Maison Rustique, Or, THE COUNTRY FARM.

Compyled in the French Tongue by CHARLES STEVENS, and JOHN LIEBAVLT, Doctors
of Physic.

And translated into English by RICHARD SVRFLET, Practitioner in Physic.

Now newly Reuiewed, Corrected, and Augmented, with diverse large Additions;
(...) Works of FRENCH
SERRES his Agriculture, VINET his Maison Champestre,
ALBYTERIO in Spanish, GRILLI in Italian; and other Authors.


And the Husbandry of France, Italy, and Spain, reconciled and made to agree
with ours here in England:

By GERVASE MARKHAM.

The whole Contents are in the Page following.


printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by Adam Islip for John Bill. 1616.

The Contents.
THere is contained in this last Edition, whatsoever can be required for the
building, or good ordering, of a Husbandmans House, or Country Farm: as
namely, to foresee the changes and alterations of Times; to know the motions,
and powers, of the Sun and Moon, upon the things about which Husbandry is
occupied: as, to cure the sick laboring Man; to cure Beasts and flying Fowls
of all so^ts; to dress, plant, or make Gardens, as well for the Kitchen, and
Physic use, as also in Quarters; with many fair and cunning portraitures,
to make compartments of diverse fashions in every quarter: with a large
description of the herb Nicotiana, or Pe^um; as also of the root Mechoacan:
to plant, graft, and order Orange Trees, Citron-trees, and such other strange
Trees: to order Bees: to make Conserues: to preserve Fruits, Flowers, Roots,
and Rindes: to make Honey and Wax: to plant and graft all sorts of Fruit Trees:
to make Cider, (...), and Oils: to distill Waters and Oils, or Quintessences,
of whatsoever the Husbandmans store and increase; with many patterns of
Limbeckes for the distilling of them: to feed and preserve Silkewormes: to make
and maintain Medow-grounds: Fish Ponds of running and standing waters: to take
Fishes: to measure and till Corne-ground: to bake Bread: to dress baked Meats:
to brew Beer: to trim Vines: to make medicinable Wines; with a very large
and excellent discourse touching the nature and quality of Wine in general;
and after that, another special and particular one, of all such Wines as grow
in Gasconie, Languedo^, Touraine, Orleans, Paris, and other countries of
France: to plant Woods of Timber Trees and Vnder-growth: to make a Warren: to
breed Herons: and to imparke wild Beasts. As also a large discourse of hunting
the Heart, wild Bore, Hare, Fox, Gray, Conie, and such like: with the ordering
of Hawks, and all sorts of Birds. And lastly, in the end thereof, is briefly
showed the nature, manner of taking, and feeding, of the Nightingale, Linnet,
Gold^^nch, Siskin, Lark, and other such singing and melodious birds.

TO THE MOST NOBLE, AND MOST WORTHY LORD ROBERT, Lord Willoughbie, Baron of
Willoughbie and Eresbie.
HOw ever the greatness of your place, or the necessity of the times, may
challenge your virtue (most Noble Lord) to be wholly taken up, in the
contemplation of high, and serious affairs, as ambitious or covetous to enjoy
a full and absolute man, and making every thing that is not equal with your
worth, too much too inferior for your eye; yet this excellent glory of
Nobility, well tempered Courtesy (in which you are flowing rich) persuad^ me
that the arguments handled in this Book, shall not appear so triuiall in your
Judgment, but that as to the tale of an honest Husbandman, you will bend your
Noble ear. And though not for the bettering of your own knowledge, yet for
the benefit which may spring unto your neighbors, grant it your most Noble
patronage and defense, from the storms and frosts of Envy and Detraction: It
first belonged to your most Noble and Heroical Father, as the gift of a learned
and well experienced Gentleman, who in the translation, took a long and
well-meriting labor; it must needs then, now be yours, both by order and
inheritance. And though when it came to kiss his hand, it was all French,
except the language, so that many wanted skill to make use, and some were
fearful how to use a knowledge so differing from their practice: yet now it
is put into other garments, and how homely soever the stuff be; yet it is cut
with that art and judgment, that without doubt, it will both endure the
wearing, and become any Husbandman of this Kingdom; or the other, who were
first breeders of the same: to whose particular profit I leave it, and my self
ever to be disposed as

your Lordships servant, G. M.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR PEREGRINE BARTIE, Knight, Lord Willoughbie, Baron
of Willoughbie and Eresbie, Lord Governor of her Majesty's Town of Barwicke,
and Lord Warden of the East Marches.
AS Darius in his deep affecting desire, P^^tarch. in ^eg. Apoh.
made choice of many such subjects and Captains, as Zopyrus; and Eacus, after
that the Pestilence had unpeopled Thessalia, did wish that the swarms of
Pismires (whereupon as it is said, (...).
the Myrmidons took their names) might be turned into men: So I am undoubtedly
persuaded (right honorable) that you having made your chief and special
choce of the things which are from above, and striving therein to set up your
rest of contentation, would with like delight have welcomed some such thing, as
had concerned the dressing and adorning of the soul: rather than any course,
country and domestical discourse (such as I am here to offer unto your
Honor) being commonly esteemed but as a tale of a turfe, or matter for a
mattocke. And indeed I could have wished that the Heavens had stoupt as low to
have revealed unto you some of her sacred mysteries: as the earth has advanced
it self herein, and opened her mouth to show unto you her cabinet of rich
provision, and casket of precious jewels. Or else, that according to your place
and calling, some Caesar had affoorded you some learned Commentary of Martial
Stratagems: or some Lycurgus, such treatise of Policy, as wherein you might
have had pointed out and delineated, as with Polycletus his golden rule, the
exquisit rules of upright justice and laws of Commonweals safe government.
But seeing this is that mite which my store will allow me at this time to offer
unto your Honor, accepting the same, may it please you to look a little
thereupon, and consider that variety and store of rarities their power,
magnificence, and renow^^e. Furthermore; of or from the earth, is ministered
matter to defend or offend, ^eed or famish, cherish or starve, make blind, or
restore sight, to ouerturne, or build up great towers, to give, or take away
light, to procure health or fickenes^e, foes or friends, peace or war,
pleasure or pain, sorrow or mirth, taste or distaste, sleep or watchfulness,
sores or soundness, barrenness or fruitfulness, life or death: and what not?
Yea, if you should desire to look upon the counterfeit of beauty, or to know
Divine Pandora her manifold other graces, (...) (...).
you need not far to search, seeing herein irreprehensible shape, surpassing
fairness, infinite riches, rare attire, robes, ornaments, issue, ability,
utility, wisdom, and government: seeing it also (as the center of the world)
attended with so many glittering globes which the Heavens do contain* every
one ready and pressed to apply themselves, and whatsoever is in them in all
serviceable sort, for the effecting of her affairs. For who is he, that upon
such grounds can refrain as absolutely to give sentence with it, against all
sorts of creatures (not inhabiting the highest heavens) as ever was given with
H^l^na for beauty, (...)
Penelope for chastity, Aeneas for piety, or Themistocles for fastness of
memory? And finally, this sacred goddess, (...)
as she shows her beauty, in being clothed in her gaiest colors, and her
perfection in her natural kindness, by pressing out of her never drying
breasts (though evermore conceived) even millions of streams to feed (as with
sweet milk) both the young and old fruit of her womb: so if you please to
call to mind such names, as the Gretians in their wisdom have given
thereunto, which are (...), or, (...), of the verb (...) to be glorious, or to
excel; or the names affo^rded it in the Holy tongue, which are (...) and (...)
(the one having relation to that kind of earth which brings forth food for
man, and the other to that which feeds cattel^) you shall clearly see, that
there cannot too reverend an estimation be had of the earth; and that it is to
fail and come short of the scope of the Creator (by whom first and
principally all names are given) to account thereof, in any base and vile
manner. Now seeing the earth is so divine a substance as has been proved, and
that every man, as also his labors, are so much the more or less to be
regarded, or honored, as the subject is, whereabout he is occupied. I cannot
doubt but that this so renowned a Grace, shall be vouchsafed to have conferd,
all due and worthy dignity and grace, upon such as take pains, like devoted
favorites, and fervent true lovers, to make her admired and honored of all.
Especially the same falling out not upon any light and wanton fantasies, that
young and youthful years may breed; (her last and worst age, having already
very deeply seized upon her:) but rather of entire affection (if not
compulsiue duty) pricking them forward (so much as lies in them) to pluck off
her stiff, hard, and dry grown slough, that so she might receive as it were
a second birth, to the doubling of the thread of her lively and lusty days.
And that upon both the sorts of them, as namely those which shape their course,
to the purchasing of this haven, through the straits of painful toil: and
the other who endure hard storms, till led by learnings lodestone, they have
also discovered the same by skilful precept. 2. Chro. 26. ^0.
And the rather, seeing that as wisdom it self: Genes. 4. ^.
(calling the first (...) and (...) that is, lovers and tillers of the earth)
the practice of the Worthies of all ages and nations, whether you call to mind
the Romans amongst the Gentiles; ^ Sam. ^. 14. (...).
or the Kings and kingly race amongst the Jews: and thirdly, the testimonies
of profane writers, Dij pecorum pauere greges: And Tempus in agrorum cultu
consumere dulce est, have not suffered them to want their due laud and praise:
so the common and delightful reading and studying of the second; besides the
laurel garland and favor, with preferment, at the hands of the mightiest
Princes, ever ready and ordained for good writers, does sufficiently declare
their merit and desert; yea unlettered and senseless works which skill has
framed, cannot but approve and praise the workman: and consiquently, the
happy hand that was employed in penning and pointing out the sum of all that
art and cunning. Again, if such as faithfully set down the acts, the
speeches, and several occurrences of persons and times, for performing so
woonderful a work, as to make the things past, and perished, in the first
breathing of the world, still to live and yield forth a lively breath unto the
last and final end of all; and on the contrary, that which shall be last, and
never was before, to be all beset with the ^oari^ hairs of the very first and
eldest antiquities, be truly worthy of immortal honor: then how much more
should they, who from painful plodding precept, have revealed the knowledge of
bringing forth, as also of recording whatsoever such famous deeds or sayings?
Wherefore accept, and take in good part, R. Honorable, (as one who can never
let slip any the least kindness that has bin offered to a mother) this
labored work, the magazin, and storehouse of all such knowledge, as may make
for the honor, dignity, (...) (...) place and possessions, he teaches thee
to charge thy self as thy revenues will liberally reach, taking heed of
pordigalitie; and stirs thee up to the knowledge of the ordering and
dressing of ground, or whatsoever other thing: that so thou may not only
see what is to be done, and how, but also judge thereof when it is done. If an
inferior person and having nothing but what thou labourest for, lacking also
skill, and so suffering thy field to grow barren: he teaches thee all good
means for the making of it fruitful. If for lack of will, poverty come upon
thee as an armed man, know that there is never a precept of paynefull toil and
laborious husbandry throughout the whole Book, but it sounds an alarm, and
proclaims an open defiance against thee as a Sluggard. If through skill
joined with will, thou reap the plentiful increase of a rich Harvest, but
abuse it, to the malicious vexing and troubling of thy neighbor in the Law, or
to the corrupting of the honest and chaste lives of Maids, or any of thy
neighbors Wives, he calls thee from such courses unto the labors of thy
ground: for scarce to take thy lawful recreation at lawful delights (such as
are Hawking and Hunting) will he afford thee any leisure: If a Farmer, he
teaches thee kindness by devising something to gratify thy Lord withal; and
gentleness in lovingly entreating thy servants. If thy neighbor enjoy any
goodly commodity of Grass, Corn, or other dead thing, or any other living
thing whatsoever that is excellent, because he would not have thee to look
upon the same with a repining, greedy, and covetous eye; he calls thee to
the providing of such of thine, by teaching thee how to do it. If thou be a
servant, he wills thee to be both painful and pitiful; that so all thy
business may be well done, and in due time: and the beasies wherewith thou
art charged, may be tendered of thee in all mildness. And finally, that all
dishonest and disgraceful ways may be far from thee, he has taken the
pains to instruct thee in so many things, as that if thou will apply thy
self thereunto, and to do them well: thou shall not find the leisure to lend
a thought to the evil that might allure thee. And that he might not be
mistaken and thought to forget that woman was made for a helper, he has
called her to her task, and that neither little, nor consisting of a few or
base things, having committed unto her (besides many other matters) the cure
and charge of families health. But leaving to speak any more of her charge in
particular, I could wish all such of that sex as are religious, to look
before they leap, and to be wise according to sobriety and gravity:
Sobriety, not meddling, above their place and reach, in matters of Physic:
and Gravity, as not having any thing to do in the matter of Fukes, either for
using or preparing of them; seeing they argue, if not plainly prove, a light,
a loose, and very sinful life.

And finally, seeing that the whole earth was once a Tempe, an Eden (that is, a
place of all pleasures and delights) and the assigned possession and natural
inheritance of man and woman, to labor and live in, with exceeding great joy
and felicity; and that through their sin it was cursed, and they were cast
out of the most pleasant, commodious, and beneficial part thereof: I could
wish them jointly to record such their former felicity, and the loss thereof,
to the end that they may apply their hearts unto wisdom, and learn, that
although they do continually labor, yet if they wallow in sins, they do
but throw down twice as much as they build up, destroy and mar mare they
make, drive far away the creatures of meat and maintenance, which they
labor so greedily to scrape and pull unto them, and even bereave the earth (if
it were possible) of all manner of fruits and increase, that so it might not
any more either feed or cloth them: For knowledge, skill, toil, pain, rising
early, lying down late, with every other help, does loose his virtue and come
short of his end, if delight of sin be joined as a companion therewithal;
it being the heavy load and burden under which all creatures do groan; the
burning ague that dries all sap and moisture; and that cursed seed which
causes them as a vaporous brood not only to fret out their mothers bowels,
and bring a curse upon her body; but thereby also to curse and cross
themselves in all that wherein they would most gladly thrive and prosper.

You must sow in March, the Moon being New,
Garlic. Borage. Buglosse. Cheruile. Coriander. Gourds. Marierome. White
Poppie. Purslane. Radish. Sorrel. Double Marigolds. Time. Violets.
Full,
Musked Annise. Blites. Skirwoorts. Succorie. Fennel. Apples of love.
Marvelous Apples.
Old,
Artichokes. Basil. Thistles. Blessed Thistle. Cole Cabbage. White Cole.
Green Cole. Citrons. Cucumbers. Harts-home. Sampier. Dyers grain. Spinach.
Gilliflowers. Hyssope. Cabbage-Lettuce. Melons. Muguets. Onions. Flower
Gentile. Burnet. Leekes. Sauorie.
You must sow in April, the Moon being New,
Mar^erome. Flower gentle. Thyme. Violets.
Full,
Apples of love. Marvelous Apples.
Old,
Artichokes. Thistles. Cabbage Cole. Citrons. Harts-horne. Sampire.
Gilliflowers. Muguets. Parsneps.
In May, in the old of the Moon Blessed thistle. In June, the Moon being New,
Gourds. Radishes.
Old,
Cucumbers. Melons. Parsneps.
In July, the Moon being Full,
White Succorie.
Old,
Cabbage-Lettuce.
In August, the Moon being Full,
White Succorie.


Herbs growing of ^eedes that are sown, may be transplanted at all times
(except Cheruile, Arrage, Spinach, and Parsley, which are nothing worth when
they are transplanted) ever observed, That such transplantation be in a moist
or rainie weather: for otherwise you must look to them, to water them.

Understand, and know, that the choice and age of seeds is double: for after
you have chosen them ripe, full, heavy, corpulent, gross, of a good color,
and that they fall not into powder either through rottenness, or bruisednesse,
Some do grow better of new seeds, as Leekes and Cucumbers. Othersome do grow
better of old seeds, as Coriander. Parsley. Sauorie. Beets. Origanum. Crosses.
Spinach. Poppie.
Know further, that you must preserve from the cold, Lettuces, Artichokes,
Basil, Thistles, Cabage Cole, Dyers grain, Melons.
fifteen days after they put forth of the earth.

Know, that seeds do thrive and prosper a great deal better, when they are
sown upon such days as are but warm, and not very hot, or cold, than in
hot, cold, or dry days.

Note, that seeds must be Gathered in Fair weather. The wane of the Moon.
Kept, Some in Boxes of wood. Bags of Leather. Vessels of earth.
And after to be well cleansed and dried in the Sun, or shadow. Othersome, as
Onions, Chibbols, Leekes,
in their husks. Note, that it does well to Plant in the last Gather grifts in
the last but one Grift two days after the change
of the Moon. Note, that they which are grown up to the knowledge of the
Planets and Signs, may exactly observe the aspects of the Moon unto the rest
of the Planets, and how long it abides in any of them, for she aspecting by
a or, in the sign
it is good to Plant Vines. Sow all things generally. Sow the fields generally.
Sow Gardens. Sow every where, and all things generally. Plant Trees and Vines.
or, by a, or, in the sign, makes it good to plant and set Tr^es and Vines.
being in the 7 1 28 7 15 28 11 24 7 28 11 7
degree 15 57 40 15 49 40 31 3 14 40 2 15
minutes of
Astrologians command us to sow and plant, because of a well tempered state
and condition in them.

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE COVNTRIE FARM.
CHAP. I.
What manner of Husbandry is entreated of in the Discourse following.
EVen as the manner of building used at this day, The variety of Countries
causes a diverse manner of laboring of the earth.
for the covering and rest of men, is nor like unto that of old time: so we see
the manner of the laboring of the earth for the nourishment and sustenance of
the same, to differ greatly, according to the Countries, Soil, Grounds, and
Situation of the Places wherein they are seated: yea, there is not so much as
their language, apparel, or household-stuffe and working tools, but they
change after the fashions of Countries, which notwithstanding do not hinder,
but that in every thing we may be as well fitted as they which went before
us. By this we may see our late kind of Husbandry to attain and bring with
it the like issue and effects which that of the Ancients did, which is nothing
else, but to live of the increase of the Earth, well husbanded and tilled by us.

Wherefore I have thought it impertinent and unseemly to tie my self to the
several sorts of labor used of men in times past, and that because that
Countries inhabited by diverse sorts of people, have, according to the several
variety of them, every one affoorded many particular and several sorts of
living; as also for that it has always been the custom of men (to the end
they might the more easily fit and apply themselves to the good liking of
others) to compose and frame themselves according to the manners of the
Country, without affecting, either by the reading of old Writers, or their
own ouer-reaching curiosity (the ruin and overthrow of all good wits)
Overmuch curiosity the ruin^ of good wits.
so many new invented fashions of Building, Tilling, Speaking, or Writing:
seeing, that by such means, in seeming to reform things without the perfect
knowledge of them, men have been brought oftentimes utterly to spill, spoil,
and mar the same. And therefore I would not have you to marvel, if the Frame
and Toil used about our French Countrey-Farme be not altogether like to that
of former and ancient days: What manner of Husbandry i^ entreated of in that
which follow^th.
for it is my purpose (following the Proverb, which says, That we must learn
the manners of our ancient predecessors, and practice according to the
present Age) to lay out unto you the ways, so to dwell upon, order, and
maintain a Farm, Meese, or Inheritance in the Fields (name it as you please)
as that it may keep and maintain with the profit and increase thereof, a
painful and skillful Husbandman, The name of the Country ^ouse (...) a Farm,
Meese, or field Inheritance.
and all his Family: whereupon it comes to pass, that the country
inhabitants do call it at this day the only or principal and greatest gain
that is, because no other thing brings more gain unto the master thereof
than the earth, if it be well husbanded and reasonably maintained.

Now for as much as (with good reason) my countrymen of England may object
against this Work, The Translator.
that albeit it may sort well with any soil that is in any degree (how much
collateral soever) allied to this temper, clyme, and mixture of the French:
yet to us that are so much remote in nature and quality, and who^e Earth
gives unto us, for our most general profit, things and fruits, either little,
or very stranger-wise, acquainted with them; and in as much as there may be
found that difference in our labors, which may equal the difference of our
tastes, they being as far from our Barley as we from their Vine, and we as
far from their Fruits as they from our Woolls; The English practice added to
the French.
I will, after the faithful translation of their noble experiences, add the
difference of our customs, and to their labors add the experience and
knowledge of our best Husbandmen, hoping thereby to give a public content to
ou^ Nation* who seeing the true difference of both Kingdoms, may, out of an
easy judgment, both compare and collect that which shall be fittest for his
use and commodity.

CHAP. II.
A brief show of that which shall more largely ^e described in that which
follows.
THe better to help the memory, The Sum of the first Book.
and as it were by the way of pointing out of our French Husbandry, I will
propound and set before you a champion place seated in such a coast or corner
as you may find, not as you could choose, and there we will prepare, without
extraordinary costs or charges, a House with all such appurtenances (or very
near such) as are fit and requisite for our time, as good Cato has drawn and
described for his, in that Treatise of Husbandry set down by him for the
Commonwealth of the Romans: And in the same place we will entreat of the state
and duty of the Farmer, his Wife, his People, Cattle, flying Fowls, and such
other things.

At the one side of this House, The S^mme of the second Book
even just in the place whereupon the Sun rises, and in one part thereof we
will place the household garden, which near unto the borders of his quicke-set
hedge shall contain a frame of Railes in form of an Arbor for Vines to run
upon, for the furnishing of our household store with Veriuice, and other
necessary herbs for the house: and we shall not altogether neglect or forget
to provide and plant in the same place herbs sit for medicine. And yet
furthermore in this garden also you shall plant things to make your profit
upon, as Saffron, Teazill, Woad, red Madder, Hemp, and Flax, if it seem not
better to reserve this part of Husbandry for fields that are full of Fennes or
waterish Places. In the other part we shall make a garden for flowers and
sweet smells, with his ornaments and quarters, garnished with many strange
Trees. About the Hedge we shall set, for to make pottage withal, Pease,
Beans, and other sorts of Pulse, as also Melons, Citrons, Cucumbers,
Artichokes, and such like: in which place we shall entreat of Bees.

Next to our gardens were must dress some well-defenced piece of ground or
green plot for fruits, The Sum of the third Book.
and there place our nurcerie for kernels and feeds, and there plant such
stocks as whereon we intend to graft. After, or next hereto, our square of old
grown trees, and such as have been transplanted, taken up, and removed: and
together with these things we will write of Silkewormes, and prescribe the
ways to distill Waters and Oils, as also to make Cyders.

Next in order to our foresaid Green plot, The Sum of the fourth Book.
lying near some one or other little Brook, we are to lay our Meadow Grounds,
or Pastures for feeding, compassed about with Osier, Elm, Aller-tree, and
Withie; and by the borders of such Hedge we will provide some Poole of standing
water or running Spring: and next in order to these, the great and large
Meadows for the provision and revenues of the Lord.

Betwixt the South and the North we will appoint* and set down Corne-grounds,
The Sum of the fi^^ Book.
and teach how to measure them, and describe their fashion and manner of
^illing* in which place we will speak of making and baking of Bread; and over
and above the moitie or half part of a hanging thing, and the moitie of a Butt
or little Hill.

In the place which is nearest unto the South, The Sum of the sixth Book.
we will plant the Vine, and withal declare the ordering of the same: We will
speak of Vintage, and the making of common and medicinable Wines. And thereto
we will add the diverse sorts of Wines which grow in our Country of France.

Betwixt the North and the East we will place our Warren, The Sum of the
seventh Book.
either upon some Hill, or in some other place fit to hunt in, and in the
higher grounds we will plant small Wood and great Timber Trees: not
forgetting, in the mean time, any thing which may appertain to the ordering
and governing of Wood, or concerning Carpentrie. We will also make mention of
Parkes for wild Beasts, of the hunting of them, but that in a few words (for
there is no need that a good Householder should trouble his brain with much
hunting) and of the breeding of Herons. Finally, we will briefly describe the
order and manner of taking of Birds. So that after all these things, there
shall not much remain further to be added hereunto, either concerning the
pleasure or prof^t of a Country Farm, especially such a one as a man ought to
desire, which would live carefully, and within the compass of reason, upon the
laboring of his Land.

CHAP. III.
What things are requisite before we go in hand with building of this Country
Farm.
AS concerning the propriety of Inheritance (whereof many Authors, both
Greek and Latin, have entreated so exactly and curiously) I do not at all
intend to incomber my self therewith, supposing, that this Country Farm, and
the Land belonging unto it, is either descended by succession, and that there
is an intent to make it in such case as may serve most commodiously to the ease
and good liking of the owner: or that (if you have purchased and bought it with
your money) you have c^eered it from all incombrances and claims before you
go about the building and sitting of it in every point as you would have it.
For like as some say, The Kitchen must be the first piece of building in a good
house.
that the first foundation of a good House must be the Kitchen, that is to say,
the Revenues and Grounds thereto belonging for the maintenance of the same:
even so, the first point and principal care of an Householder, before he build
or trim up his House, is to bethink himself how he may make the state entire
and absolutely unto himself, and so to have nothing to do with such as are
under age, Creditors, Rentors, or others in superior place, which may
interrupt and command him from his intended purposes and necessary affairs.
Purchase by statute, the surest of al others.
He must also see, that all such Charges, Rites, and Customs, as Law does
require, be fully answered, and by name that it be clear of all former Sales*
Bargains, and Statutes, which is the safest manner of purchasing in these
days: That there be (...) foolish buyers than sellers.
for there are found a far greater number of foolish buyers than of foolish
sellers. Let there be past a year and a day before he make any exchange,
raising and moving of new debts, for the clearing of his Inheritance, and let
him not lay out to the value of a penny, before he have fully ended all things,
measured and bounded his grounds from his neighbors, and assured his peace even
against the most wayward and troublesome. To be short, let him be free from all
manner of Courts and Suits: and if it cannot be otherwise, but that one or
other controversy do still hang upon him (seeing, That Land (...) stri^e in
hand.
as some men say, that Lands do unavoidably infer and bring with them strife
in the Law) yet let it be of such nature, as that he may be plaintiff rather
than defendant: I mean in respect of duties to be performed to the chief
Lord, and other impositions by the Prince; in discharging whereof, even to the
uttermost Penny, Capon, or whatsoever else it be, he ought to be no less
careful and diligent, than in mending one tyle in the roof of his house,
which in course of time being left vnrepaired and vnput in again, causes
others also to fall, and so causes great annoyance to the lodgings underneath.

CHAP. IIII.
The seating and situating of the Country Farm, with other his appurtenances.
ALthough every man in all things enquireth after his own commodity, and
straineth himself to come as near to perfection and excellency as possible
he can* notwithstanding, the well-instructed and modest House. holder
contenteth himself with that, whatsoever it be, that comes of the hand and
grace of God, and accounts for great bountifulness and liberality such
Pittance, Grounds, and Seat as falls unto him, assuring himself, that choice
and perpetual fruition belong no more to him than Empi^es and Kingdoms unto
Princes. Wherefore, if the place wherein he was borne, which he enjoys by
right of Succession, or Purchase, be not naturally so sit and convenient, as
that he may thereby be drawn and allured with the love of it* then he must
endeavor so to fit it by his skill, Labor (...) a Householder.
and endeavor by his labor so carefully to amend and correct it, that it may
be sufficient for the maintaining of him and those that belong unto him, and
the erecting and setting up of an House. That (...) to say, that euerything
having attained his height, does in the and decrease.
For he should not learn to lust after, or desire, any more (if the Proverb
be true) than a Wheele-barrow for the first hundred years, and a Banner for
the second hundred years.

If I should here go about but once to imagine such a situation of a Country
House, as should be so perfect and exquisite, at that nothing should be wanting
therein, I might justly seem to my self to be void of all reason. It is very
true, that if any such place could be found, (...)
where the Air, Water, and Earth did all afford their best and most desired
favors and qualities, it would much avail and make for the purpose: but so it
is, that neither Emperors nor Kings could ever attain the skill to content
themselves otherwise than with the situation of their own Countries: some of
them sometimes being too hot, too cold, very subject to corruption and
putrefaction; othersome less profitable for the bringing forth; and some
again of a mean and indifferent condition, and contrariwise. Notwithstanding,
although the place be not so fertile as a man could wish, neither yet so
commodious as that great Husbandman Cato does desire it; yet it must be
provided and foreseen above all other things, that it have the benefit of a
good Air: for suppose, that the grounds were very fruitful, and endued with
all the best properties and qualities that a man could possibly wish to be in a
champian ground; A good air (...) Farm.
yet notwithstanding, if the Air be pestilentiall and infectious, or not
found, it should argue nothing but great foolishness in a man thereto employ
his cost and pains. For where a man is in continual danger of sickness, or
of death, not only the gathering of Fruits, but also the life of the Workman
is continually hazarded: or rather, which is more truly said, death ^s there
more certain than any profit. Wherefore (if it be possible) you must make
choice of a place far from marshes, far from the Sea shore, and where as
neither the Southern nor Northern winds do ordinarily blow, and which lies
not altogether open to the South Sun, nor yet unto the North: but principally
see that it be placed near unto some one or other good and honest neighbor,
Near unto a good neighbor.
seeing it is an insupportable thing to be daily haunted of a brawling and
wicked neighbor: let it not be placed near to Holds or Towns of Garrison,
thereby to avoid the outrages of Tyranny, and inrodes of Soldiers: Far from
places of garrison.
let it in like manner be far from Rivers and Brooks, which are subject to
ouerflow, and that in respect of the unavoidable charges for the repayring of
such ruins and spoil as such ouerflowings do cause. Far from Rivers and
Brookt
And yet I could willingly wish, and greatly desire, that it might not be far
off from some smooth and gentle stream, able to bear a ship, to the end that
victuals may with the less cost be transported thence to other places for your
better commodity sake: as also near some great good Town, that so the things
of readiest sale may be sold for the best advancement and making of the most of
the revenues of the same. Although to wish to have a Farm in every point so
perfect and well seated, as that nothing should be wanting unto it, were (as
has been said) an unreasonable thing: as it is also to expect or look for
grounds and fields so well conditioned, as a man could desire in a ground of
special and principal praise and commendation. It is true, that besides that
Necessity does beget skill, and provoke and stir up men to take all possible
pain, industry, and care; it does also procure, that there should not that
discommoditie be found to offer it self, which shall not be recompensed and
counteruailed either by one or other commodity: as for example, in hot places
there are grown good Wines and Fruits of long continuance: in cold places,
great store of sweet waters, and sometimes seawater, which greatly increases
their profit: in others, for the most part, when the Earth is barren in the
upper part, it contains some good things underneath, as it falls in
Stone-pits, Mines, It behooves v^ to content our selves with that which God and
Nature affoordeth.
and such other things, which make the change for the better. So then we are
to hold our selves content with such estate and condition as the place shall
afford, where we must dwell and settle our habitation: and if it be not such
as some curious man in his desire, or one that is hard to please, might require
and look for, then we shall strain our selves to mend it by the means see
down hereafter.

There are very few Farms to be found so seated, as that there is not
something to be supplied, as want of Water in high and ascending places; such
as are the Countries of Beaux and Campaigne, notwithstanding that their grounds
there be strong, as it happens in rising and mountainous places: too great
store of water in falling grounds and long valleys, such as are to be found in
some places of Sauoy, Daulphine, Auuergne, and Gascoigne, in which places there
is more pasture than tillage: other quarters are given by nature to be sandy,
as toward the Town of Estamps, Saint Marturin de l'Archaut, in Solongue, and
in the Country of Lands, which notwithstanding cease not to be moist and
waterish: other quarters are chalkie and clayie, as toward Rheims, Troy, and
Chalons in Campaigne: othersome are stony, as toward Saint Lou de S^rans,
Tonnerre, Vezelay in Daulphine, and in the Pyrene Mountains, Rock^e grounds
good for the bearing of Vines, and so for such Countries as a bound with Vines.
where is to be found great store of excellent Marble: and some are rockie,
which are most fit for the Countries abounding with Vines. Howsoever the case
stand, the building cannot happen in so inconvenient and strange a place, but
that a man may make choice to take the best quarter for the Sunshine, as
that which is most for the health and wholesomenesse of the inhabitants, and
apply it every way for his use and ease.

If therefore a high and flat place, as Beaux or high France, do want Water,
you must, A high and flat Country. Pooles. Cesternes.
for a supply, make Pooles right over against your Courts, and Cesternes in
your Gardens: and as for your grounds, you must draw furrows therein in such
sort, as that the earth, cast up by the way, may retain moisture a long time:
and if the ground prove it self strong, you shall not need to manure and dung
it so often, neither yet to let it lie fallow more than every fourth year. If
you cast Pits, you must dig them of a convenient wideness and length, that
is to say, fouresquare; but somewhat more long than wide, Pits called Aranques.
after the fashion of the Pits Aranques, which are in use in the gardens of
Prouence and Languedoc, with their trough laid to the brinkes of the Pits, to
receive such water as is drawn: but if the water be so low in the ground, that
such kind of Pits cannot be made, then there must Pits be made to go with a
wheel, and those so large, as that at every draught you may draw up half a
pipe of water at the least, which you shall empty into particular troughes,
and keep them for the use of your People and Cattle: but above all other
things, you must have a special care to gather and keep well all Rain water,
either in C^sterne, or otherwise.

The Cesterne shall be set in such a place, To make a Cesterne for to hold and
keep Rain water.
as that it may receive all that comes from such spouts as are belonging to
roofes or lower lofts of the house. It must be firmly and closely paued with
clay and mortar, and after drawn over and floored with the same mortar, to the
end that the water be not made muddie, or ^ast of the earth: and if there
happen any clift or chinke, you must stop it with Cement made of clean Hair,
Tallow, vnquencht Lime, and yolks of Eggs well beat and made into powder, and
then all of them well mixed together. The throat or passage for the water out
of it, shall be such as that appointed for the Pits or Wells* Some cast into
their Cesternes E^les and other fresh water fish for to be fed and kept there,
to the end that the water may become the lighter by reason of their moving and
stirring of it, and that so it may the more resemble the nature of running
water: but indeed such water is nothing wholesome for men, as neither yet for
beasts; it were far better to straw with green herbs all the bottom of
the said Cesterne, and cast in little pebbles of the River upon them, for by
this means rather the water would be made better.

Moreover, The way to prepare ground for the bearing of wood.
for the discommoditie of Wood, you shall make lean the earth in certain
places near unto your lodging with gross Sand, Fullers earth, and ashes from
off the Earth: after that, you shall either sow or set there such Trees, as you
shall think that may serve you; although indeed it were good to prove what
kind of Trees would best prosper there, before you wholly sow or set it.

If your place extend and reach unto some running stream, A Country near unto
Rivers.
your meadows shall not be so far off from it as your house; which, to be too
near a neighbor unto Rivers, would be a cause of procuring Rheumes, and the
falling down of some Rooms: and yet it is not good to have it too far off,
as well in respect of watering of the Cattle, as for the washing of Buckes,
Skins, Line, and H^mpe; for the whiting of Webs of Cloth, if so be that you
intend or purpose any such thing; for the grinding of your Corn, as also (if
only the River near unto you be nauigable) to send that which you reap from
your Fields unto the Town: but you must choose the highest piece of ground to
build your dwelling house upon.

I leave out the pleasures of Princes and great noble Personages, The pleasures
of Princes.
who for their delight sake do dwell in Summer in wattie places, excellently
trimmed and beautified with waters, and furnished with all delights: for our
householder may not in any case charge himself with further costs, than this
his state may well bear: for Princes have wherewith they may be at their
change and variety of lodgings, according to the changes and alterations of
the seasons of the year, and to turn at their pleasure the square into the
round, and contrariwise.

In a dry place, A dry Country.
as Beaux and Champaigne, and the mountainous Countries, learn^ to set your
building so well, as that it may take the Eastern Equinoctial, and not lose
the rising of the Sun in March and October, or rather in September.

If there be ever a Hill, A Hill to build upon.
build upon the edge thereof, making choice to have your lights toward the
East: but if you be in a cold Country, open your lights also on the South
side, and little or nothing toward the North, if it be not in your Barnes
where you put your Corn, or such other things, as are subject to the Weasell
and other vermin. Ouer-against the North you shall procure some row or tuft of
Trees for to be a mark unto you of your place, and defense also for the same
against the Northern winds in the Winter time. But if you be in a hot
country, you must set your said tuft of Trees on the South side, against such
winds and heat of Sun as come from thence, and boldly open your lights,
especially in the said Barnes which lie on the North side.

Make good choice of the best parts of your Grounds, to be most fit for Fruits,
Corn, and Meadows, and plant your Vineyard, to have the South open upon it.
You shall make also certain cross Barnes with their counter-windowes, in the
place toward the South, to open them in the time of a Northern wind. Such
places are found in Countries full of Mountains, which do greatly desire the
East; and yet notwithstanding would therewithal take part of the South, which
is so needful for them.

In this and such like places Wells are in greater request, and much more
necessary than in valleys and plain grounds, and that we may find out the
place where it is best to make them, we must choose the Eastern side, at the
beginning of the descent, somewhat therewithal bending toward the North, but
we may not have any thing to do with the Western side: and yet somewhat
better toward the South, where having over night dug the earth in diverse
places the quantity of three feet over and five in depth, and after returning
in the morning at the Sunne-rise, you must make trial how it sounds, being
stricken with the end of a Holly staff, armed at the said end with some round
piece of Iron or Latten, after the manner of the end of a Shepherds staff
without the Crook; and there, by the judgment of the ear, to observe and
mark how it sounds underneath, as whether it sound like a Mortar, or like
fat Earth, Potters clay, or some other that is very hard, or like a Glass
half broken, or else like a very deep Pit, that touches the Quarrie or Vein
lying underneath: and this is the best way to judge and make trial. Or
otherwise in the month of August or September, at such time as the Earth is
very dry, a little before the Sun rise, you must lie down flat upon the
ground, having your face toward the East, and choose out that place where you
shall epsy a vapor to rise up out of the Earth, after the manner of little
Clouds, for this is a token of a proud (or plentiful store of) water. Or else
to make a shorter trial, to make deep trenches of four foot within the
ground, and therein to put sponges or fleeces of Wool very dry and clean,
covering them with boughs of Trees, or leaves of Herbs: then, after some
time, to take them out of the Earth, and they being wet and moist, do argue
abundance of water, according to the quality of moisture which they have
within them: whereas if on the contrary they be dry when they be taken up, it
argues that there is no water to be come by. Diverse there be that gather
figures of the springing up of water in place where, by their seeing of small
clouds and vapors rising from thence into the air, in dry, fair, and calm
seasons. But howsoever, it is not convenient to content ones self with the
bare viewing of the herbs which grow thereupon, without having first made
some trial: for under Crowfoot, Folefoot, Plantaine, Dogtooth, Cinquefoile,
Milfoile, and three-leaued Grass, Water is not far to seek, but it is
naught worth, if one dig not very deep, as is to be seen at Bagnolet
Belle-Ville upon the Sand, and other places of Liury. Under Veruaine is
oftentimes found good Water, and deep, according to the nature of the ground:
and withal, if the head do spring from grounds apt to boil, as red Sand, or
gray Rock, and not from those sides which by and by are dried up. Above all,
to the end we may have Wells containing water of a good relish, (...)
and such as will never dry up, we must make choice of a s^^die, black,
grauelly, or clayish ground, or such a one as is full of pebbles, and
especially that which is mixed of pebbles and sand together, but never of that
water which flows from Fullers clay, mire, mudde, or springs from the
grounds where Sallowes, Roses, Reeds, and other such Plants, which are
engendered of a watrie humor, do grow: for although that such places do yield
great store of water, notwithstanding that water is naught worth, and will
easily be dried up. Wherefore as much as lies in you procure that your Wells
be far off from such ditches, as wherein they lay the dung of Stables,
Cattle, or Swinecoats to rot, or any other place which may annoy in regard of
the pissing of beasts, if they be not well dug and made very deep. Wells
of good Water.
True it is, that Wells will be a great deal^ the better, if they consist of a
high rising water, and not such a one as lies deep in the earth. For
howsoever that such Wells be less hot in Winter, and in Summer less cold, yet
notwithstanding it shall be infinitely better, because it has more help of
the Sun and Air, which are the two things which do greatly amend and make
better the water: and if necessity force the water to lie so deep and low,
we must seek to help the inconvenience, by drawing but a little, and often,
for the iumbling and stirring of the water will rectify it: and amongst other
things, you must have special care not to keep it covered.

Fountains Fountains.
in like manner rising from such places of Mountains, are had in request, as
well for the profit of the water, which is a great deal better and more
pleasant than that drawn out of Wells, To find out the beads of Fountains.
as also for the beautifying of the Country Farm. And for to find their Head,
or Spring, we must use the like means as we have laid down for the finding
of Wells, excepted that we must make chief choice of such as break forth
upon the North at the bottom of high and great Mountains, having hollow
places, and compassed about with plains, for in such plain grounds the water
gathers it self together, and distilleth through the earth. Now this kind of
provision of water is when you desire it in great abundance: but if you stand
upon and desire the best and most excellent water, you must make choice of high
places, and such as are not ouer-shadowed, the fall whereof does enjoy the
Sunne-rising, for water out of such Fountains is a great deal more light and
pleasant in taste, and by how much it runs the swifter and longer way in the
Air and Sun before it come to the bottom, so much it grows the better; as
when it falls from high Rocks, it is (as it were) beaten and broken in
falling through the downright places of stones and craggednes^e of the Rocks.
We must also see that such Mountains, be full of Dogs-tooth, Plantaine,
Fox-taile, wild Penny-ryall, transmarine Sage, which is called Adianthum,
Milfoile, Chameleon, and generally, all other herbs and plants, which grow
without being planted, and are by nature green, well branched, good and
thick, and well flowred.

The time most apt in all the year, The best time to (...) out Springheads.
and affoording greatest perseverance for the finding out of the heads of Wells
and Fountains, are the months of August or September, for then it is easy to
know the greatness of the head, when the earth, by the great heat of Summer,
has no moisture of rain left remaining in it, and then also we may gather
assurance of such as will never dry up altogether.

If it happen that the head Fountain be somewhat too far from the Farm,
(...)
you may force the water to come thither by little Rivers, or rather more
conveniently by cha^els and conduits made of Lead, Wood, or Pot-earth: the best
are made of Aller tree, F^rre tree, or Pine tree, out of which distilleth
Perro^en, because that such Trees have an oily humor, and hot, which easily
resists the hurtes which water might cause: Next to them are those which are
made of Pot-earth, if that the water carried along in them were not the cause
of breeding obstruction. These must be two fingers thick, and sharp at one
end the length of half a foot, to go the one of them into the other: the
worst sort is those made of Lead, because the water carried along by them
purchases from the Lead an evil quality, and that because of the Ceruse
thereof, so that it oftentimes causes bloody fluxes and other such like
diseases, if we believe Galen and them which for this cause call the
inhabitants of Paris Squitters, because they use Fountaine-water which runs
through Leaden pipes: which point notwithstanding seems not to be without all
doubt, seeing that Ceruse cannot breed, nor be made of Lead, without vinegar,
and for that we see also diverse Countries do drink of such waters, without
being troubled with bloody fluxes: whatsoever it is, we must set well
together and soulder the pipes with a compound made of unquenched lime, and the
grea^e of a hog, or of Perrosen and the whites of eggs, or of lyme, whites
of eggs, oil, and the filings of iron, because that all these things do
hinder corruptions and rottenness which the water might cause. If any
Mountain do hinder the laying or bringing along of these Pipes, we must make
them way: if any Valley, we must rear arches, such as are to be seen in a
Village near unto Paris, called Ar^ueil, and that because of those said
arches; or raise pillars and other matter to support those water-passages.

But it is not sufficient to have found out those Heads of Wells and
Fountains, What Waters are best.
but we must further consider of the goodness and wholesomenesse of the Water,
as Aristotle teaches us: For seeing the greatest part of our life depends
upon the use of this element, it is requisite that the Master of the Household
should have care to procure good Water, in as much as Water must be the most of
his servants drink, and that the Bread which he and his family do eat, is
kneaded therewith, and the greatest part of his victuals boiled therein. The
best and most wholesome Water of all others is Rain Water falling in Summer,
when it thundereth and lightneth very much; and yet notwithstanding, Rain
Water causes costiuenes^e and obstructions, especially that which is kept in
Cesternes newly made, and that by reason of their Mortar wherewith they are
ouer-layd: It does also corrupt very quickly (that only excepted which falls
in May) and being so corrupted, it ma^reth the voice, bringing Hoarsenesse, and
a little Co^gh. Next to this in goodness is (...) Fountain Water, which
falls from the Mountains, and runs along amongst Stones and Rocks. Next
to this in goodness is Well Water, or that which issues at the hanging parts
of the Mountains, or that which springs in the bottom of a Valley. The
fourth different sort of Waters is that of the River. The worst of all the rest
is that of the Poole and Marish Grounds: and yet that which runs not is
worse than all the rest, and more apt to in^ect. The Water of Snow and Ice is
the most unwholesome of all, because it is the coldest and most earthie, as not
having been prepared by the heat and virtue of the Sun. And as conce^ning
the Water of Wells and Fountains (seeing it is not found good always and in
all places) we shall know them to be good, if it have neither taste, s^^ell, nor
any color whatsoever, being notwithstanding very clear, and of the nature of
the Air, taking quickly the color of any thing that one shall cast into it,
being also clean, warm in Winter, and cold in Summer, easy to make hot, and
as soon becoming cold again; in which, Peason, Beans, and other such like
things, do boil easily, and which being put for some space in a Brazen,
Copper, or Silver Vessel, well scoured, leaves no discolored parts or spots
in the same, and which, when it has been boiled in a Ca^ldron, made very
fair and clean, does not make any ^etling or show of filth in the bottom: if
such as use to drink it, have a clear voice, a sound breast, and the die or
color of the face be neat and lively: finally, that which together with the
rest of the marks, is very light, and by consequent as principal of all the
rest shall that be judged, which excels in the foresaid marks and
qualities: and for to know which is the lightest, weigh as much with as much of
every sort of Water, or else take two, three, or ^oure Clothes of one and the
same web, length, and breadth, according to the quantity and sorts of Water
which you would compare together, and in every one wet a Cloth, distill the
Clothes, or let the Water drop out of them, and then weigh them, for the Cloth
which was moistened in the ^ightest Water, will then weigh les^e than the rest.
It is true, that the lightness of Water is not so truly tried by weight as by
drinking, not causing at such time any burthenous weight in the places about
the short Ribs, and passes through the body speedily, as also in being
quickly hot and quickly cold.

Dry Places, Places given t^ bring forth (...).
and Countries abounding with Mountains, do commonly bring forth Stones,
which is easily perceived by the rough and boisterous handling of the Earth,
and also by the Stones lying upon the upper part thereof, which otherwise might
have fallen and been cast there: in manner as sometimes it falls out, that
men find upon untilled grounds the lively shapes of Fruits and Corn gathered
together and grown unto the Stone, which is to be seen near to Mommirall in
Brie, where Wood is grown unto the Stone: besides that, the Hearth will make
quick and speedy trial hereof. This will do you service in the enclosing
either of your Park, or of your Vineyards, and other such like commodities,
besides the profit you may make of it by the selling of Milstones and Stones to
build withal. Deceitful stone-pits.
But look well to your self, and take good heed of Quarries, and casting of
Stone-pits, and of their deceits, which oftentimes rewards us with our pains
for our labor.

And as for the Earth (taken and understood generally) it bears all manner of
Corn, Why the earth is termed by the name of a Mother.
Fruits, Herbs, Timber Trees, Metals, Stones, and other things, and this
has been given unto it even since it was first made: and hereupon old Writers
have justly given unto it the due name of Mother. But although, in respect of
the cold and dry substance and nature whereof it consists, it may be called
all of one temperature, yet it purchases and gets contrary qualities,
according to the several situations it has in diverse places, as also upon
occasion of affinity, intercourse, and participation it has with things of
repugnant quality: and hence do rise the diverse sorts of the same, and so
diverse, as that every ground will not bear every thing, but one or two at
the most. For this cause, to avoid both cost and labor, see above all things,
that you prove, either by your own trial and experience, or else by such
inquiry as you can make of your neighbors, what kind of Fruits, what kind of
Corn, and what sorts of Trees, That it is against the nature of the free
Country of Bea^x to bear any Rye. To^^aine the Garden of France.
do prosper best thereon. Some places in Trance, and the free Country of
Beaux, bears no other grain than Rye, which is contrary to the nature of
the ground new broken up: another loves nothing but Wheat: Solonge loves
March corn, and sometime Mesling: Touraine, worthily called the Garden of
France, is found most plentiful in Gardens and Fruit Trees, as that part
called Brie or Braye (because it is situate betwixt the Rivers of Marne and
Seine) does bring forth Fruits and Corn for sustenance: and that quarter which
lies betwixt Marne and the River of Aube brings forth an infinite deal of
Hay: Notwithstanding, Man by labor is able to tame every thing.
the diligence of the Farmer may by his industry overcome the weakness of a
ground, even as well as all sorts of wild Beasts may be tamed by the
painfulness of man.

In watrie and marish places it will stand us upon to make our profit of the
water, Watrie and marish places.
which you shall oftentimes by sluices turn from his natural courses into your
pasture grounds and ponds of running and standing water, for the profiting and
helping of the same. About the brinkes and edges of the most commodious ones,
you shall set ranks of such Trees and profitable Plants as you know to like
and prosper in the water. And you must especially observe and mark the
diversity of the bottom and undermost part of the ground, The under parts of
watrie grounds.
which in watrie places is often found to differ much, and to be somewhat
strange, and according to the nature thereof to set such Trees as may best
agree therewith.

Your House being ^eated in such places, Islands of Flaunders.
will be most strong and pleasant in Summer, but of greatest maintenance,
preservation, and safety, if you enuiron it round about with water, after the
manner of an Islet, as it is practiced in many places of Flanders, who make
the use thereof familiar among them, to reap thereby the benefit of Fish in
his season, the flesh of wild Foul, Trees as well for Fruit as for Fire and
Building, besides the helps of their excellent pasture grounds: but indeed
your own health, as also the health of those of your family, is impaired
hereby, especially in Winter. To build on the tops of high ground.
Wherefore it will be better to build upon high ground, as the ancient Romans
did, and to leave the waters below, for the comforting of your ^ight, if so be
you have not the means of closing in all the same round about, for your breed
of young Colts and other Cattle, all which will like very well upon such
grounds, except it be your Cattle serving to furnish you with Wool.

If your Farm do, Wild grounds, Deserts, and Bull-rushes.
for the most part, consist of wild Grounds and Deserts, you shall make them
arable by labor and pains, and recover them, deluing them diligently, and
raking them often: for the Bull-rush, B^akes, and such other herbs will soon
be killed, when the earth is often turned. But and if you desire with more have
and certainetie to destroy them, you shall burn the ground (...) two first
years, and sow therein Lupines or Beans, to the end that together, with the
curing of the disease of your fields, you may reap some profit and com^oditie.

Stony grounds St^nie grounds.
are mended by taking away the stones, and if the quantity be ^reat, it will
be best to cast them together in manner of some small hillock in certain
places of the ground, and so by that means the rest will be cleansed and
freed: or ^^ther, when the days of handie-workes shall be got good cheap, it
will be best to dig the earth very deep, and there burying the stones
beforehand, afterward to ^uer them with the earth.

If the Farm consist most of Forests and Woods, Untilled grounds.
you shall make thereof arable ground, by plucking up the Trees altogether, as
also their roots: but and if there be but small store, it will be enough to
cut them down and burn them, and then to till the ground. And such grounds
are wont the first year to bring forth much, because that the moisture and
substance, which before was spent in the bringing forth and nourishing of
Trees, Bushes, and Hea^bes, does prepare it self wholly for the good of the
Corn that is sown upon it; or for that it having been fatted and grown
better by the leaves and herbs of many years, which of it own accord it
brought forth before it was tilled, becomes afterward sufficient to nourish
and bring forth great abundance of fruits: and so it comes to pass also,
that being robbed of her former nourishment, in time it grows lean, loosing
the freshness and moisture which was maintained by the covert, and therefore
continues not so fruitful as it was at the beginning.

Sandy places may be made better by Dung and Marle, Sandy grounds
which yet notwithstanding, even without such Husbanding, by means of some
current of water running v^der the Earth in some Countries, cease not to
yield good profit to their owners: but these crave rest, which is the
principal remedy to help their weak and feeble estate, and also to be sown
with variety of grain, as after Rye, some kind of pulse. The way to know such
grounds is common: when the great Sand is fast and yellowish, it is then found
to be good for Corn; and when it is white and dry, it is good for Wood and
wild fruits. But it behooves the Farmer to apply himself unto the nature and
temper of his field, What is (...) to know the nature of great Sand.
and according unto it to sow and plant in every place such things as are best
agreeing with them, as Pulse, Millet, Panicke, Ryce, Lentils, Fetches, and
other things, which do not require great store of fatness. But in our English
Soyles we find, that our sandy and hard grounds do bear best Barley at their
first breaking, or when they are fattest; after, Rye, Oats, Fetches, or Tare.

The strong, Strong grounds,
hearty, and fat Soil is good for Vineyards, and is apt to bear great store
of Wheat-Corne, foreseen that the year be dry, especially in the month of
May, but small store of any other increase: yea, and if the times be much given
to rain, they will bear but a little Corn, and great store of chafe. Yet if
the Seedsman have a careful hand in the bestowing of his seed, and do not (as
it were) cloy or choke his ground therewith, these fat Soyles will bear very
well and sufficiently the first year, either whole Straw-Wheat, Pollard-Wheat,
or Barley; and the second year, Beans, Pease, or both mixed together; and the
third year, Wheat or Rye, or both mixed together, which is called Maslyne or
blend Corn.

A raw, Rough ground*
rough, and tough Soil is hard to till, and will neither bring forth Corn,
nor any other thing, without great labor, howsoever the seasons be temperate
in moisture and dryness. To help the same, you must labor it most
exquisitely, harrow it and manure it very often with great store of dung, so you
shall make it better and less subject to the injuries of the Sun, Winds, and
Frost: but especially desire that they may not be watered with rain, for water
is as good as a poison to them.

The Clay and strong ground, A clay ground*
as that in Bresse and other pla^es of Partois, craves great and deep
furrows when it is eared, and every where else, as even in the very places
where stones lie deep and ouer-couered again with good earth: and this to the
end that the water may the better be conveyed away, which is naturally mixed
therewith, and cannot so easily depart, by reason of the clamm^e sliminesse of
the earth. This plot is not so fit either for Trees or Vines, except it be for
some fruit Trees, and those well husbanded and nourished. If you build there,
then do it upon some high ground, To build upon a high ground.
and near enough unto the River, and cause the Eastern and Northern quarter,
because such places are subject very much to putrefaction, and very
unwholesome.

The territories of Croye and Ardose are more sound and wholesome, Territories
and fields lying in Croye and Ardose.
though they be more barren: but it must be made better, and much mended, and
employed only to that which it delights in: for the Baylife of the
Husbandry ought to know the nature of the ground, and not to force it to bear
that which is contrary unto it, The nature of the earth must be known.
notwithstanding whatsoever you do unto it for the bettering of it: for of
forced grounds there comes as much profit as there does of beasts, by violence
used toward them. For suppose you may compel them, yet it shall be to your
great cost and charges, by reason of their hurts, maladies, and otherwise, for
such cattle commonly stand not in good plight and state. An old prouerh, That
of compulsions comes no good.
The old Proverb also says, That a Householder should give greater heed unto
his profit, and the holding out or continuing of that which he has under his
hand, than to his pleasure and rare commodity.

Every Country fit for good Vineyards is stony and grauellie, or full of
pebbles, and is found to be better on the South quarters, or on the descent of
the Hill, lying on the side toward the River: This place is not so good for
Corn; in the plain or ^lat places thereof you must make it better, and dung
it. Make your buildings there on the sloping side, which looks into the
Southeast, where you may not remove your self far from the River, for the
reason before given.

The best Soil is that which is black, Good ground, a fruitful country of
France.
crumbling, and easily turned over, that is to say, which easily falls into
small pieces in ones hand, and feels light, sweet, and fat in handling, like
to that which is found in the country of Tourraine, Maine, and Anjou, which
are fertile in all manner of fruitfulness and abundance of goods, rich in
Hills, Valleys, Pasture-grounds, Vale-grounds, Vineyards, and all sorts of
fruits: but upon good cause they give place to Prouence, part of Languedoc, and
Guienne, and the better places of Aquitaine, The fruitfulnes of Aquitaine.
all which, by reason of the heat of the South Sun, bring forth not only in
greater abundance, but their fruits of all sorts of better qualities and more
forcible. The inconveniences of the Southern wind in Languedoc, Prouence, and
Guienne.
This is the land of Promise in our France, and has no discommoditie save that
of the Southern wind, which they call Austrault: which except it be tempered
by the Northern winds, does almost every year engender unhappy calamities
both in men and beasts. Wherefore in this Country the dwelling places and
buildings must be set upon a Hill, and the South wind shut out and den^ed all
entrance by lights, except when it shall be needful, in the depth of Winter.

But to speak generally, The signs of a good and sertile ground.
the Soil may be known to be good and to bear great store of fruits by these
means: as, if it be somewhat black, or somewhat yellow; if it (...) not when
it is ill tilled; if it become not myrie when great store and abundance of
rain shall fall upon it, but drinks up all the water that shall fall, and
therewithal keep this moisture and refreshment a long time; if in Winter time
it become not hard in the upper part thereof; if without being husbanded or
mended by great labor, or fatness of dung, it bring forth flourishing
herbs, timber trees, straight, thick, having great a^^es, and abounding with
store of their several fruits, and those good and well-rellished in their
kinds: and if it yield great fruitfulness of Corn: if by being watered, or
rained upon, it become blown up, and as it were stretched out and black, and
not hard bound, or turned white: if the water springing forth of it be sweet,
or if the green soddes thereof being broken in pieces, and steept two or three
hours in water that is sweet and of a good taste, do not mar or make worse
the taste of such water, which must be tried by tasting of it, after that it
has been strained and clarified: For naturally water issuing out from a
spring, or wrung from something that has been steept in it, retains and
carries with it the taste of the Earth: and on the other side, if the Earth
steept in Water, the same Water do after such steeping yield a sweet and
pleasant relish: if cast up, and two or three days after thrown into the
said ditch again, it gather on a heap, and rise higher than the said ditch;
for in doing this, it shows it self to be a fat Earth: and whereas one shall
do nothing but pare the said ditch, without doing any more, it will be but
indifferent: but and if he come not to touch the edges of the said ditch, it
will be light earth: furthermore, if it be watered with rain, it yields a
pleasant smell. On the contrary, Naughty earth.
the Earth must be judged of no value, if it have not all these signs of
goodness: and principally, that which is cleaving like Glue, like Potters
Clay, Chalkie, Whitish, which shakes and trembles, which is too hard, rough,
and strong, which is watrie and marish, which has a salt or bitter taste, which
brings forth Trees and Herbs that are bitter, cold, and thornie, as
Brambles, Fern, Briars, Wormwood, Juniper, Lauander, Broom, Butchers Broom,
and other such like: as on the contrary side, Rushes, Roses, small Grass,
three-leaued Grasses, Thorns, Dane-woort, wild Plum-trees, and such other
things, do show the goodness and fruitfulness of the Soil: for the things
above named are not found or nourished any where almost but in the sweet
veins of the Earth. Yet, according to the opinion of Serres, all Clayes which
are black, gray, or marlie, albeit a little tough and gluie, yet, if after
their drying they become not hard, but crumble, and (as it were) fall to
cynders, or if they be not much subject to a kind of vomiting or casting up of
water, or to an extraordinary excess of coldness, they are to be reputed the
fattest and best Soyles for Corn, though not for the Vine: and though they are
less apt to breed or put forth Wood, yet the Wood growing upon such Soyles is
ever the best and the longest lasting.

CHAP. V.
The building and enclosing of our Country Farm.
PEace being purchased, then build thine House, says the wise and prudent
Householder: and the Author of the Latin Georgickes does highly prize and
value those great Farms and Houses, whose appurtenances and expenses are
great: but he counsaileth men to undertake and deal with so little as he
knows well to do. Great Cages make not their Birds good.
For as great Cages make the Birds never a whit the better, even so it is not
so safe and sure a course to have a costly and large Building upon the ground,
neither yet to have so fair and large Fields, neither yet so great quantity
of Grounds, as that they must be either all ill husbanded, or else if for the
careful tilling of one part of them, all the rest be left and let go
untilled, as neither to covet greedily, or aspire to possess other great and
stately Farms, when he is not able to husband and till that which he has
already in possession, if so be perhaps that a man long not to bring himself
wilfully into the danger of the Lords of such Farms, rather than to advance or
further their own profit: like to those bad Carters, Unfaithful Farmers.
which will not see or suffer either Horse or Man to stand still, until by
continual toil and incessant laboring of them about the grounds of his
Farm, he bring to pass, that both Lands, Horse, and Men be not able to hold
out, but become little worth: which is the cause, that a Lord letting his Place
and Demeanes to Farm, must make account, that the earnest desire and watchful
regard he has to uphold and maintain his grounds in good plight, will not be
accomplished or manifested by deed of Indenture, or posting over of the charge
to another, but rather it stands him upon in his own person to see such as
are to labor therein, to be set to their work, ouer-looking ever and anon the
company, and ordering used by the baylife of his Husbandry in the handling of
his business, The eye of the Master fatteth the Horse.
that so he may prevent the mischiefs above named. It is also said of some
men, That the eye of the Master does fat the Horse; and that matters are never
so well cared for, or looked to, as by himself. For there are but few, (...)
either Hindes, day-Labourers, or L^bourers by great, which do not love their
Masters profit a great deal les^e than their own, and every day are behind
hand in one duty, or piece of work or other, which ought to have been done.

Better therefore is a small House of good stuff, not sumptuous, well seated
and well fitted (but let it have of every thing a little) than so costly a
place, and of such large rooms, as that either they become envied of their
Superiors for it, or else at length causes the Master to sell it again. For
the good Roman Husbandman says, That a Householder must so diminish the
charges of every thing by his labor, (...)
as that he may evermore have more things, and more to sell than to buy, and
that he every day become more strong and powerful than his Field: For seeing
that the Lord and it must needs combat, wrestle, and encounter the one with
the other, if the Field be too strong, then the Lord is wronged. Every place
in the Fields is also oftentimes to b^ looked unto, and if need be, speedily
repaired, because the decay of any part of it, (...)
or of any thing which is to be used in it, being let alone and neglected
only one year, draws on another los^e as great as it self, and costeth
thrice as much to make it up again, as and if it had been looked unto within
a month or fi^teene d^yes after the decay did fall and happen. And their words
in this case are of no val^e, (...)
which ^ay, That Ground^ trodden upon and trampled with many fect, are half
(...) and spent: or, that Ground lying far off does breed nothing but fl^gons
and bottels. For I wou^d hau^ the Master to be more commonly there, than at
home at his House, and that he should so dispose of his estate, as that there
may be both for all neces^^^i^s of food* and so ^o^th, and somewhat to spare:
otherwise his House and (...) should minister more unto his servants than to
himself, and his charges should exceed the increase and revenues: and that as
well in tarrying at home, as also when he goes abroad, he make it his chief
delight to understand and see the governing of whatsoever belongs unto him,
not troubling his mind with Hunting, Banqueting, much Company keeping,
Drunkenness, and welcomming in of every commer, and so to give himself
excessiuely to his delights and recreation of his spirit.

The placing of such Building as is made, (...)
is most fit to be on the edges of some great Hill, upon some small (...), or
the top of the Hill, if the Country be tempestuous and full of Mountains: for
by (...) means he shall reap the liberty of the Air, and a goodly Prospect:
he shall be safe from the annoyances of foggie Mists: he shall not be oppressed
with cold in Winter by reason of Ice, nor over hot in Summer, and the Wat^r^
and Floud^ which run down from the top of the Hills shall not threaten, much
l^sse do harm unto the foundation of his dwelling place: as also he shall not
be too much subject to the Winds and Raines of the whole year: he shall
proc^re h^s principa^l Lights to stand upon the Sunne-rising in the months of
March and September: for the Winds blowing (...) those quarters are dry, more
hot than cold, but very whole^ome, as well for the body as for the spirit of
Man: and the Sun, which comes to enter betimes in the morning into the
House, does diminish and wast the darkness and gros^enes^e of the Air: add
further, that look by how ^uch his Hou^e shall be set more upon the said
Eastern point, by so much the more easily it will be able to receive that Wind
in Summer, and be les^e beaten in Winter with Frosts. The Barnes shall be open
toward the Sunne-set, in respect of their greatest lights, and with^ll, shall
have one light serving toward the North, for the cause above named: but all
Houses for Beasts shall have their Windows toward the South, and borrowing
somewhat of the East, for that the Winds blowing from thence will keep them
sound at all seasons and times. (...).
It is true, that as for St^b^es for Horses, it is neces^arie to make them a
light serving toward the North, to open ^n the hot time of Summer, during the
vehement heat thereof, and that at the hour of their ease and rest, which is
Noone-tide: for at this time and hour, if you give them not some breath of
air to cool them withal, the heat of the Noone Sun, which would strike in,
and their own, which is always in the Stable, as also their breathing and
press of the whole company of Horses, being there together, would set them in
such a sweat, faintness of body, and loathing of their mea^, as that the
very Stable would weary, wear, and spend them as much as the Plough it
self. And as for the rest of the Buildings, or the base Courts, it makes no
great matter upon what Coasts or Quarters you dispose them: The base Courts
howbeit, if you so contriue them, as that they may mark upon the North, they
cannot but be to good purpose. These instructions for Lights and Windows are
not so strictly enjoined, as that the differing qualities and conditions of
Countries, where such building must be made, may not move you to dispose them
otherwise: for seeing there are found in some Countries such Winds as are
almost ordinary, and may be said to have gotten (as it were) ^ habit, and
those blowing from such Quarters as lie upon the Sea or Marshes, or such
other, and therefore bring with them some noisome quality, or at least little
profitable; it must needs be permitted in such places to alter and change the
former directions. And to speak the truth, seeing that by the means of
Windows and counter-Windowes you may cut off the entrance both of Sun and
whatsoever Winds, it shall be left in your free choice to make such Lights as
may seem most necessary in your own judgments, being evermore directed
against such annoyance as the Air might bring from that place whatsoever from
whence it comes.

And although that every one build after his own humor, (...)
yet the cause should so stand, as that reason should rule evermore: and
surely, such a man should be estee^ed but of a slender judgment, which having
a place and commodities belonging ^hereto, did not fit things in such sort, as
that on the one side of his chamber he have ^ light open upon the Court and
forepart of his Farm by which they must enter that ^ome to it, Of the Lig^ts
to be made in Building.
and another open upon his Gardens and principal Grounds. Wherefore that he
may know the more easily to prepare his Buildings (as it were) anew, or else
repair it after his own fancy, it will be meet and convenient for him to do
in manner as follows.

Draw a great Court and wide, and that very square every way, (...).
in the midst thereof cause to be cast two Fish Ponds at the least; one for
Geese, Ducks, and other Cattle: the other, to water, steep, or soften
Lupines, Osiers, Rods, and such other things, as also for the rotting of your
dung: and somewhat more to the further side, a Well with two or three troughs
of hewn stone, to water your Cattle and Poultrie ^t, if you have not the
benefit of a running Water, or some near River, either great or small. Make
also two Dunghils; the one, to con^aine and rot all your new dung, and to keep
it till the year following: the other, that from it you may take the old and
rotten dung, and carry it out into the fields* These two Dunghils must be
far from them, and on a ground falling from the forenamed Fish Ponds and
Well, if so be that the place will afford it, or else, at the least, cast
deep within the Earth, and paued in the bottom before hand, least that the
Earth should drink up the moisture: for Dunghils must of necessity be kept in
continual moisture, to the end, that if peradventure amongst the Straw,
Litter, Stubble, or Chafe, which is brought thithe^, there be the seeds of any
Herbs or Thorns mixed among, they may rot, and not bad or bring forth any
Weeds, when the dung shall be spread upon the ground. And therefore expert and
skillful servants do cover with Clay the dung which they cast out of the
Stables, to the end the Wind may not dry it up, or that the Sun or Wind
should cause it to spend all the moisture, and turn it into dust.

This Court, The Wells of the C^^rt.
containing two acres square, shall be compassed in with a Wall of ^ighteene
inches thick, and ten foot high from the ground, for the resting of your
Buildings upon that are within: and to meet with the danger threatened by
Thieves, and ruin^s procured by Rain, it shall be strengthened with chains on
those sides which lie next unto Ways, as also with good Rafters, according to
the greatness of the commodity of your plac^, and other stuff.

In the midst of the Wall, The door of ^he H^use.
and in the forepart, which is the part lying upon the Sunne-set, you shall
make your Gates and their Porch, and in like manner a cover over head, to keep
the said Gates from the Sun and Rain, which otherwise would beat full upon
them, and overthrow them, as also for the special use of your self and your
family, as to give them place and shelter in the time of Rain, or when they
please: And the Gates must be so high and wide, as that a Cart laden with Hay
or Corn may go in with ease. You shall raise it half a foot above the
ground, and defend it on the outside or upper ground with a threshold well and
fitly laid, and in such sort, as that upon the running down of water it may
not rot, which they would do, if they should come close to the ground: and
that thieves may not cast them off their hooks with Lea^ers or Crows of iron
standing on the outside, which they might the more easily do, if they should
be cut short of the Earth, and not have the help of the Threshold.

Ouer-against the Porch, A partition.
toward the trade-way, you shall make a partition of ten or twelve furlongs,
well enclosed with Ditch and Quickset, hedged round about, for the feeding of
your tired, weary, or sick Cattle, which cannot keep or go in company
with others, as also wherein they may rest and chaw the cud in fair Weather
and in time of great Heat.

The Farmers Lodge shall be built near to the side of the Porch upon the left
hand, The Farmers Lodge.
and shall have the daylight coming in upon the side toward the street,
Westward; notwithstanding, that his Windows shall lie upon that side of the
Court which is Eastward. His Kitchen shall be raised two or three steps about
the ground, to the end it may be freed of the moisture wherewith the Court
abounds in Winter: it must also be high built and great, to the end that the
floor lying nex^ above may not be so subject to the danger of the ^ire, and to
the end that all his ^riends and servants may at all times easily bestow
themselves therein. The Farmers Oven.
The Oven shall be set without the room, having the mouth in the inner side of
the chimney of the said Kitchen, and lower than the Mantle-tree, not far
above the Hearth.

At the entrance of the said Kitchen, and in such place thereof as shall be
least subject to the Sun, and most cool, you shall have a Dairie-house or
small vaulted Room paued, and lying slope-wise, and with a gutter, to serve
for the huswifes Dairie, and therein she shall do all her busines^e about
making of Butter and Cheese, and the said Gutter or Sink shall serve for the
avoiding and conueying of all such washings as she is to make about her Milk
vessels. On the other side of the said Ki^chin she shall have the like house of
Office, or vaulted room, which shall also b^ for the Huswifes v^e, and serve
for a Spence to keep her provision of victuals in; and underneath this, a
little Cellar: and the place for the coming out shall be in stead of an
upright Table, set as you go into the Kitchen.

On the other side of the Kitchen shall be the Farmers Bed-roome, The Farmers
Chamber.
and one other joining to it for his maid servants and children, and a third
joining close unto it, for to keep foul Linen: To the walls of which room
you shall go forward to ioyn^ a fourth, which shall be sufficient large, and
the door to go into it shall stand in the court without, and it shall serve
for fuel, working tools, and other necessary things. And the upper part of
Loft of this room shall serve for Garners Garners.
to lay Fruits, all manner of Pulse, Corn, Herbs, and Roots in, that are to
be kept.

Upon the right hand as you go in shall be Stables for Horses, Stables for
Horse.
reserving also a sufficient great low room bounding the great Porch, for the
Carter and other men servants, (...)
as also for the keeping of Collars, Cart-saddles, Traits, thick clothes, and
other furniture for Horses: and along, at the end of your Horse stables, you
shall make Houses for Oxen and Kine. Oxe-hous^s.
And over the said Stables, Lo^ts and Rooms for Hay and Prouender for Cattle,
adding to the end of these great Houses a little one, to keep Calves in of
both kinds, which you have wained, with intent to bring up for further
services. At the end of all these Beast-houses, and close to the same, you
shall appoint a Dog-house, if you like not better to place the same in the
midst of your base court under some small Shed laid over with boughs, covered
with straw, open (...) two places, to the end the dogs may take sent and
breath on two sides, for this ^atch thus placed will serve for the whole base
Court.

In the place right over against the Porch of the Farm shall open the door of
your ^wne house, The entrance of the householde^s dwelling place.
which by a stayre of eight steps at the most shall bring you to the first
story of the same, the entry whereinto shall be like unto a plain vacant
alley of an indifferent wideness, with an outcast at the further end upon the
Garden, and that ^ith a descent of a like pair of stayres unto those at the
entrance. The round stairs.
Upon the right ^and of this entry shall be your Kitchen, Storehouse,
Butterie, and a place of re^ourse or lodging for two or three serving men: The
Kitchen.
betwixt which Kitchen and Butterie ^here shall be a winding stayre which shall
have his foot into the Kitchen, and thereby you shall go up to the Corne-lofts
there above. Near unto your Kitchen, you shall make rooms to stamp and
press your Grapes in: The first story shall be of such length and breadth as
your appointed platform lays out unto you, borne vp^n a raised vault from
the ground, well stayed upon bearing pillars, and furnished with casements to
take the Air at, upon both sides, and that to the end that you may have an
under story of like length and breadth to that above, which shall be a
halfe^ellar and a halfe-vault; which, b^side that it will preserve your lodging
from earthquakes, will also serve you to couch your Wines and Cidres in,
without any fear of ^otting the hoopes, as also to hang your Bacon and other
powdered provision, your Oils, Candles, yea, and your Wood also, and your
Fruits likewise during the Frost. Your Lodging or Mansion shall have no more
than this one story, above which you shall raise no other save only your
Garners and Galleries, keeping your house thereby of a lower pitch, and so
less subject to the rage of the Winds, which will save you ^ great deal of
charges, wh^^ as you shall not be forced to use the helping hand of Tylers
every hour. Upon the left hand of the said Alley or Entry shall be your Hall,
through which you shall pas^e into your Chamber, and out of your Chamber into
your Wardrobe and inner Chamber: and at the end hereof, if the body of your
House shall have compassed in place enough, you shall make a Chamber to lodge
strangers; the way into, as also out of which, shall be by a turning stayre on
that side toward the Court, that so such strangers may be at their liberty,
not molesting or troubling you by their passing in or out: and this if so be
that your good liking and inclination mo^e you not rather to build for the
entertaining of your friends and other strangers on the other side of your
Hall. The chietest Lights must be t^ward the East.
You shall make your fairest Lights and Frames toward the East upon your
Garden, reserving only half windows for the side lying upon your Court,
seeing they serve for no other thing, but that you may have an eye upon your
folk, and to see who be comers and goers to your lodging: and at the end of
every such little chamber you shall make a Privy, for the necess^rie use of
every of the two said bodies of the house. Whatsoever room shall be over head
or above your Alleyes, Hall, Chamber, Wardrobe, and Chamber for strangers,
shall be for Garners, Garners.
that so you may lay apart, and by it self, your Rye, Wheat, Pulse, and
Fruits, and cast aside your foul Linen, and they shall all of them have
pretty windows upon the North side, The North wind good for the keeping of
Corn.
for that quarter is most cool, and least moist: which two things are of great
force, long to preserve and keep Grain. At the end of your Rooms, for the
treading and pressing of your Grapes, you shall set up your Henne-house, A
Henne-house.
and rooms for other Fowls, fashioned foure-square like a tower, but yet more
long than wide or broad: in such sort, as that the lowest room shall serve for
Water-Fowles, as for Geese and Duckes by themselves; and the upper for those of
the yard, together with their Pearches and Baskets to lay in: and you must make
under the Henne-lo^t some separated room for Turkey Chickins and Turkey
Cocks: Turk^^ Henn^^ and Cock^.
and upon high, under the floor that is over them, you shall contriue a close
room, after the fashion of a Lettuce, therein to keep your Feasants. Fesants*
As for your Peacockes, you shall give them liberty to roust every where.
Near unto the same place you shall make your ground Doue-house (if the Law
will permit you such a one) in fashion like a round Turret in the midst of
your Court.

Set your Sheepe-cotes and Swine-sties upon the South, in such manner as they
may have no open pl^ce but upon your Court: (...)
and unto the principal Sheepe-cote you shall make a par^^^ion of very high
Hurdles, to draw the Lambs from the Ewes, a^ also the Ramme^ in like manner:
and close unto these shall you make your Swinestie, raising two in^losures of
Walls well dawbed on both sides, the one for the Sowe^, and the other for the
^ogges. In like sort you shall deal with Goats, making several Cotes (...)
them: and the upper parts of all these shall serve for Garners to lay their
meat and wh^tsoeuer food necessary for such Cattle.

Right (...) against these Sheepe-cotes you shall make your Barn, (...)
with his great d^re of the widenes^e of the middle Bay, and that to give light
to the Threshers: (...) o^ thesaid Barn (if the Law will not permit you to
build a (...) on the ground) you shall make you a place to keep Birds in, of
the same (...) with the porch, and as high as you will: the lowest part of it
shall serve for Birds to keep themselves s^fe in, when either the Rain, or
too much heat of the Sumne, shall (...) them. One of the sides of your Barn,
all along for the space of three ^ayes, shall serve to put your Rye and Wheat
in, and the other side, for as much length* shall contain your Pulse or March
Corn: the middle part is that which i^ of the breadth of the porch, with his
roof above.

And betwixt the Sheepe-cotes and Swine^sties, (...)
right over against the porch of the Ba^ne, you shall make a place of a
competent height, in manner of an Appentice, to s^t your Ploughes, great Carts,
Drayes, Tumbrels, Waines, and other Instruments and Furniture for Husbandry,
if you please not rather to make the groundwork of your place to keep and
nourish Birds in, to serve for these purposes, when as your a^thoriti^ will not
bear you out to build a Doue-hou^^ on the ground, because you h^ld not in see
Fa^me, or Copyhold.

Under, (...)
or upon the side of your turne-stayers, according to the breadth of the body
of your House, your Farmer shall have a way into the Gardens: but you your
self shall have your way in by another winding stayr^, which you shall make to
descend ^^om above, from your alley that is over them: the one of which
Gardens, as that on the right hand, shall be for Pot-hearbes; and the other for
Quarters and ^^lse, together with a place for Bee-hyues.

At the end of a great Alley which you shall make from your winding-stayre to
the wall of your Orchard, running betwixt the two Gardens, without any manner
of par^^^ion except two Hedges of Quick-set, shall be your Orchard, separated
from your other Gardens by a wall continuing all along the two sides of the
enclosure of your pla^e. And in the midst of the said great Alley there shall
be Wells, to water by Pipes and Spouts so much as is needful in the Gardens,
if it like you not better to con^ey some Fountain that way, or else to seek
for the Heads of some Springs, or else to make a Cesterne well mortered to
receive and keep Rain water.

The O^chard s^all make the fence on the side toward your House, (...)
and by it you shall make your way into your Feeding or Pasture grounds, lying
along by the sides of some grieve and ^lourishing Water-bankes: along the sides
of which Brook, as also about your Ponds of salt and fresh water Fish, you
shall plant Willowes.

Where you enter into your Orchard out of your Garden, (...)
you shall on the one side make a Nurcerie for Seeds and Kernels, and on the
other side for Stocks and Plants, and in the midst the ranks of removed and
grafted Trees, and at the end below y^u shall plant by ridges your Osiers,
which may, for their better prospering, take the benef^^ of the coolness and
moisture of some small Brook.

The (...) Gate (otherwise called the Back or field-Gate) on that side toward
your Meadow, (...)
made for your own going in and out alone, shall be set out and garnished with
two Ch^^rons, set upon one maine Timber, and no more, and four or five
Bat^^^ments above, and shut with a strong door: for that way you shall go into
your House privily, and in like sort go forth again when it seems good unto
you, without your servants their priuitie, and for your avoiding of the
noisomeness of the Beasts Houses and of your great Court. And to this end you
shall have a special passage from your Stable or Garden, not far from your
house wherein you tread your Grapes, to drive your Cattle by continually.

Notwithstanding all which, (...)
yet my meaning is, that your cost and course in building should be according
to the revenues of the grounds, or value of the profits, and that (as says
Cato) the dwelling House be not set after seeking of Grounds, nor Grounds
caused to go seek Houses and Rooms: for great Plots of Building, and
Enclosures of Pleasure, cost much to build and maintain: and Buildings which
are less than were requisite for the profits of the grounds, are a great cause
of much loss in the Fruits of the same.

CHAP. VI.
The duty of a Father of a Family, or Householder.
AFter I have thus disposed of Rooms and Building, (...)
I wish and desire, that the Lord of the Farm may be a man of great knowledge,
well acquainted and given to matters of Husbandry: for who so is ignorant of
them, having had but small practice in them, as also he which does take his
chiefest delight in other things, and spends his time otherwise, must of
necessity commit himself to the mercy and discretion of a Farmer, which will
mock him to his face, and will impair his grounds and house also, heaping
thereto a world of quarrels and suits, which he will raise: or else he must
trust to some other accomplisher of the business, either in governing or
waiting and attending: and he asking counsel of other the ^armers thereabout,
they will make him believe things to be not so good by the half ^s they are.
And indeed we read for a certainetie in the Roman Histories, That the Earth was
never so fruitful as then when it was allured and won by the industry of the
famous Roman citizens, and delivered out of the tyrannous handling of
gros^e-headed peasants, whom we see before our eyes, notwithstanding that they
are altogether ignorant, to grow rich at our costs and charges, and to the
great spoil of the ground which they husband and till. There is nothing
comparable to the ouer-looking eye of a prudent and discreet Lord, and one that
is accustomed to Husbandry, and which looks after and contenteth himself
with such estate as may stand with his profit, and keeps to himself the
principal charge, which is a watchfulnes and earnest desire to preserve his
goods, and has always care of his company, and farmeth not nor yet renteth
ou^ any thing but that which he will have nothing at all to do withal, except
a little oversight: Neither yet would I have him, What things are most fit to
be farmed out.
in so doing, that he should pass any bargain by the way of Notaries, or by
Writing: for by this means he robs himself of his liberty. Let him learn
well to know and understand the natures and choice of Men, Cattle, and
Grounds, and let not that work possibly fall out, which he himself knows not
to do, if he should stand in need, or else to give directions in and to
command unto others; at the least let him understand the times and seasons
when, as also the manners how, things were accustomed to be done: for as a man
which sees not any place whereby he may give light to another, can never
lighten him so well; even so that Lord of a Farm, which understands nor,
neither knows the seasons and proper times for to do any thing belonging to
his government and jurisdiction, neither yet the ordering of things, to execute
every thing accordingly, shall never know so well what to command, and does
nothing to the workman but t^ouble and grieve him: and it is the manner of men
to mock at such as command and will things to be done which are nothing to the
purpose, but must afterward be undone again, or else abide without any profit.
This is it which the great Husbandman Cat^ has written, That the ground is
very ill entreated and grievously punished, whose Lord and owner knows not to
teach and command that which is to be done: but must depend and rely wholly
upon his Farmer. Therefore it is most necessary, that the father of the
Family, or owner of the Farm, be most expert in every work due for every
Season of the year, as thus: first, for such Earths as are applied only to
Tillage, he shall know, that if the Soil wherein he lives be a stiff,
strong, heavy, and tough Clay, he shall then, from Plow-day, which is ever the
Monday after Twelfth-day, till S. Valentines day, break up (...) Pease-Earth,
where he intends to sow Pease and Beans, which must lie for ^ait, which is,
till it have received Frost and Rain, that thereby the Mould may break* but
if his Earth be a mixed Earth, and of a more light nature, then from Plow-day to
S. Valentines, he shall break up or ^allow that Earth which he intends to
keep (...) the year following: From S. Valentines day till S. Chaddes he
shall sow his Beans, Pease, Fetches, or other Pulse whatsoever: provided
always, that he sow his Beans first, he Pease next, and his smaller Pulse
last of all: He shall from S. Chaddes day till a fortnight before our Lady
day, commonly called the Annuntiation, sow his Oats, either upon the I^^ams,
which is land ^owne the year before, or on the tilth or fallow ground prepared
for the purpose: from a fortnight before the Annuntiation, till a fortnight
after, he shall sow his Barley, either on Clay ground, hassell, or mixed Earth:
and upon light sands, from mid April till Whitsontide: from May day till
Midsummer he s^all fallow his stiff Clayes, or Summer-stirre his lighter mixed
Earths: from Midsummer till Lammas he shall Summer-stirre his stiff Clayes,
and foil his lighter Earths: from Lammas till a ^ortnight after Michaelmas he
shall Winter-rigge all such land as he intends to sow Barley on the year
following: He shall also in that season sow his Wheat, Rye, or Mas^yne: he
shall then also furrow or cut sluices whereby to drayne the water from his
arable land, because the drier that it lies, the better it is, and evermore the
more fruitful, as the experience of Husbandmen find by a continual practice.
And as he thus knows how to dispose and order his arable ground, so he
shall also know how to husband his Pasture or Meadow ground: as namely, in the
months of January and February he shall first plash and cut his Hedges and
Quick-sets, that thereby they may grow thick and strong at the bottomes: he^
shall then cast his Mole-hils level, and kill Moles, and prune such
Fruit Trees as either have decayed or dead branches in them: or else such
superfluous succors, as growing from below, robs the trees of much sap and
nourishment. In March, if your ground be not very fruitful, but of an
indifferent temperature, you shall lay all those grounds of which you intend to
have Hay: but if they be fertile, and bear much burden, then if you lay them
at May day, it will be fully early enough. At Midsummer you may mow your
fruitful low grounds, and at the translation of S. Thomas you may mow those
which lie higher and are less fertile: observing this, that i^ the season of
the year be moist, then you may let your high grounds grow the longer, and cut
your low grounds sooner; but if the season be burning and dry, then you must
cut your high grounds the sooner, and let your low grounds stand the longer*
because the first will burn at the root, and the other retain his moisture.
All these months of June, July, and May also, when either the weather or other
hindrances detain you from these greater works, you shall then lead forth
your dung, compass, or meanure to your tilth or ^allow field: and it is also a
good season for the bringing home of your Fuel, especially when your
provisions lie far off. At Lammas pull your Summer fruit, and reap your
Corn, and your other Grain, either before or after, as you find them ripen.
After S. Ma^hewes day if you have any meanure vnlaid, lead it forth, for one
Load then bestowed on the Earth, is more precious than two in the former
Seasons. About a week before S. Lukes day begin to skowre your Ponds and
Ditches, plant and replant Fruit Trees: and if any of your Hedges were left
vnplasht in the Spring, plash them now, for it is an excellent Season. At
Allhallontide cut down your Timber, chiefly your Ash, Elm, or Ewe, or what
else you prepare ^or Cart, Plow, or Harrow Timber. Before Christmas brush your
Hedges* and weed them from all dead and superfluous branches: also then, and to
the end of January, is good stubbing of Wood grounds, and removing of Bees:
also then you shall bare the roots of your Fruit Trees, and cover them again
with rich Mould the March following. Thus our Husbandman, according to the
opinion of Oliver d^ Serres, having enriched his memory with these knowledges,
shall live a Free man, and no Bondslaue, a Master, and no Prentice, to his
Farmer or Baylie.

I mean all this while, The chief key of all the rest.
that the abode of the owner of the Farm is upon his Inhe^itance, and that he
have the Royalty and Chiefetie of the whole, and that he does ^ithdraw
himself from home, and secretly retur^e thither again when it shall seem ^ood
unto him, to keep his people continually in doing o^ their office and charge:
^his is the cause why, among the rest of his Buildings, we have counseled him
to ^rouide a back gate in the end of his Enclosure, (...)
Let him not go to see the Town, ^^cept it be upon his earnest affairs, and
let him commit his Suites to be followed^ which without great loss he cannot
let pass and neglect) by some faithful Attur^ey, To order his Suites.
to whom he shall give nothing but the only counterpane of his Evidence: and
^eing in the Town, What time the Householder should keep at his Farm, and
when he may best go^ abroad to the Town, or elsewher^.
let him not go to see any man therein, except it be in Winter, ^r at such
time as when his Harvest is in, and his Seed ^ime and first arder be dispatched,
^o the end that by one and the same means he may attend upon his causes in
contro^ersie, and go about the getting in of his debts, I wish further, that
he carry himself ^leasant and courteous unto his folk, not commanding them
any thing in his choler: ^or boisterous and rough handling will prevail as
little with men as with stiffe-nec^ed iades. Let him speak familiarly unto
them, let him laugh and jest with them ^ometimes, Men cannot abide to be
roughly entreated.
and also either give them occasion, or else suffer them to laugh and be
^^errie: for their incessant pains are somewhat mitigated, when they ar^
vouchsa^ed some gentle and courteous intreatance of their Master toward them.
Notwith^tanding, I wish him not to be too familiar with them for the avoiding
of contempt: neither would I have him to acquaint them with his purposes,
except it be sometime (...) ask their counsel in a matter, and let him not
spare sometimes to seem to do af^^r their advice, though he had determined
the same course before: for they will ^orke with more cheerfulness, when they
think that the matter is carried accor^ing to their invention. Let him
maintain the cause of his neighbors, and not to ^rrogate unto himself, or
take any thing upon him, as commanding them. Let him ^lso relieve them in their
necessities* and yet let him not lend them, except it be some small thing* and
such as he had rather loose than ask twice, except it be in their extreme
need and necessity. Let him patiently and quietly bear their tedious and
^roublesome natures, whom he knows to envy and repine at him, never falling
out with them, or giving them ever any just occasion of displeasure: but
win^ing at that which he knows of their nature and natural inclination, let
him pleasure them to the uttermost that he can, and seem to be at one with
them, as if he h^d never understood any thing to move him to the contrary. And
thus he may pu^^hase peace and rest. And there remains nothing more for his
office, but his service to God, love to his neighbors, good instructions to
his children, honest examples to his servants, and peacefulnesse with all men
living: he shall rather lend than borrow, rather buy than sell those things
he has use for, but evermore better furnished to sell than buy necessary
commodities. This is Serres opinion, and worthy a general imitation.

CHAP. VII.
The Office of the Farmer.
TAke unto you for your Farmer a man of indifferent years, not ^ickly, but
lusty and strong, and of the same Country and Soil that your Farm lies in,
if it be possible, and him such a one, as whom you have known of long time, or
else by the report of honest men have he^rd of, to be a good man, and his wife
also to be a thriftie huswife, and his children well nu^^ured: Such a one as
has no Farm or Inheritance neer^ unto your house, who from (...) youth has
bin hardly brough^ up* and well experienced in matters and business^s belonging
to Husbandry, or otherwise, by means of great diligence and good will toward
the ^ame, has attained the Mystery of Husbandry. One who is a sparing and
sober minded man, not poor and very needy, a gadder to Towns, quarreller or
haunter of Al^houses or Tau^rnes, not suffering any thing to go backward, or
by little and little to come to nothing: one that will v^e to rise first, and
go to bed last* not haunting Markets or Faires at Towns, if it be not upon
very urgent necessity; not admitting of new Ways or Paths, and Breaches into
his grounds; or suffering any encroachme^^ to be made upon the least part of
the Inheritance belonging to the Farm; for (...) ynch of ground lost in one
year, is worth a foot within two years after: Which will not undertake to
lodge any Guest, if he be not the very friend and familiar of tht Lord of the
Soil: which is given to have himself and all his family clothed rather for
pro^it than for pleasure; as namely, to save them only from the Wind, Cold,
and Rain: Husbandmens apparel.
for which purpose shall serve Garments and Sleeves made of Skins; Caps,
Clokes with Hoods, or Cas^ocks of Canuas: for by this means there shall be no
day so boisterous and cruel, wherein they may not work abroad: O^e which will
not have any other to his servant, but such as is ^it for the business belonging
to the Farm, and for the work and profit of his Master: Not given to play the
Merchant for himself, nor to lay out his Masters money in Cattle and other
Merchandise; for such businesses do turn away and hinder Farmers from
attending upon the affairs of the House, and cause them that they are never
able to render any sound account unto the Lord of the Farm: and again, i^
they be demanded such Moneys as they owe, they show you nothing but layings out
and costs in stead of pence. Such a one as will make no Bargains when he is in
drink. To know to write and read, is not necessary for a farm^r.
And for Writing and Reading, i^ skilleth not whether he be able to do it, or
no: or that he should have any other charge to look unto besides that of
yours: or else that he should use another to (...) down in writing such
expenses as he has laid out; for Paper will admit any thing. Again, Paper
endures all t^ings.
you shall not put him to make Reckonings of long time, neither yet of mo^
things than his memory may well carry away. It behooves that he be skillful
in all things, for which he has Tools, Instruments, and handy work to
exercise himself with and in, A Farmer must have much knowledge.
about his matters of Husbandry: As also that he know to govern and amend all
such Tools as he has the handling of, or which his folk use: otherwise, if
there should but need a handle to a Spade, or a nayleto a Horse or Tumbrell,
there must presently be admitted into wages a Nayle-Smith for the Cart, and a
Shoo-Smith for the Horse. This his knowledge shall also serve him to judge if
he be well dea^t withal by such Craftsmen, as to whom he shall of necessity
be driven sometime to commit, either to be mended, or else new-made, the
Instruments requisite for his business. He must have Tools and Instruments
twice so many in store as he uses to have Workmen, to the end they need not
to borrow any thing of their neighbors, for otherwise he shall lose more in
days works not fulfilled than would pay for the buying of his iron Tools.
Again, let him at the first time do his work so well, as that he need not to
go (...) it the second time: For in attempting to mend that which has been
done amiss for lack of heed or negligence, beside the loss of time, which
always is required in labor, the thing it self is also impaired and made
worse: and this is loss unto the Lord for the present, and without hope of
recompense for the time to come, not being fit to yield such profit as it was
wont in years p^st.

Let him have his eyes always upon his people, and ouersee his Cattle every
night, and not only when they are in the house, but also as they return from
labor, or from the pasture: let him view and look well upon their
countenance, gate, sta^^, and gesture, for to know, if there be any diseased or
languishing: and from this care he is not to exempt himself any one day in
respect of the Ox^n, Kin^, Swine, and Sheep: for oftentimes in the morning
they go to the place of their walk in good state and plight, and return
sick home at evening: let him not go to bed (...) have appointed every one of
his people what he is to do the next day in the morning. Let him be last in
bed, and up again^ by break at the spri^g of the day, to see hi^ company
every one set to his appointed work: let him every ^orning ^iew the state of
his grounds, let him not suffer his Cattle to be dulled with labor, and let
him know the remedies that are good f^r them against falls, wrenches, and ^^ch
other inconveniences. Above all things, let him be true, let him keep and hold
(...) perform what he has spoken, let him no^ swear, but show such example
to his people as that thereby he may induce them to esteem highly of him, to
^eu^rence and to honor him. (...)
For as a true and simple speech makes a man to be highly re^arded; even so a
blasphemous mouth, and such as is full of oaths, an unprofitable, ^anton, and
scornful speech, accompanied with evil example of deeds, makes a ^^an
contemptible amongst all men. Let him eat and drink among his servants, and ^f
the same, and at the same Table. Let him pay them their own iust^y, declare
his ^ind unto them in mild sort, and not to pay them any thing before hand, if
it be not ^n case of los^e or sickness.

If you set any pieces of ground to him to farm (for still I understand, that
the ^hiefe charge and oversight should be yours) let him not run day after
day behind ^and with you, least so you might make him negligent, and an ill
play master, both ^o your loss and his own, and yet seeming to hold him
excused, either in respect of ^he unseasonableness of the time, or hardness
of the year, if either of the two can (...) any likely sort be alleged: In
which cases also you shall somewhat bear with ^im, and let him pay at many and
little payments what he ought to have paid toge^^er, thereby to ease him so
much as may be; and to the end he may bring his Farmer ^^ut of his debt, he
shall not let to take it by penny and penny, even by any very (...) payments.
N^cessarie things to be provided.
Do not pinch him of such necessaries as he shall request of you, ^hether it
be for the maintenance of your House, or the repairing of any other ^^ings
that do belong unto you. Watch him not ^o near, as that he may have cause
(...) complain, for he may wring you in some one thing that you would ^euer
think ^f. It is not good ^o exact too much at a servants hands.
And mark, that to be much exacting and ingrating upon your Fa^mer, does
of^^ntimes make him either a mere negligent, or a pla^^e thee^e. Praise him
for what ^ou see discreetly ca^ried in the affairs of your Farm, and rebuke
him not sharply ^or that which you shall not find so well done, but counsel
him to amend such and ^^ch bad trick^s, signifying unto him therewith, that in
so doing he shall greatly ^lease you. Now ad^ies Farmers do not thrust
themselves upon a man, or offer ^hemselues in multitudes as they have been
wont to do in time past, and therefor ^t is no more a common thing for
Masters to make choice of some one among many, ^ut he must be content to take
such a one as he can find. The natural inclimat^on of the s^uerall C^unt^imen
of France.
For this cause it is needful ^or the Lord of a Farm to know the diverse
dispositions of men of diverse Nations: ^or the Norman Normans.
lo^eth to be peaceably dealt withal: and contrariwise, the Picard ^oth stand
in need to be handled ho^ly. The natural Frenchman is ready, and full of
invention, Normans. Picards. B^yais. Lim^sins.
but not very hasty, except necessity do mightily provoke him. You ^aue a
threefold choice of the Bryais, for there are some of them subtle, and some
^ierce and outrageous, and othersome si^ly and sottish. The Lymosins are
industri^us, and given to sparing* but if you take not heed, he will rather
procure his own ^ro^i^ than yours. The Gascoine is hot, and quickly fallen
into choler. The Pro^inciall is haughty, Goscoins. (...).
and cannot endure to be reproved. The Poiteuins are deceit^^ll. The Auuerguaes
are industrious, painful, and enduring all alterations of Time (...) Fortune:
but and if he once spy out the thing whereby you gain* he will share with
you, (...)
or else it shall go hard. The Angeuin, ^aurang^ois, and Mancean, are ^ittie,
subtle, and lovers of their profit. The Ch^ram, Beauceron, and Soloignois, ^re
laborious, peaceable, apt, and given to be gatherers and close graspers. The
Champenois and Burguignons are frank, free, and of a stout heart, but
opinatiue, and wedded to their own conceits, so that you must oftentimes let
them go on, vn^ill the thing it self show them their error. Then according to
the Country and ^omplexion that your Farmer is of, whom you shall place in
your Farm, you shall ^^solue with your self to handle his humor mildly and
cunningly, that so you ^ay draw from him, for your profit, as much as possibly
you can, applying and fit^ing your self to bear that in him which you shall
see past hope of amendment. But of many and diverse Nations, have a care to
choose out of many bad, the best, and after such choice to be wary and
circumspect to prevent that in him which might hurt or hinder you: Considering,
that as grounds are of diverse natures, and love that which agrees with their
natures; even so there are some men more fit, apt, and ^nclined to one thing
than unto others.

CHAP. VIII.
That the Farmer must have knowledge of the things foretelling Rain, Wind,
fair Weather, and other alterations of the Seasons.
YOur Farmer, The f^retelling of Rain.
although he need not to be Booke-wise, notwithstanding* by long and assured
experience must have some knowledge in the things fore-shewing Rain, Wind,
fair Weather, alterations and changes of the Air, of all the parts of the
year, and of the qualities of the same, of Tempests, Lightnings, Thunders,
Colds, Frosts, and Hail, that so, according to the fitness of the Seasons, he
may begin himself, and set all other his workmen to their labor.

He shall know before hand that it will be Rain by these and other such like
signs: If the Moon, when she is very new, have her horns obscure: but if
the higher horn of the said croisant be more obscure and dark than the lower,
it will rain about the last quarters: but if the lower be more dark and
obscure than the higher, it will rain in the first quarters: and if it be
blackish in the midst, it will rain at the full Moon: If the Croisant, or
body of the Moon, hang sagging, and look toward the West, it is a sign of
rain: or if the Moon, being in the full, b^ compas^ed about with vapors, and
have one or two black and thick circles about it: or if the Moon have a pale
face and color, he shall mark whether the fourth, or (as some will have it)
the fifth day of the age of the Moon be rainie: for in th^se days lies the
manifestation of whatsoever shall follow in the whole course of the same,
whether it be unto Winds, or unto Rain, or unto fair Weather. He shall also
see before that it will be rain, if the Sun be red at his rising, and by and
by afterward become black: if round about the beams of the Sun, at the
rising thereof, there appear a little dark Cloud: if at the rising thereof it
seem hollow, and (as it were sunk: or if it have some red Clouds about it,
mixed with other black ones, or somewhat grayish: or if it have a circle about
it like to that of the Moon: if (...) his rising it cast forth certain Beams
or Clouds toward the West or Southwest Wind: if at the rising or setting
thereof it have his Beams maimed, shortened, faint, and weak: if, when it
rises, it have his Beams troubled and incombred, and yet not through the
occasion of any cold: so if when it rises it cast forth his long and
stretched-out Beams crookedly and overthwart the Clouds, notwithstanding that
as concerning all the rest it be very clear and bright: if before it rise it
cast and put forth certain Beams: if at the rising thereof the Clouds be red,
as well in the East a^ in the West: if when it sets there appear near unto
it, upon the left hand, a little small Cloud: or if in setting, it shut up it
self in whitish Clouds, like unto ^leeces or cardings of Wool, and that they
do spread themselves broader and broader, it will rain within a few days: if
the other Planets be also compassed about with a circle, it is a sign of
rain: if the Stars do not twinckle, or give their accustomed glimpses, or
show more great, or have about them some small circle, it is a sign of great
store of water. It is also a sign of Rain, if it lighten in veri^ fair
goodly Weather, and when the Skies are clear and beautiful: if in Summer the
Lightnings do exc^^d the Thunder in quantity: if it thunder at high Noone: if
upon the tops and high^st parts of the Hills there fly scatteringly, and in
wandering sort, thick and gross^ ^louds: if after that rain is ceased, there
rise a sharp and cold wind; for thereby the ^aine will begin again afresh: if
little Birds, haunting the Fennes, be continually ^ashing themselves in the
water: if the Crow do wet her head at the brinke of the ^ater, or wade into
it, and cry very much toward evening: if the Raven sound out ^er song from
the hollow of her throat, and boast her self of her wings: if the Geese cry
and fly more than they have been accustomed: if the Bees will not slye far
from their Hiues: if the Heron wander and whirle about to and fro in the
midst of (...) fields all sad and lowering: if Oxen eat more than ordinary,
lie down upon the ^ight side, look toward the South, lick their hoofes all
about: if the Kine look up unto the air, and draw in the same: if the Asses
bray: if Cocks crow at all hours, and chiefly at evening, when they are upon
their pearches; for the crowing of the Cock at an unusual hour, as at nine,
ten, eleven a clock at night, signifies indiffe^ently change of weather, from
dry to moist, or contrary: if the Salt become moist: ^f the common Issues or
Priuies do stink more than usually: if such creatures as are ^entle take not
so good rest and continue not their peaceable courses as they did before: if
the Wolves yell and run near about Houses: if Spiders fall down, not ^eing
blown down of the wind: if Dogs tumble and wallow on the earth: i^ Pi^eons
come late home to their house: if Flies, Waspes, and Hornets, Fleas and Gnats,
^ite more keenely than ordinarily they are wont: if the sound of Bells be more
loud and shrill, and heard further off, than they were wont: if the Cranes
forsake the val^eyes, and return at a very good hour: if in Summer it
lighten when it thundreth ^ot: if Asses, old and young Mules, without present
occasion, do rub their cares a ^reat while: if the Tezill, gathered and hanged
up in some part of the house, do ^hut up and close his prickles, as taking a
new shape, and cas^ing off all his rough^^sse: if the Sparrow cry early: if
the little Frogs croope more than ordinary: if the ^oot of the Chimney fall
hastily and in great quantity: if the Ashes clutter together unto balls: if
the Oil sparkle in burning Lamps: if the three-leaued Gras^e do ^lose up in
self and gather together his leaves: if the Swine do play a long time, and
run to and fro, shaking and ^earing what they have taken in running: if the
worms come out of the Earth: if the Cat, after that she has a long time
licked the sole of her foot, and trimming ^he hair of her head, do reach the
said sole of her foot oftentimes over her ^are.

Likewise he shall foretell great abundance of Rain, Signs ^ore^^kening
great store of Rain.
if the Clouds be dark, deep, and thick: if the drops of water falling from
the Skies be somewhat whitish, and make great bubbles and great falls here
below: if the Rain fall mildly, and begin to fall with small drops: if the
Water fallen upon the Earth in great abundance without any wind, be
incontinently drunk up of the Earth: if the Waters of the Fennes and standing
Pooles grow warm without the heat of the Sun more than ordi^arie: if Hens
with their Chickens by and by in the beginning of the Rain do fly unto their
houses: or if in the morning they come forth late, and (as it were) not
unconstrained to their feeding: if the heavenly Bow (called in Latin Iris) do
stretch it self toward the South; or if it appear double, triple, or
fourfold in the Heavens; and if it appear after it has rained, the fear of
future Rain is not quite abandoned.

He shall foresee times of Snow in Winter, Signs ^oret^kening Snow.
if he perceive that the clouds of dark ones become as it were whitish,
chiefly when the North wind blows: if round about the Sun or the Moon
there come diverse pale circles, or half red ones: if in the time of great Cold
the air grow thick, and somewhat rebated of his sharpness: if it make a
dry Cold, without any Frost: if together with many signe^ of Rain there
appear many also of Cold approaching.

He shall judge in like sort of Hail, Hail.
if in the Spring or Autumn he see that the clouds of black and dark ones
become whitish: or if about the month of April, together with many signs of
Rain, there be mixed dark and whitish clouds.

He shall give good heed to the tokens fore-shewing future Winds, Signs
^or^^tkening Winds.
and they are these: if the Sun at his setting be red: if the Sun set
amongst reddish clouds: if the Sun all the day long, or a great while before
his setting, have carried a Purple color, and setting, seems greater than
ordinary: if the Moon have a red face: if the Clouds in a fair Season and
beautiful Sky be carried on high: if the Clouds appear in the Heavens
gathered together as they were flocks of Sheep: if Forest^ and the high tops
of Mountains do make a noise: if the stars of Heaven run every way: if
they seem more gros^e, and of greater light than usual: if it thunder in the
Morning, or in Winter: if in the Spring time it thunder more mightily and ofter
than it lighteneth: if the sound of Bells be sometimes heard very easily, and
by and by not to be heard: if the Sparrowes do sing and chirpe beyond measure:
if the Dogs tumble themselves upon the ground: if the webs and small threads of
the Spiders do fly in the Air: if the Duckes do spread and flicker with
their wings often and a long time together: if the Heron cry toward night as
he is flying: if the ^lame of the fire cast forth many small sparkles: if the
Wood do crackle and breath out wind more than ordi^arie.

He shall foretell the happening of any Thunder, The signs foretokening
T^^nder, Lightnings, and Tempests.
Brightness, Lightening, and Tempest, when he shall see, that in the morning
and evening in Summer, or in the beginning of Autumn, the Sun yields a
greater heat than ordinary; and when there appears in the air a very
thick and deep cloud: if the Wind called Typhon, causing Whirle-winds, do
blow ragingly, and that the air be full of many thick and dark clouds: if
the days in Summer or Autumn be more fervent and hot than the season of the
year can naturally bear: and that sometimes at the Sunne-set there appear a
Rainbow toward the West: if there fly in the air many ajri^ impressions and
burning flames.

He shall be assured of fair Weather, The signs ^oretokening fair Weather.
when he shall perceive that the Sun shows it self clean at his rising,
or clear and shining at his setting, having about it many small clouds apart
one from another, and withal somewhat red and pleasant: when the Sun in the
time of rain sets, ha^ing his face red and fiery: and when the Day-breake,
which men call the Morning, shall appear of the natural color of white; and
indeed the Proverb (A red evening and a white morning sets the Pilgrim a
walking) teaches as much: if when the Moon is three or four day^^ old, it
show it self pleasant and clean without spots or clouds: if when it is in the
full, it be seen clear: and that that part of the Heavens, called S. James
his way, appear clear and bright: if at evening there appear many
Lightnings, not accompanied with Thunders, or Clouds: if at evening or morning
(at what time of the year soever it be) the deaw fall in great abundance: if
the Northern wind blow strongly: if the Owl after S^^ne-set do come forth
and whoop all the night without ceasing: if the little F^ies before Sunne-set
do swarm together, and sport themselves in the Sunne-beame^: i^ the Crows
flock together in great companies, and call with a ^ull voice: it the Crow
call early in the morning: if the Bats do ^om^ forth of their ^oles at
(...)-set, and ^lye up and down in the open air: if the Crane^ ^lye high, and
do not betake themselves very quickly to a lower pitch: if Wat^r-Fowles do
haunt somewhat ^arre off from the side of the Water.

And although that the parts of the year ordinarily have their beginning and
ending at a certain time: Sig^es ^oretokening the be^innings and endings of
times.
as the Spring begins about the seventeenth of February, and ends about
the seventeenth of May, and so consequently of the other: notwithstanding, for
as much as these parts and seasons do square and fall out of order, sometimes
sooner, sometimes later, the good Husbandman shall have, over and above the
common, certain signs and tokens to foresee the beginnings and endings of
the times of the year as they may fall out extraordinarily. As if he know that
Water-Fowles fo^sake the Water, or that the house-Nightingale, especially the
Male, do^ sing more than any of all the rest: if the Cranes flock together,
and return unto the place from whence they are come: if the Geese fight
together for their feeding place, being in great leanenes^e: or if the Sparrow
more than ordinary call betimes in the morning, he shall say that Winter is at
hand. In like manner, if he see that the Western^ wind begin to blow, and that
the cold rebateth: if the Swallows do return in flocks* (...) the Ducks have
their breast bone white at the end of Winter* he shall judge, that (...) Spring
will be very quickly: for such creatures do sen^ibly feel and obseru^ (...)
bounds and approaches of Seasons, howsoever out of course and extraordinari^
that they be.

If in Winter, Signs ^oretokening Cold.
in the beginning of Frosts, he perceive, that the Birds haunting ^^^nding
Waters, do betake themselves to Floods and Rivers, which are not so apt (...)
freese: or that the Snow falling from the Skies is but in small and thin
flakes: if at (...) beginning of Frost there fall some small, round, and white
Hail: if the little ^irds do hide themselves in the Bushes, and seek for
their l^uing near to Towns and Villages: if the Fire give a more shining
flame, and make a ^oter coal: if that ^oollen or Linen dipped in Water do by
and by freese: if the utmost parts of the ^^die become suddenly cold: if in
Winter the things which were wont to be moist and wet are espied to become
dry: if the drops of Water coming from the roo^^^ (...) Houses do fall one a
good while after another, he shall hold it for firm, that cold (...) near at
hand, or else that that which is already will be very violent and of long
^^^ntinuance.

He shall prognosticate the length of Winter, A long Winter.
when he shall see that the Oaks will (...) full of Acornes, or when the Ducke
at the end of Winter shall have a red breast^one: or that the Hornets do
appear before the end of October: or that Ca^^^ll, which go together in
Herds, do trample the Earth to mire.

He shall judge great Summer heat to ensue, The heat o^ Summer.
if he see that the Rams and old ^eepe do couple together oftentimes in the
Spring: for so indeed of the (...) and temper of one part of the year, a man
may easily judge what will be the (...) of another: for ordinarily, if one part
or quarter of the year be clear, fair^ ^^ather and dry, it must needs fall
out that the other should be rainie. As for exam^^^, a rainie Winter does
commonly follow a dry Autumn: in like manner, a dry ^pring comes after a
rainie Winter: and so consequently, the other parts of the (...) do carry
themselves in Heat, Cold, Moisture, and Dryness. Generally, he ^^all be able
to prognosticate of the state of the whole year, following the
Prog^ostications of ancient Fathers, as concerning the day whereupon the first
day of ^he Feast of the Nativity or New years day does fall. For if it fall
upon the Lords ^ay, the Winter will be mild and clear, the Spring delightsome,
windy, and moist: ^ere shall be peace; Cattle shall be at a good price; all
manner of good things shall ^bound; old things shall die. If it fall upon a
Monday, the Winter shall be indiffe^^nt, the Spring in like manner, the Summer
windy and thundering in diverse pla^^s, the time of Harvest temperate* Wine
shall abound, but not Honey; diverse dis^^ses shall reign; some great Princes
and Nobles shall die. If it fall upon a Tues^ay, Winter will be windy, dark,
and snowie; the Spring cold, dry, and moist; the ^ummer windy and moist;
Autumn very inconstant: Women shall die: there ^ill be great danger to such
as are upon the Sea: vprores will happen between ^he people and their
Superiors: some Fruits will be dear. If it fall upon a Wed^esday, Winter will
be very sharp; the Spring very bad; a good Summer, and a ^old and moist
Harvest: Wine, Corn, and Fruits will abound, if they be not spoiled (...) men
of War: young folk and children shall die, and Cattle likewise. If it fall
(...) a Thursday, the Winter will be good, windy, and rainie; the Spring
windy; ^ummer good and Rainie; Autumn moist: Wine, Corn, and Fruits will
abound: ^reat Princes will die: there shall be peace betwixt Cities and their
Princes. If it ^all on Friday, Winter will be constant, the Spring good, Summer
inconstant, and Harvest time indifferent: the good things of the Earth will
abound: Sheep will di^ ^n some Countries: there will reign pains in the
eyes: and there will some tumult^ and vprores be made. If it fall upon a
Saturday, the Winter will be dark, cloudie, and sharp; the Spring somewhat
windy* the Summer moderate, and Harvest time ^rie: the fruits of the Earth
will not be plentiful: Fishes will be in great plen^ie: ^here will fall out
perils upon the Waters: great spoils by wilful (...) will be com^itted: and
Wars will reign.

In like manner, according ^o the disposition of the Sun and the twelve day^^
(...) the Feast of the Nativity, he shall be able to foretell the
inclinations of years: (...) if the Sun be altogether beautiful and clear
upon Christ's day, the year will (...) good and peaceable: if upon the second
day, Gold and Wheat will fall of their former value and price: if upon the
third day, Churchmen will fall at varianc^^ if upon the fourth day, young folk
will have troubles: if upon the fifth day, all goods will increase: if upon the
sixth day, Gardens will prove fruitful: if upon the seventh day* there will be
great Dearth and Famine: if upon the eight, abundance of Fish: if upon the
ninth, a good season for Cattle: if upon the tenth, great heaviness of (...)
if upon the eleventh, great foggie Mists and Mortality: if upon the twelfth,
Vpror^^ and Warfare. Wherefore, if the Sun shine in those twelve days* and
that con^inually, all these things will come to pas^e.

He shall likewise prognosticate and foreknow the disposition of the whole
(...) by the disposition of S. Paul's day, which is the twenty fifth of
January; for if thi^ day be fair, clear, and smiling, it promises great
abundance of the fruits of the Earth: if upon this day there be any Mists,
there will ensue great death of Cattle: i^ it Rain or Snow, we are to fear a
great dearth: if it be windy, there will be Wars and Seditions among the
people.

He shall know how every month in the year will be inclined, The knowledge
of the disposition of eueri^ ^oneth.
by observing the inclination of the day of the Nativity, and of the Festival
days following: in such sort, as look what Weather it is upon the day of the
Nativity, such Weather will follow in the month of January; and so
consequently the other moneth^ will carry themselves, and answer sutably to
the other of the twelve Festiua^^ days.

He shall be careful to foresee whether the year will fall out forward or
backward: (...)
if after Vintage there fall Rain, especially before the end of the month of
October, the year will prove forward: if it rain about the end of October, it
will prove indifferent: but if it begin to rain shortly after in November, the
year will prove backward; and then it will behoue the good Farmer to sow in
greater quantity, for that before the mid time much of the Corn does rot and
spoil in the Earth.

He shall not be ignorant of the tokens fore-shewing whether it will be a good
or a bad year: A good or bad year.
and proportionably to this, he shall learn to understand how Harvest has
been gathered round about him, and in near adjoining Countries, whither their
Country Corn has been accustomed to be carried: as also in such Coun^ri^^
as from whence they have been wont to have some brought; to the end, that by
buying before hand, or ever that scarcity pinch, he may either, by keeping of
his store, o^ else by husbanding of it sparingly and thri^tily, reserve such
Corn as he shall know to be likely to prove dear, and that not only for the
maintenance of his Famili^ and his Seed, but also to the end he may take his
best time and place to sell his own^ for his most profit.

He shall know a fruitful and fer^ile year, Signs foretokening fruitfulness.
if he see in the Oak apples, commonly called Gals, a Fly engendered and bred:
if the Harvest time be beautiful and f^ire weather; the Spring reasonably hot:
if there fall good store of Snow in his due tim^ and season: if Trees bear but
small store of Fruits: if Rivers and Floods do nourish but small store of
Fish: if the Broom be fruitful and abundant in bringing forth of flowers: if
the Waln^t-tree* from his beginning to flourish, be more laden with flowers,
for the bearing of fruits, than with leaves: if the Masticke tree do bring
forth hi^ fr^^t well liking and fed: if the wild Onion, or Sea-Onion, called
Squilla, cast forth a fair and great flower, which withers not so speedily.

On the contrary, A barren ^^are.
he shall fear a barren year, when he shall see that the Nut of the Gall
shall bring forth a Spider: if any Comet appear in the Firmament: if the
Spring and Summer be too moist: if the Earth and Air be full of Spiders,
Worme^, Wood^eere, and other such like Vermin: if the Walnut tree have more
leaves than Nuts: if the Deaw and Frost come in unseasonable times: if Birds in
great flock^^ do leave and forsake the Islands and Woods, and betake
themselves to the plain Fields, Towns, and Villages: if the Crow continue not
to abide in the Woods: ^f there fall out great store of Beans, and likewise of
Fruits and Fishes: if there happen any great eclipse of the Sun at such time
as the Corn is in flower; for the ears thereof will have no Corn in them:
Which also falls (...) in like manner, when the Seed which is sown is either
a lean, a light, or a half rot^n Corn.

He shall know whether Corn will be dear or cheap for the present year,
Tokens ^^reshewing Corn^ to be good cheap or dear
and ^n which of the months thereof. Let him choose out at adventure twel^e
grains of Corn the first day of January, let him make clean the fire-Harth,
and kindle a fire ^hereupon: afterward let him call some boy or girl of his
neighbors, or of his own house, let him command the party to put one of
these grains of Corn upon ^he Harth, made very clean and hot: then he
shall mark if the said Grain do ^eape or lie still: if it leap a little,
then Corn shall be reasonably cheap; but if it ^eape very much, it shall be
very cheap: if it leap toward the Fire more or less, Corn shall be more or
less dear: if it lie still and leap not, then Corn shall ^tand at one price
for this first month. He shall do in like manner with the second Grain for
the month of February, and so in order with the rest of the Grains for ^he
rest of the months as they follow. Signs fore^^kening a sickly or sound year.
Furthermore, for the better preservation of ^imselfe and his family from
diseases, as well contagious as others caused of distem^erature and ill
disposition of the Air, it will be good that he should have some fore^^ght to
discern what diseases in likelihood may ensue. But the most certain and ^^re
token is, if at the end of the Spring, or during the Summer, it rain
ordinarily, and that in great abound^nce, and accompanied with great and
vehement heat, with^^t any Wind at all: or if the Southern Wind blow: or that
as yet there have not ^^llen any Rain at all: if the Air be full of Fogges
and Mists: if the Sun endure any Eclipse: or if there be seen in the Air
any Comets or fiery flames: if the Trees do seem to flame and burn: if that
the time of Harvest and Winter be very foggie, and yet notwithstanding rainie:
if Bread, set abroad in the open Air, do in the night time draw moisture unto
it, and become mouldie: if Dogs run mad: if that it be found that Wolves run
into some Towns, being mad: if Birds forsake their nest^, eggs, and young
ones: if there be a great death of Sheep: if that Fennes be full of Frogs* if
Walls be full of Sowes and such other like Vermin: if upon the way a man
cannot but meet with Worms, Lisards, Serpents, and Moules, crept out of their
holes and lurking places: if Birds fall dead out of the Air: if in the Nut of
a Gall be found a Spider: if young and old folk be troubled with the Pocks and
Measels* if Women with child be brought in bed before their time: if in Summer,
after rain, there be to be seen in the Fennes great store of Frogs, having
pale or ash-colored backs and yellow bellies: if Grounds, planted with Roses
or with Violets, do bring forth and yield flowers in the beginning of Autumn.

He shall prognosticate great death of Cattle, if he see that the leaves of
the Elm tree and Peach tree do fall before their time. And I would that all
men understood that I have set down these things without any mind to derogate
from the good and Almighty providence of God, who binds not himself to the
Orders and Laws whereunto he has bound and tied Nature, but alters the same
even according to his own good will and pleasure, as being Creator of all
things, and as unto whom all honor appertains.

CHAP. IX.
That the Farmer must have the knowledge of the Motions, as well of the Moon
as of the Sun, and of the power and oper^tions of them both in matters of
Husbandry.
NOtwithstanding, that the consideration and observation of the Motions,
Fa^ulties, and Effects of the Stars, and chiefly of the two great and
admirable Fires of the whole World (called of God, by the mouth o^ Moses, The
Sun and the Moon great Lights.
Lights) that is to say, the Sun and the Moon, does app^rta^^^ r^ther unto
some excellent Astrologian, than to a simple Husbandman: notwithstanding, for
as much as the greatest part of matters of Husbandry, as Beasts, Plants,
Trees, and Herbs do take their generation, no^rishment, growth, and perfect
consummation, by the lively inspiration, action, casting forth of Beams, and
wonderful mouings of these two Organes and principal Instruments of all the
World; it is very expedient that the Farme^ and Governor of a Husbandry should
have that knowledge gotten by long experience, which teaches their virtues and
powers in matters of Husbandry, to the end he may handle, manage, and order
the same according to the motions of those two great Gouerners. Of the Moon.
So then to speak of the Moon in the first place (which, by reason of being
nearest unto us of all the rest of the Planets and celestial Bodies, does
work her effect in like manner upon us as concerning our bodies as well as
upon the rest of earthly things) it is most certain, that in les^e than in one
month it runs all that course and way which the Sun is in running all the
year long: and that it has no light of it self, but that it takes and
receives it all from the Sun, giving his reuerberations and reflections unto
the Earth with more vehemency when it is further off from the Sun: as on the
contrary, look how much it comes the nearer unto her conjunction with it,
The cause of the grow^h and wa^^ of the Moon.
so much the less light and force does it impart unto the Earth. Hereupon it
comes, that we say, that the Moon increases or decreaseth: not that indeed
it does increase or decrease (save then when it is in his eclipse) being
continually enlightened by the Sun; but this his brightness only which it
casts and spreads upon the whole face of the Earth, does only increase and
decrease. And this shining brightnes^e, according as it is longer or lesser
time, has likewise more or less force to mo^e the humors of natural things
to work their effects. For by how much the more that this light increases, by
so much the more does the moisture thereof spread and communicate it self
abundantly throughout the outward parts: as on the contrary, by how much it
waneth and grows less, by so much the natural humiditie and moisture does
withdraw, and betaketh it self unto the inward parts. This is the cause why
men call the Moon the Mother, Nurse, Regent, and Gouernesse of all such
humidities as are in earthly bodies.

Wherefore, To slaughter Ca^^ell in the new of the Moon.
to speak first of Field-beasts, the well-aduised Farmer shall not kill at any
time whatsoever his Porkes, Muttons, Beeues, Kine, or other Beasts, of the
flesh whereof he would make his household provision for the sustenance of his
Family, in the wane of the Moon. For such flesh as is killed in the decrease
of the Moon falls away and impaireth every day, and also craves much fire
and time to make it ready withal: neither ought any man to marvel or stand
astonished at this, if he consider well, that a Sawsage, or other such like
kind of meat, does grow less by a quarter when they are boiled. Neither shall
he make account of or buy any Horseflesh, or other, which was foled or brought
forth in the decrease and old age of the Moon, for that they are more weak
and faint than the rest: moreover, they come to no growth, neither is their
flesh of sufficient weight when they be killed. He shall never ^^sh his Pooles,
Fish Ponds, Ditches, or Waters with salt Fish, in the decay of the Moon: for
both Fish and other Beasts of the Water, especially they which ar^ (...) with
shells or think s^ales, as Crayfishes, Crabs, Oysters, Muscles, and such (...)
are found veri^ much impaired in their substance and lean in the old age and
(...) of the Moon: and contrariwise, gross, fat, and full, when she is in her
force, (...) full. The Faulkone^ shall choose rather the full Moon to f^ye in
than the wane, (...) that Hawks, and all Birds of the prey, are a great deal
more nimble, sharp, and (...) abo^t the full Moon than in any other time. The
Horse and Beast subject (...) malady of the eyes, is better at ^ase in the
decrease than in the increase or full (...) the Moon. He shall make provision
of Fa^s, or of the marrowes of the bones of ^utton, Har^, Beef, and others, if
he have need, in the full of the Moon, not in the (...). He shall geld his
Bore-Pigs, Rams, Bull-Calues, or Bulkins, and (...), when the Moon
decreaseth. He shall set Eggs under Hens or other Fowl^ ^^he new of the
Moon, and principally in the first quarter.

As for Trees and other Plants, Fruit Trees and others.
the wise and discreet Farmer will plant his Fruit-^^ees and others in the new
of the Moon, and yet not before the first quarter. At (...) same time he will
have regard to cut down and lop Wood for his fuel: but (...), such as he
minds to keep for to build wi^hall, when the Moon decrea^^, being sure that
all matter (be it to build House, Presses, Bridges, and other (...)) being cut
down in the decrease of the Moon, lasts a long time, and is and maruailo^s
good, and yet better when it is cut down rather at evening than in (...)
morning: which thing may also be applied to hewn stone and milstones, when
(...) be cut out of their Quarries and (...). He shall plant his Vine in the
increase of (...) Moon, when it is four or five days old: He shall cut the
lean Vines, and such (...) planted in ^ bad soil, in the increase likewise of
the Moon: but those which ^ore fat, in the going away of the Moon, seeing
that thus they will bring forth (...) Grapes than if they were cut in the
increase, in as much as then the Moon (...) upon them to soften them and make
them fat, cannot choose but cause aboun^^ce of Clusters and Leaves: but cutting
them the Moon being old, the Wood ^ommeth bound, and applies it self only
to bring forth great store of fruit. He (...) cleanse* prune, To cleanse trees
and cut at the foot Fruit Trees toward the later end of the Moon, (...) they
will become better laden with fruit. He shall make his Nurseries of (...), the
Moon being over the Earth.

As for Fruits, To gather fruits. Grapes.
he shall gather Apples, Pears, and other Fruits, as also his Grapes, ^he
decrease of the Moon, because thereby the Wines will be the better and (...)
kep^, which otherwise would be in danger to sour and rot in ^he month of
(...) following, being the time that men are wont to cut their Vines. And which
(...), he shall gather and carry into his house whatsoever he would have to
endure (...) last long, To sow Corn^. To winnow or fan, to searce and lay up
Corn under lock.
at such time as the Moon shall decrease. He shall sow his Corn, as (...)
and other Grain; he shall weed, fan, searce, and gather together his Corn
(...) a lock; he shall grind his Corn, To grind Corn.
the better to keep it in flower, in the end (...) old of the Moon: It is
very true, that the bread increases and profits more, (...) be ground, the
Moon increasing and being new. He shall mow and cut down (...) Corn with
Sithe, the Moon wasting. He shall pull Line and Pulse at the same (...): and
yet indeed all Pulse gathered or reaped in the growth of the Moon are of (...)
digestion.

(...) concerning Herbs, he shall sow them the Moon being new, and gather
them (...) the Moon increases in her light, as being then of far greater
force than in (...) wast and wane. At the same time he shall gather Cucumbers,
Gourds, Melons, (...), Pompions, and all Roots which grow in the head, whether
they be Leekes, (...), Onions so^n* in the wan^.
Radishes, Turnips, Lillies, Saffron, or such like; except Onions, which (...)
be dealt withal clean contrary: for they become a great deal more gross
(...) better fed in the declining than in the augmenting or full of the Moon,
during (...) time they have no such force of greatness of body:
notwithstanding, if they (...) sown or transplanted in the wane of the Moon,
and toward the later end, they (...) a great deal more strong, sharp, and
biting, than if it were in the growth or full^ the Moon.

Furthermore, he shall cut down his Meadows, for the feeding of his Cattle,
when the Moon is new: T^ mow Med^w^s.
he shall dung To dung them.
his grounds and make them fat in the increase of the same, in as much as the
Moon gives no less power unto the dung to soften the Earth, than it does to
Trees and Seeds, to bud, grow, and multiply every one in his place: he shall
water his Meadows in the decrease of the Moon.

And he shall not be content to know what force and efficacy every quarter of
the Moon has upon Beasts, Trees, Pl^nts, Herbs, Fruits, and other things
contained in this inferior World* but shall also be careful to observe what
power every day of the Moon has, not only upon Beasts and Plants, but also
in the disposition and governing of Man, to make his use thereof in the time of
necessity, and in time and place, as occasion offers: following such
infallible Observations as h^u^ been long continued, and which our Fathers
never attained unto; and they be such.

In the first day of the Moon, Adam was created: if any man fall sick^ upon
this day, the sicknes^e will be long, but he party shall recover: the dreams
which he dreameth in the night shall be found joyful: the child that is borne
this day shall live long.

In the second day Eve was created: it is good to take any Voyage upon this
day, either by Sea or Land, and the Traveler shall have happy success in all
the places where he shall lodge and so^ourne. This day is good for the increase
of posterity: It is likewise happy and favorable to such as shall have any
Suits unto Princes, or other great Personages. Likewise it will be good to
build and set up upon: as also to make Gardens, Orchards, and Parkes; to till
the Earth, and sow it. A Th^ft or Robberi^ committed this day will not long be
unfound out, for it cannot be concealed. If any on^ fall sick, he will be
quickly healed. If he dream in the night time, he must not respect it, for it
shall come to no effect. The child borne upon this day thriueth and grows
iollily.

In the third day Cain was borne: Upon this day no man is to enterprise any
work, either in Gardening or Planting, except that which he purposes to lose:
who so falls sick, shall undergo and bear it with great pain and grief
unto the end; but by little and little, keeping good order of diet, he shall
recover his health. Any dream dreamed this day or night shall come to naught:
likewise the child then borne shall be of long life.

In the fourth day Abel was borne: This is a good day to begin a work in, to
make Mills in, and to go upon the Water. A Fugitive or Runaway, as also a
lost or strayed Beast, shall be quickly found: The party falling sick upon
his bed, shall hardly escape it: if the dream he good, it shall come to pass:
if on the contrary it be evil, it shall not come to pass: the child borne
this day shall pro^e a Traitor.

In the fifth day Lamech was borne: If upon this day any party have committed
any thing by hap or accident, and ^lye for the same, he does but lose his
labor by such flight, for he shall by and by be punished alive or dead.
Robbery committed this day, shall not be found out: who so shall fall sick
upon this day, shall never rise again: the dreame^dreamed shall be doubtful:
the child borne shall die veri^ quickly.

In the sixth day Ebron was borne: It is good upon this day to send children to
School, and to go a Hunting: Theft or Robbery committed this day shall b^
quickly found out: likewise the sicknesses which shall be taken, shall be soon
healed: the dreams which a man shall dream on that day, are not to be
disclosed: the child that shall be borne, shall be of long life.

In the seventh day Abel was slain by Cain: It is good on this day to let
blood, foreseen that the Moon be in a fit sign: into what Coast or Quarter
soever that ^ Malefactor or Thief does fly, both he and the theft committed
shall be quickly found out; the sick soon healed; the dreams certain and
true; good to buy Swine, and to make food of all manuer of Beasts: the child
borne shall be of long life.

The eight day Methusalem was borne: It is good for Travelers: the Patient
taken with a disease, shall languish a long time: the dreams therefore shall
prove true: the child shall not show any good ^ignes in the iudgemen^ of
Physiognomie.

In the ninth day Nabuchodonosor was borne: This said day is indifferent: the
dreams of the night come to pass incontinently: the party that shall fall
sick will escape, if he die not within eight days, and therefore shall not
languish or bear it mournefully: the child borne upon this day shall be of a
long life.

The tenth day Noe was borne: All good things done this day shall prosper: the
dreams shall be of no effect: who so upon it shall fall into tribulation and
aduersi^ie, shall not need to fear, for it shall not long endure: likewise, he
that falls sick shall die within ten days, if he be not well succored:
the child borne upon this day shall travail many far Coasts and Countries.

The eleventh day Samuel was borne: It is good to change ones house in: a good
and joyful dream shall fall out to be true, and come to pass within a few
days: the party lying down sick upon his bed, shall there continue a long
time, and yet notwithstanding h^ shall escape: the child borne upon this day
shall be of a good spirit, apt and forward to all good sciences, and of a long
life.

The twelfth day is very dangerous, and therefore we must not do any thing in
it, for upon this day was Canaan borne: who so shall fall sick therein, shall
be in great danger to die within twelve days: the dreams thereof shall be
true, according to their signification: the child borne this day shall be
altogether hypocritically inclined.

In the thirteenth day it will be evil to begin any work: who so falls
sick upon that day, shall continue long languishing: the dreams thereof shall
be accomplished within nine days: the child borne that day shall live long.

In the four^teenth day God blessed Noe and his works: he that falls sick
that day, shall amend again quickly: the dreams thereof will be doubtful:
the child borne that day will be perfect in all things.

The fifteenth day shall be indifferent, that is to say, neither good nor bad:
the sick shall not die upon his sickness whereinto he fell that day: the
dreams thereof will be certain, and accomplished within ten days: the
child borne thereon shall not be subject to women.

In the sixteenth day Jacob was borne: For this cause it makes good to buy and
^ame Horses, Oxen, and other Cattle: the sick shall be in great danger of
death, if he change not his Air or House: dreams shall come to pass: the
child shall not live long.

In the seventeenth day Sodom and Gomorrha was destroyed: It is ill to attempt
and do any thing: Physic taken will do no good unto the Patient: the
dreams will be verified within th^ee days: the child will not be prosperous
in all things.

In the eighteenth day Isaac was borne: It is good to be at leisure, and to go
about business: the sick shall be in danger of death: the dream shall be
true: the child shall not travail far, but he shall get great goods.

In the nineteenth day King Pharaoh was borne: This day is dangerous, wherefore
it will be good to avoid company and drunkards, and to live peaceably without
doing any thing: the diseased will soon^ recover: the dream will prove tru^:
the child will not be malicious, or a mocker.

In the twentieth day the Prophet Jonas was borne: This is a good day for the
doing of all things: the disease will continue long: the dream true and
apparent: the child which shall be borne will be malicious and a mocker.

In the one and twentieth day was borne King Saul: It is good to rejoice and
cheer up ones self in fair and honest Apparel: good to buy provision for
sustenance: the theft committed will be found out: the taken sick in great
danger of his disease: the dream vain and unprofitable: the child borne,
subject to endure great ^rauaile.

In the two and twentieth Job was borne: It is not good to go about
Merchandise, not to enterprise or undertake any charge: That sick shall be in
danger to die of the sickness that he shall take this day: the dream shall
be true: the child borne shall be good and honest.

In the three and twentieth day was Benjamin borne: Whatsoever a man does upon
that day, it shall turn to his honor: the disease shall be long, but not
mortal: the dreams false: the child borne, a dissembling wretch and ill
favored.

In the four and twentieth day Iaphet was borne: It is an indifferent day,
that is to say, neither good nor bad: the sickness will hold long, but the
patient will recover: the dream will be of no effect: the child that is borne
will be mild and courteous, and will love to make great cheer.

In the five and twentieth Mortality entered into Egypt: The sick will be in
danger of death the sixth day after the beginning of the sickness: the child
that is borne therein shall be subject unto many dangers, perils, and
adversities.

In the six and twentieth Moises divided the Sea: the same day died Saul and
Jonathan: for which cause, the day is very dangerous, and not good to do any
thing in. He that falls sick upon that day, will never escape: the dreams
will prove true: the child borne will not be any man of great prosperity or
pleasure, that is to say, neither poor nor rich.

In the seven and twentieth it is good to take pains in all manner of
businesses: the sickness will be variable: the dreams will be doubtful: the
child borne will be mild and lovely.

In the eight and twentieth all good things will be good to be done: the sick
shall be recovered of his sickness: the child borne shall be slothful and
negligent.

In the nine and twentieth day Herod caused the children to be slain: This is
a dismal and unhappy day; wherefore there must nothing be done that day, nor
yet undertaken: the dreams will be very certain: the sick will turn found:
the child borne will live and keep society in peaceable manner among men.

The thirtieth and last day is good to do all things in: The sick shall be in
great danger even unto death, but if he be well and carefully looked unto, he
will recover: the dreams will be turned into joy within the fifth day: the
child borne will be subtle and deceitful.

As concerning the Sun (which is the other Instrument of the whole World,
performing the greatest part of his actions really and in deed during the day,
whereof it is the author, as the Moon does hers during the night, as being
then when she is in her force and vigor) it by his natural heat, influence,
actions, and casting forth of his celestial beams, gives unto earthly
bodies their form and vegetative life, accompanied with certain powers and
virtues, so far forth as every natural body is capable, and deserves or
requires it: Which operations of the Sun in these Earthly matters, are
wrought and effected by certain his motions, accomplished in the four
quarters of the year, which is that time wherein the Sun dispatcheth his
whole course. Wherefore the wise and prudent Husbandman shall give heed to the
four quarters of the year, which are the Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter,
to the end, that according to the motion and power of the Sun in these four
quarters, he handle, manage, and govern all his affairs of Husbandry. And
this is the thing that we will more particularly handle at large in the
Chapter following, by the works that the Husbandman must do in every
several month of the year.

CHAP. X.
The particular Works that a Husbandman must be careful to do every Month
in the year.
FVrthermore, to the end that his people may not live idle, and that they may
not loose one small minute of time; which being employed about some one or
other work, he shall dispose of his works so, as that they may every one
have his certain time, and he shall know at his fingers ends what things is to
be done every month and time of the year. Yet thus ever to govern his
memory, that these labors following being more natural to the Kingdom of
France than to any of her neighbors, they shall, for their satisfaction,
because the Book is now intended general, return to the sixth Chapter, and
there behold the convenient labors fit for colder Countries, as is the Island
of great Britain, Ireland, and the Low Countries.

In the month of January, January.
chiefly toward the end, he shall cut down his Wood which he appoints for
Building, or other Work, when the Moon is under the Earth: for the
brightness of the Moon makes the Wood more tender, and the Wood which shall
be cut at such time will endure a long time without rotting. He shall dung the
Fruit Trees, not letting the dung touch their roots. He shall graft all such
great and little Trees which bud betimes, as Rose-trees, Damask, Plum-trees,
Apricock-trees, Almond-trees, and Cherry-trees. He shall dig the Earth for
the casting in of Nuts, Almonds, and the kernels of Apricockes, Peaches, and
Plums, and such others, in grounds that are cold and moist, in the two first
quarters of the Moon. He shall cut his Vine in fair and beautiful Weather.
He shall plough the grounds that are dry, light, white, lean, sandy, full
of roots and great herbs, and which were not eared in October. He shall give
the second ear unto those his grounds that are most barren, and scatter upon
them the chafe of Beans, Wheat, or Barley. He shall cut down the boughs of
the Willowes for Railes for Vines and Stakes for Hedges. He shall prepare
props and thick square Laths to underset his Vines. He shall cut and take
away the superfluous boughs of the Trees, the Moon decreasing. He shall
turn the uppermost of all the dung made since S. Martins day undermost, and
contrarily, to the end it may be well rotten when he shall carry it out to
spread it upon his Field and Meadow. He shall furnish afresh or make new his
Carts, Tumbrels, Ploughes, and other his Instruments necessary for his
Husbandry. He shall make provisions of very sharp iron tools to cut and
cleanse his Trees and Vines. Above all things, let them beware of Sowing,
because the Earth as then is too open, heavy, full of vapors, and like unto
Wool not well carded.

In February February.
in the new Moon he shall transplant Vines of two or three year, which shall
now already have taken good root, but he shall not touch them of one year,
which will not be removed because of the small strength which they have as yet
got. He shall carry dung out into his Corne-fields, Vineyards, Meadows, and
Gardens. He shall cast trenches for the planting of new Vines. He shall cut
the roots of the Vines, and set square Laths or Props for the defending of
them. He shall prune and cleanse the Trees of whatsoever is superfluous: He
shall cleanse them from worms, ^ilthinesse, and worme-eatings, canker, and
rottenness, which are to be found in the dry leaves. He shall make ready
his Garden-grounds to sow and set therein all manner of herbs. He shall give
the Earth her second earing for the receiving of Beans, Barley, Oats, Hemp,
Millet, and such other Seed of small Pulse. He shall ouerlooke his Vines,
especially those which he knows to be weak and tender. He shall repair the
Hedges of his Gardens. He shall plant woods for Timber Trees and Talwood. He
shall also plant the slips of Olive trees, Pomegranate trees, Quince trees,
Fig trees, Popla^ trees, Willow trees, Elm trees, Osiers, and others, as
well Fruit Trees as wild ones, which have roots. He shall cleanse the
Doue-house, Henne-house, and place where the Peacocks and Geese make their
haunt, because that these Cattle in the end of this month begin to be hot,
and to tread. He shall over-looke his Warren, to stoa^e it anew, and to
handsome up the Earths. He shall buy Bees: he shall make clean their Hiues
very carefully, and kill their Kings. He shall buy Faulcons, Sparrow-hawkes,
and other Birds of the prey, which he shall put into Mue in the end of this
month.

In March, March.
even in the beginning of it, he shall sow Line, Woad (if it were not sown in
February) Oats, Barley, Millet, Pannick, Hemp, Peason, Lentils, Tare
everlasting, Lupines, small kinds of Corn, as the Fetch, Fasels, and other
such like bitter kinds of small Pulse. He shall g^ue a second carder unto new
plowed fallowes, which are now by this (...) well amended and dunged, so as
that he may make them read^e to sow. He shall weed his Corn: he shall get
Grifts to graft, when the sap begins to climb the Trees, and before that
they put forth any buds. He shall plant these Fruits, great Nuts, Chestnuts,
Almonds, small Nuts, Filberds, and the stones of Olives and Apricocks, and
diverse other Fruits. He shall sow diverse Nurseries with the kernels of Apples,
Pears, Mulberries, and such other like Fruits. He shall plant such Herbs a^
are set low and close by the ground, as the slips of Artichokes, Thistles
necessary for use, Sage, Lauander, Rosemarie, Strawberrie, Gooseberrie-bush,
Roses, Lillies, Ci^ruls, Cucumers, Melons and Pompions. He shall trim up his
Gardens as well ^or the Kitchen or commodity, as that which is drawn into
quarters, or for pleasure, and shall sow therein whatsoever necessary Seeds.
He shall cut and uncover the roots of Vines and Fruit Trees, to the end they
may bring forth more fruit. He shall put dung to the roots of the Trees: he
shall gather up the loppings to make Fuel of.

In April, April.
about S. George his day, you shall set abroad your Citron and Orange Trees, as
also all such other Trees as you had kept within house from S. Martins day,
from which he shall remove the earth from foot to foot, taking from them such
roots as are put forth toward the uppermost part of the earth, as also all
superfluous boughs, not suffering any one branch to exceed another either in
breadth or height. He shall plant, if he have not already done it, Olive
trees, Pomegranate trees, Citron trees, and Mulberrie trees, and shall prune
them carefully. He shall graft the Fig tree, Chestnut tree, Cherrie tree, and
Orange tree. He shall cut the new Vine, for at this time it endures best to be
cut. He shall be careful to feed his Pigeons, because at this time they find
but little in the fields. He shall put Horse to his Mares, the hee-Asse to the
shee-Asse, and Rams to the Ewes. He shall make clean the Hiues of the
Honey-flies, and shall kill the Butterflies, which abound when Mallows are in
flower.

In May May.
he shall water the Trees that are newly planted: he shall sheare his Sh^epe,
fill up his Wines, gather great store of Butter, and make much Cheese, g^ld his
Calves, and begin to look to his Bees and Silkewormes, of which he shall
gather together a great number. He shall weed his Corn, cast the earth off his
Vines the second time, uncovering and freeing their roots from the earth about
them, to the end that the heat may not hurt them: he shall take away all the
green branches and tender boughs which bear no fruit: he shall crop the
ouer-ranke boughs of Trees, he shall graft such Olive trees as must be grafted
in the bud.

In June June.
he shall make ready his Threshing floor, and cause it to be thoroughly
cleansed of straw, dur^, and dust: he shall cut down his Meadows, mow his
Barley, crop his Vines, thresh his Corn to sow in Seed time.

In July July.
he shall mow his Wheat and other grain used to make pottage of: he shall
graft in the bud: he shall gather from Apple Trees and Peare-trees the faulty
Apples and Pears, and those which do ouer-charge the Trees: he shall dig
his Vines again the second time, and pluck up from them the Grass called
Dogs-tooth: he shall lay eeuen and fill up the earth where it is any where
cleft or broken, to the end that the Sun may not burn before hand the Vine:
He shall cut down such Wood as shall serve for this Fuel all the year long.

In August August.
he shall pull his Line and Hemp; gather such fruits from off the Trees as he
means to preserve. He shall take away the leaves from about such Grapes as
are slow and backward, to the end they may receive and reap the more heat from
the Sun. He shall make his Veriuice. He shall dig the Earth to make Wells,
or to find the heads of Fountains, if he have need. He shall think upon
making ready his Wine vessels and other things necessary for his Vintage.

In September September.
he shall give his land that comes to be tilled again, after it has been
fallow, the last earder. He shall sow his Wheat, Mas^ing, Rye, and such like
Corn. He shall gather his Vintage: beat down Nuts: cut down late Meadow
grounds, to have the after-Crop. He shall gather stubble for the thatching of
his house, and for fuel to the Oven all the year. He shall cut away the
branches of Madder, and gather the Seed to sow in the beginning of the March
following. He shall gather the leaves of Wo^d, and order them in such sort, as
that they may be made up into balls, and he shall cause them to be dried in the
Sun, or at a fire not very hot. He shall cut down Rice and Millet.

In October October.
he shall make his Wines, and turn them into Vessels. He shall bestow his
Orange, Citron, and Pomegranate Trees in some covered place, to avoid the
danger of the eminent Cold. He shall make his Honey and Wax, and drive the old
Bees.

In November November.
he shall couch his Wines in his Cellar. He shall gather Acornes to feed Swine.
He shall gather Chestnuts small and great, and such Garden-fruits as will
keep. He shall take Radish out of the Earth, taking off their leaves, and
putting them under the Sand, to keep them from the Frost. He shall lay bare
the roots of Artichokes, and cover them again very well, that the Frost may
not perish them. He shall make Oils. He shall make Hiues for Bees, Panniers,
Dung-pots, and Baskets of Osier. He shall cut Willowes for to make Frames to
bear up Vines, and shall bind the Vines, and draw the climbing Poles from the
Vines.

In December December.
he shall oftentimes visit his Fields, thereby to let out the water which may
stand in them after great Rain. He shall cause water to run through the old
Meadows, and dung them if need be. He shall make provision of Dung to manure
his fallowes that are broken up and tilled. He shall cover with dung the
roots of the Trees and Herbs which he intends to keep unto the Spring.
He shall cut off the boughs and heads of Willowes, Poplars, Saplings, and
other Trees, to the end that their boughs may more speedily put forth and grow
so soon as Winter shall be past. He shall cut down his Wood as well to build
withal as to make his fire with. He shall make ready his Nets to catch
Birds, and to beset the Hares, when as the Fields shall be y^ie, or covered
with Snow, or overflowed with Waters in such sort, as that a man can do no
work in them. He shall also occupy himself (as long as he pleases) in
making a thousand pretty Instruments and necessary things of Wood, as are
Platters, Trenchers, Spindles, Bathing-Tubs, Dishes, and other things requisite
for household store: as also Harrowes, Rakes, and Handles for these Tools. He
shall repair his Teames, Yokes, Ploughes, and all other Instruments necessary
for the fitting and garnishing of Cattle going to Cart or Plough, to the end
that all may be in good order when they are to go to labor. He shall also
make provision of Spades, Shouels, Pickaxes, Peeles, Hatchets, Wedges, Sawes,
and other furniture fit for a Country house store.

CHAP. XI.
The condition and state of a Huswife.
I Do not find the state or place of a Huswife or Dairie-woman to be of less
care and diligence than the office of her Husband, understood always, that the
woman is acquitted of Field matters, in as much as she is tied to matters
within the House and base Court (the Horses excepted) as the husband is tied to
do what concerns him, even all the businesses of the Field. Likewise,
according to our custom of France, Country women look unto the things
necessary and requisite about Kine, Calves, Hogs, Pigges, Pigeons, Geese,
Duckes, Peacockes, Hens, Fesants, and other sorts of Beasts, as well for the
feeding of them as for the milking of them: making of Butter and Cheese: and
the keeping of Lard to dress the laboring men their victuals withal. Yea,
furthermore they have the charge of the Oven and Cellar: and we leave the
handling of Hemp unto them likewise; as also the care of making Webs, of
looking to the clipping of Sheep, of keeping their Fleeces, of spinning and
combing of Wool to make Cloth to cloth the family, of ordering of the
Kitchen Garden, and keeping of the Fruits, Herbs, Roots, and Seeds: and
moreover, of watching and attending the Bees. It is true, that the buying and
selling of Cattle belongs unto the man, as also the disposing and laying out
of money, together with the hyring and paying of servants wages: But the
surplusage to be employed and laid out in petty matters, as in Linnens,
Clothes for the household, and all necessaries of household furniture, that of
a certainetie belongs unto the woman. I mean also that she must be such a
one as is obedient unto God and to her husband, given to store up, to lay up
and keep things sure under lock and key, painful, peaceable, not loving to
stir from home, mild unto such as are under her when there is need, and
sharp and severe when occasion requires: not contentious, full of words,
toyish, tatling; nor drowsie-headed. Let her dispose of her stuff and
implements under her hand in such sort, as that every thing may have his
certain place, and that in good order, to the end that when they be to be
used, they may be found and easily come by and delivered. Let her always have
her eye upon her maids: and let her be always first at work, and last from
it, the first up, and the last in bed. Let her not suffer to be lost or
purloy^ed, no not the least trifle that is. Let her not grumble at any time for
any service done to the Lord of the Farm: for the value of the least crum of
Bread denied, or unwillingly granted or given unto him or his, may loose the
quantity of a whole Loaf afterward. Let her not trouble her brain with the
reports and speeches of others, but let her acquaint her husband with them in
good sort and manne^. Let her gratify her neighbors willingly, never
attempting to inueagle or draw away any of their men servants or maids from
them: neither let her keep company with them, except when she may do them
good, or help them, or when she makes some marriage, or assemblies of great
company. Let her not suffer her daughters to gad and wander abroad upon the
Sabbath, except they be in such company as is faithful, or that she her self
be present with them. Let her compel her sons to be foremost at work, and
let her show them the example of their father, that this may be as a double
spur unto the men servants. Let her not endure them to utter or speak any
unchaste word, oath, or blasphemy in her house: and let her cause Tale-bearers
to be silent, and not to trouble themselves with other folks matters. Let her
keep close up her Stubble and lopping of Trees for fuel for the Oven. Let her
not suffer the stalks of her Beans, Peason, Fetches, Thistles, Danewort, the
refuse of pressed things, and other unprofitable herbs, to be lost, for in
winter they being burnt into ashes, will afford provision to lay Bucks
withal, or else be sold by little and little unto the Town. Let her give good
account unto the Mistress or Lord of the Eggs and young ones, as well of
Birds as of other Beasts. Let her be skillful in natural Physic, for the
benefit of her own folk and others when they shall fall out to be ill: and
so in like manner in things good for Kine, Swine, and Fowls: for to have a
Physician always, when there is not very urgent occasion and great
necessity, is not for the profit of the house. Let her keep all them of her
house in friendly good will one toward another, not suffering them to bear
malice one against another. To ^se Bread temperately.
Let her govern her Bread so well, as that no one be suffered to use it
otherwise than in temperate sort: and in the time of Dearth, let her cause to
be ground amongst her Corn, Beans, Pease, Fetches, or Sarrasins Corn, in
some small quantity; for this mingling of these flowers raises the paste,
makes the Bread light, and to be of a greater bulk. Provision for Drink.
At the same time she shall reserve the dross of the Grapes she presses,
affoording them some little corner, for the employing of them in the de^raying
of some part of charge for the servants Drink, that so the Wine may serve for
her husband and extraordinary comers. But the natural remedies which she
shall acquaint her self withal for the succor of her folk in their
sicknesses, may be those, or such as those are, which I shall set down by
writing, in manner of a Country Dispensatorie, leaving the other more
exquisite Remedies to be used by the professed Physicians of the great Towns
and Cities.

CHAP. XII.
The Remedies which a good Huswife must be acquainted withal, for to help her
people when they be sick.
FIrst, for the Plague The Plague.
she shall make a distilled water of the herb called Regina prati, after
that she has caused the same to be steept in white Wine: or else she shall
cause to lie to steep in the juice of Citrons a piece of Gold, or the powder
or leaves thereof, for the space of 24 hours, and afterward mix that juice
with white Wine, and the powder or decoction of the root of Angelica, and so
give it to drink to the infected. Or else let her take two old Walnuts, one
Fig, ten leaves of Rue, one grain of Salt, powne and temper them
altogether, and roast them under the ashes, and afterward being sprinkled with
Wine, let her give them to be eaten. Or else let her take one head of Garlic,
twenty leaves of Rue, as many of Clarey, and powne them altogether with white
Wine and a little Aqua vitae, afterward let her strain them out, and give the
party to drink thereof a good draught. The water of Naphe Naphe.
drunk to the quantity of six ounces, causes the malignitie of the Plague to
break forth by Sweats: the juice of Marigolds, Scabious, and of the flowers of
Betonie do the like. Apply upon the swelling a loaf very hot, or a Hen ^ut
through the midst, or a white Onion, made hollow on the root side, and filled
up again with good strong Treacle or Mithridate, softened with the juice of
Citrons; it having all this within it, and being well stopped, must be roasted
under the ashes till it be rotten; after that powne it well in a Mortar, and
apply it: or else, if it be strained, the juice drunk, and the drossie part
applied to the place, you shall perceive the like effect.

For a continual Fever A continual Fever.
(which is otherwise called the hot Disease) she shall apply upon either wrest
of both the arms, the juice of the stinging Nettle, mixed with the ointment of
Poplar buds: or two springs of new-layed Eggs, Soot taken off from the Hub of
the Chimney, and well beaten togeth^^, and mixed with salt and strong vinegar,
let her bind the whole unto the parties wrests with a Linen Cloth: or else in
place of this she shall take away the heart of an Onion, and fill it with
Mithridate, and apply it fast bound upon the wrest of the right arm: or else
she shall take the heart of a water-Frog, and apply it upon the heart or back
bone of the sick party: or else she shall apply upon the region of the Liver,
or unto the soles of the seet, quick Tenches. Many for this cause do stamp
the small Sorrel, and make a drink for the great heat thereof, as also make a
Cataplasme thereof to apply to the wrests of the sick party. Others do the
like with the water which they strain out of a great Citrull. Others cause to
steep in water the whole seed of Flea-wort for the space of a night, and
minister of this water, with a little Sugar, to the sick party to drink.

For a Quartane Ague, A Quartane Agu^.
take of small Sage, or for want of it, the other Hysope, Wormwood, Parsley,
Mints, Mugwort, white spotted Trefoile, stamp them all together with the
spring of an Egg, and the grossest Soot that you shall find clea^ing to the
Chimney, and of the strongest vinegar that may be found; infuse them
altogether, and make thereof Catapla^mes fit to be applied to the wrests of the
hands. To the same purpose steep the crummes of two white Loaves, as they come
from the Oven, in a quart of Vinegar, afterward distill the same by a L^^becke,
and give thereof a small draught to the sick party to drink, about some two
hours before the fit come. Some hold it also for a singular remedy to take
the juice of the female white Mulleine, before it put forth his stalk, pressed
or drawn forth with white Wine, and drunk a small space before the fit: The
like effect has the juice of Folefoot; the decoction of the leaves and roots
of Veruaine boiled in white Wine; the decoction of Calamin^, Peniryall,
Organie, Burrage, Buglosse, Languede-boeuf; the rind of the root of Tamariske,
Ash-tree, Beton^e, Time, Agrimonie, and the roots of Sperage, all boiled in
white Wine; the juice of Wormwood and Rue powered from their feelings, and
drunk before the fit; the juice of Plantaine drunk with honied water. Some
do make great account of the powder of the root of Asarum (otherwise called
Cabaret) dried in the Sun, or in the Oven, and taken in the weight of a
French crown, with white Wine, half a quarter of an hour before the fit.
Furthermore, the Liniment made with Mithridate, or the oil of Scorpions,
applied to the ridge of the backs, soles of the feet, palms of the hands,
brow, and temples, some small time before the fit. The very same virtue has
the oils of B^yes mixed with Aqua vitae. Some townsmen do use this
superstitious rite against such manner of agues: that is to say, they eat nine
days together, being fasting, the leaves of Sage; the first day nine, the
second eight, and so consequently, they diminish every day a leaf until the
last of the said nine days: and the confident persuasion that they have of
this medicine does cure them. Some find it very singular in a Quartane Ague,
after purging, to drink white wine, wherein there has been Sage steeped all
night: if you eat before the fit a head of Garlic pilled, you shall escape the
fit of shiuering cold: if you drink one or two ounces of the juices of the
root of Elder stamped and strained some small time before the fit, and take the
same again two or three times, you shall lose your ague. The distilled water
of the roots of Sea-Holly: or else take a dram of Myrrh in powder, and
drink it with Malmesey an hour before the fit. The distilled water or
decoction of Cardu^ Benedictus, and taken before the fit: Pills made of Myrrh
and of Treacle as big as a ^ich pease taken an hour before the fit.

For the Thirst Thirst.
of an Ague, let him roll to and fro upon his tongue the three-cornered stone
found in the heads of Carpes; or the leaves of round Sorrel, or a piece of
Silver or Gold, or a Snayle stone, or a piece of Crystal oftentimes dipped in
water, or the leaves of Pursl^ne or of Houseleeke, or the husked seeds of
Cucumbers.

For a Tertian Ague, A Tertian Ague.
steep in white Wine the bruised root of herb Patience for the space of
three or four hours, afterward strain it, and reserve about a pretty draught
to give the sick to drink an hour or two before his fit: or else do the
like with the roots of Plantaine steept in equal quantity of Wine and Water:
or take a pretty draught of the juice of Plantaine, or of Pur^lane, or of
Pimpernell, and drink them a very little while before the fit: or else drink
with Wine every day six leaves of Cinquefoile, that is to say, three in the
morning, and three at the evening* or the juice of Smallage, of Sage, and good
strong Vinegar, of every one an ounce, three hours before the fit. The most
sovereign remedy that some men do find for it, is to drink fasting, five
hours before the fit, two ounces of the juice of Pomegranats, and presently
after to lay to the wrists, temples, and soles of the feet small pills, of the
bigness of a Pease, made of an ounce of the ointment of Populeon, and two
drammes of Spiders webs, and there to leave them, until such time as that the
hour and fear of the fit be past: or else a Cataplasme made of Sage, Rue,
Greek Nettle, gathered before Sunne-rise, of each a handful, Salt and Soot
the quantity of a Walnut, it being all stamped with vinegar, and applied to
the pulset an hour before the fit. Some do greatly approve of a Liniment of
Earthwormes boiled with Goose grease, to rub the brow and temples of the sick
party withal before the fit: or else to carry about his neck the horns of
a swift Heart, which is a singular remedy.

For a Quotidian, A Quotidian Ague.
it is good to drink, somewhat before the fit, the juice drawn out of Betonie
and Plantaine: or to drink every morning a reasonable draught of the
decoction made of the root of Smallage, Parsley, Radishes, Sperage, leaves of
Betonie, and Spleenwort, red cich Pease, and the middle ri^de of Elder: or to
steep in white wine the roots of Danewort, and to drink a small draught
thereof an hour before the fit; but after that he must take heed of sleeping:
or let him drink every day with Wine two leaves of Cinquefoile, one in the
morning, and another at evening: as also let him apply unto his pulses the
Cataplasme that we have set down for the Quartane Ague.

To take away the pain of the Head, Headache coming of Heat.
coming of great heat, namely such as befalls Mowers during the Summer time,
there must be applied upon the brows slices of Gourds, or Linen Clothes
dipped in Rose water, or the juice of Plantaine, Nightshade, Lettuce,
Purcelane, and Vinegar of white Wine: or let her beat two whites of eggs with
Rose water, and with Flax make a Frontlet: or stamp bitter Almonds with
Veruaine water, and apply them unto the brows: or to wash the head in warm
water, in which has been boiled the leaves of Vines and Willowes, the flowers
of Water Lillies and Roses, and with the same water to wash the feet and
legs: and if in case the pain be so great, as that there is fear that he
should loose his wits, let there be applied upon the crown of his head,
brows, and temples, a Cataplasme made of the white of an egg,
Bole-armoniacke, Crabbes thoroughly boiled, and Poppie seed, with the water of
Betonie and Vinegar.

If the Head complain it self of too much Drink, Headache coming of drinking
of Wine.
there may be made a Frontlet with wild Time, Maiden hair, and Roses: or
receive and take the fume of the decoction of Coleworts: or by and by after the
head begins to be ill, to eat one or two short-started Apples, or some
bitter Almonds: or else to drink of the shauings of Harts-horne, with
Fountain or River water: or if you see that your stomach be not sick, thou
may take of the hair of the Beast that has made thee ill, and drink off a
good glass of Wine.

If the Head become sick of some great Cold, Headache proceeding of Cold^.
apply and lay to the Head a bag full of Branne, Millet, and rubbed Salt: or of
Sage, Marierome, Betonie, Time, Annise-seed, Fennell-seed, Bay Berries, and
Iuniper-berries, as hot as you can endure them: or else chafe the temples with
the juice of Nightshade, oil of Roses, and Vinegar.

To cure the Frenzy Frenzy.
that comes of a hot cause, you must apply upon the head of the patient the
lungs of a Sheep newly killed, or the whole Gather: or some Hen or Pigeon
slit along the back and applied unto the same place: or rub his brows and all
his head over with oil of Roses, Vinegar, and Populeon: or with the juice of
Nightshade, oil of Roses, and Vinegar.

To awake those which are given to sleep too soundly, Drowsinesse, or
heaviness of Sleep.
it is good to make a Frontlet of Sauorie boiled in Vinegar: or to make a
perfume for the patients nosthrils with strong Vinegar, or seed of Rue, or
Nigella, or feathers of a Partridge, or of old Shoe soles, or of the hoofes of
an Ass, or of man's hair: or else to apply upon the brows a Cataplasme of
Mithridate, and upon the right arm the head of a Bat.

To cause them to sleep which cannot well slumber, Too much watchfulness.
it is good to make a Frontlet with the seed of Poppie, Henbane, Lettuce, and
the juice of Nightshade: or the milk of a woman giving a girl suck: or with
the leaves of ground yu^e, stamped with the white of an egg: or put under the
pillow a Mandrake apple, or the green leaves of Henbane, and rub the soles of
the feet with the grea^e of a Dormouse.

For the swimming in the Head, Swimming in the Head.
there is commonly used the conserve of the flowers of Betonie, or Aqua vitae,
or the confection called Electuarium Anacardinum.

To preserve such from the Apoplexy The Apoplexy.
as are subject unto it, let them drink in Winter a good spoonefull of Aqua
vitae well sugared, and let them eat a bit of White bread by and by after; or in
stead of Aqua vitae, let them drink the Claret water which I will set down
hereafter, or of the water of the root of the wild Vine, or of the powder of
the root thereof continually for the space of a year.

For the Palsy, The Palsy.
rub the place afflicted with the oil of Foxes, Bays, and Castoreum, mixing
therewith a little Aqua vitae: use likewise oftentimes the water of Cinnamon,
and of S. John's wort; or the conserues of Sage, Rosemarie, Cowslips, Baul^^e,
and Mithridate: make him dry Bathes with the decoction of Lauander,
Coastmarie, Danewort, Sage, and Marierome.

To preserve one from the Falling sickness, The Epilepsie or falling sickness.
otherwise called S. John's disease, it is a sovereign thing to drink for the
space of nine days a little draught of the juice of the herb Paralysis or
Cows^^ps, or of the distilled water of the Linden tree, or of Coriander: or to
use every morning, for the space of forty days, a powder made of the seed of
Pionie, and Missletoe of the Oak, or of the skull of a Man, and more specially
of that part of the skull which is nearest unto the seame of the crown, with
neat Wine, or with the decoction of Pionie: as also to hang about his neck the
Missletoe of the Oak, or some piece of a man's skull, or of the root or seed of
male Pionie, or of the stone that is found in Swallows neasts: or to wear
about his neck, or upon one of his fingers, some ring, wherein shall be set the
bone of the foot of the Ox called Elam or Alce, and that so, as that the bone
may touch the flesh or bare skin: you shall deliver them that are in that fit,
if you tickle them and pinch their great toe, or rub their lips with man's blood.

To take away the redness of the Face, Redness of the face.
it is good to wash the face with the decoction of the chafe of Barley and
Oats, and to foment it afterward with the juice of Citrons: or else take four
ounces of Peach kernels, two ounces of the husked seeds of Gourds, bruise them
and press them out strongly, to the end they may yield their oil: rub or
touch with this liquor the pimples or red places.

To take away the spots of the Face, Spots in the face.
make a composition of the flower of Lupines, Goats gall, juice of Limons, and
very white Allome, touch the spotted places with this ointment or else make an
ointment: with the oil of bitter Almonds, Honey, Ireos, and Wax: or else rub
your face with the blood of a Cock, Hen, or Pigeon: or foment it with the
water of the flowers of Beans, Orenges, or Mulberries.

For the Kings evil The Kings evil.
take Leekes, with the leaves and roots of the herb Patience, press out
about some pound of the juice thereof, in which you shall dissolve an ounce of
Pellitorie powdered, and a scruple of Viridis aeris, mix all very well
together, and herewithall you shall daily foment the said disease: Hang about
your neck the roots of water Betonie, and the lesser Plantaine. If you cut the
foot of a great Witwall or Toad, when the Moon is declining, and begins to
join it self to the Sun, and that you apply it round about his neck which
has the Kings evil, you shall find it very sovereign for the said disease.
The dung of a Cow or Ox heated under the ashes betwixt Vine or Colewort
leaves, and mingled with Vinegar, has a property to bring the swelling to
ripeness. Or else use this remedy, which is always ready, singular good,
and well approved: Take a sufficient quantity of Nicotiana, stamp it in a
very clean Mortar, and apply both the juice and drossie parts thereof unto
the said tumor together: and do this nine or ten times.

The Rheum falling down upon the eyes is stayed by a Cataplasme applied to
the brows, Ill eyes.
made of the muscillage of shell-Snailes, and corporated with the flower of
Frankincense and Aloes well stirred together, until that the whole become to
the thickness of Honey.

For a weak Sight, A weak sight.
take Fennel, Veruaine, Clarey, Rue, Eyebright, and Roses, of each a like,
and distill them all in a Limbecke: of this water distilled put three or four
drops in your eyes morning and evening. Also the water of young Pies distilled
in a Furnace is very good: in like manner the water of rotten Apples, putting
two or three drops thereof into them. It is good for the same disease to take
the vapor of the decoction of Fennel, Eyebright, and Rue: to drink every
morning a small draught of Eyebright wine, or to prepare a powder with dried
Eyebright and Sugar, to take thereof every morning the weight of a French
crown, two or three hours before meat. There is a stone found within the gall
of an Ox, which put into the nosthrils, does maruellously clear the sight: ^o
does the wine made of the root of Maiden hair, if it be often used in the
morning.

For the pain of the Eyes, Pain in the eyes.
it is good to make the decoction of Camomile, Melilot, and the seed of Fennel
in water and white Wine, and dipping a fourfold Linen Cloth therein, and
after wringing it well, to apply the same oftentimes to the eye: or else to lay
upon it woman's milk and the white of an egg well beat together.

The redness of the Eyes Redness in (...) eye.
is amended by the applying of Linen Clothes or Plegets of Flax, moistened in
the whites of eggs well beat together with Rose or Plantaine water: or else
boil a sour and sharp Apple, take the pulpe thereof, and mix it with Nurce
milk; afterward make a little Liniment to be applied to the red eyelids. In
the mean time you may apply to the temples a frontlet made with Prouence
Roses, or conserve of Roses, and other astringent things, to the end that the
^he^me falling from the brain may be stayed, seeing it is the cause of such
redness. Other cause small, thin, and dainty slices of Veale, or of the
neck of an Ox newly killed, to be steeped in woman's milk, and lay them upon
the eyes, laying again above them stupes of Flax. Some cause little children
to make water in Copper, Brass, or Latten vessels, they swill the urine round
about the Basin, and afterward upon the sudden do cast it out of the Basin,
they cover the Basin with a clean Linen Cloth, and let it stand so covered
four and twenty hours, they find rust in the bottom and round about it,
they gather and dissolve the said rust with Rose water, which Rose water they
keep within a Violl well stopped, and drop thereof into their eyes evening and
morning, holding them wide open. Many likewise there be which content
themselves with Tuthia prepared.

To take away the filthiness or gumminesse of the eyes, Filth in the eye.
touch them and rub them round about with a Sapphire dipped in cold water.

To prevent that the eye do not continue black or red after a blow, A black
and blew eye.
there must by and by be dropped into the eye the blood of the wing of a Pigeon
or Turtle dove.

To take away red spots or blemishes of the eye, A blemish in the eye.
it is good to use the like remedy, or else to apply to the eye a Cataplasme
made of young Wormwood, stamped with the milk of a woman and Rose water.

For an old redness in the eye, Redness in the eyes.
take the bigness of a small Nut of white Copperas, and a scruple of Florence
Ireos, as much of Roch Allome, make a powder, which you shall mix with half a
pint of Fountain water after the measure of Paris; or else boil them all
together until the water become clear, and drop into your eye three or four
drops, either of the one water, or of the other: or make a Liniment to apply
upon it with the dross of oil of Linseed, gum Arabicke, Tragacanth,
Mastick, and Camphire.

For the inflammation of the Eye, The inflammation of the Eye.
it is a singular remedy to apply to the eye the lungs of a Sheep newly
killed: or to make a Cataplasme of the pulpe of a sweet apple roasted under the
embers, mingled with Barley meal, the milk of a woman, Rose water, and the
white of an egg: The water of Marigol^s is also sovereign good in this case.
A Wolves eye, or the stones that are found in the mawes of Swallows, have the
like virtue hanged about the neck. Or take with the point of a needle a piece
of Frankincense, set it on fire with a wax Candle, after quench it in four
ounces of Rose water, go over this course thirty times, and strain the Rose
water through a white Linen Cloth, and keep it to drop in some drops of the
same into the corners of your eyes at night when you go to bed: and in case
you may feel great pain in your eyes, mix together with this water a little
of woman's milk.

To restrain tears and all other humors falling upon the eyes, The weeping
Eye.
it is good to take a decoction of the leaves of Betonie, the roots of Fennel,
and a little fine Frankincense, and to make an eye-^alue thereof: also to wash
the weeping eyes oftentimes with the decoction of Che^uile, or to drop
thereinto sometimes the juice of Rue mixed with purified Honey. Some hold it for
a secret remedy to tie behind the head some drops of Amber, which also have
the virtue to slay the ^heume falling down into the throat: or else to drop
into the eye water distilled of the gall of a man and Celandine: or else to
anoint the edges of the eyelids with the soot of Butter burned in a Lamp,
which is a secret for to dry up and stay all rheumes of the eyes, and to shut
up most speedily all ulcers made in the great corners of the eyes, and all
rheumes coming of the tenderness or blearednesse of the eye.

For the white spots of the Eyes, The white spots of the Eyes.
take one or many new eggs laid the same day by one or more black Hens, or
for want of black Hens, by other, roast them hard upon hot embers, cut them
afterward into equal quarters, and take away the yelke, and put in place
thereof as much Sugar candy, made in powder, of the whitest you can get,
strain all together through a Linen Cloth very clean and doubled, that so
you may do it very strongly: the water or liquor that comes forth is very
good to drop one drop after another into the diseased eye, at night when they
go to bed, or at any hour of the day. There is another water very good for
the same disease, which is made of white Copperas, Sugar candy, Rose water,
and the hard whites of eggs, they being all strayned through a Linen Cloth,
and of this there must be some put into the eye after dinner and at night going
to bed. Some do use with very good success another Water, which is this:
Take of Tuthia prepared and powdered an ounce, Mace half an ounce, infuse them
together in Rose water and white Wine, of each half a pint of Paris measure,
for the space of six weeks in a Glass well stopped: this Glass you shall
set in the Sun when it shines, and take it in when it shines not, or is
Night, or Rain; stir the Glass twice or thrice every day: These remedies
are likewise good for red, running, and weak eyes.

For ach in the Ear, Ache in the Ear.
coming of a hot cause, drop thereinto the oil of Henbane: take oil of
Roses, and a little Vinegar, and make thereof an iniection into the ear, apply
thereto afterward a bag of Camomill* Melilote, Linseed, and Holihocks, boiled
in milk. If the cause be of cold, then put therein musked Cotton, or a grain
of Musk. Seribonius does commend greatly the foot of Pitch dropped warm into
the ear which aketh by reason of an inflammation, together with a little of
the oil of Roses.

Against the noise and sounding of the Ear, A noise in the Ear.
it is good to drop into the ears of the oil of Rue, or Spike, oil of bitter
Almonds, or Bays, together with a little Aqua vitae, or fat of an E^le: or
Aqua vitae wherein has been steept the seed of Cummin or A^^ise: or else take
the scrapings of the wood of Cedar tree, made very small, and thereof fill a
bag of crimson Taffata very thin, of the greatness of an Almond, dip it in
very good Aqua vitae, in such sort, as that the said bag be thoroughly
drencht with the same, put the same bag well and forward and close into the
hole of the ear which blows and sounds, and afterward lie down upon the
same ear.

Against Deafness, Deafness.
you must drop into your ears the juice of an Onion, or of Brionie, mixed with
Honey or Oil, wherein have been boiled the roots of Daffodill: or of the
juice of the ri^des of Radishes, mixed with oil of Roses: or the fat of an
Eele, and the oil of bitter Almonds.

For the loss of Smelling, The smelling lost.
or when it is corrupted, make a perfume with the seed of Nigella, the leaves
of Aron, Rue, and other herbs which have a strong favor: also smell often upon
Mints.

For tumors under the ear, Swelling under the ear.
you must make a Cataplasme of the flower of Barley boiled in honied water, and
putting thereto the Muscilage of Fleawort seed and the oil of Lillies. A
Cataplasme made of the dung of Goats, fresh Butter, and the residence of the
oil of Nuts does digest the swellings under the ear.

Against the stinking of the Nosthrils, Stinking nosthrils.
it is good to snuff up into the nosthrils of the decoction of Marierome,
Calameth, Cloves, Ginger, and Nutmegs, made inwhite Wine, or else of the
vinegar of Squils.

To stay bleeding at the Nose, Bleeding at the nose.
you must by and by lay your thumb upon that side of the nose that bleedeth,
and you must put about your neck a neck-lace of Iaspar stone: you must tie the
uttermost parts of the body so strait as you can, and put in the nose a tent
of dead Nettles, and hold in your hands the leaves and roots of Agrimonie: or
else hold in your mouth very cold Cesterne water, and change it oftentimes.
Some do much approve the use of Camphire, the flowers of Willow, the moss of
Quinces, and other hoar^e fruits put into the nose: and to apply unto the
Brows Camph^re, with the seed of Nettles, or with the juice of Plantain or of
Nightshade: or else to apply unto the Temples, and about the neck, especially
oueragainst the iugular veins, herbs of a cooling faculty, as Nightshade,
Planta^ne, Lettuce, dead Nettles, or pricking Nettles, pouned with salt and
vinegar, Peruincle, and others. Peruincle also put under the Tongue has the
same virtue. Some do make in like manner Neck-laces and Bracelets of the
herb S. Innocent. Some hold in the hand, that is, on that side that the nose
does bleed of, a branch of Holihocke. Diverse Country folks, to stay any kind
of bleeding in any part, do wrap of Hogs dung in Cotton, and apply it to the
place from whence the blood comes. Others snuff up into the nose the powder
of a three-cornered stone found in the head of a Carpe, dried and made into
powder.

Against the ach of the Teeth, Toothache.
you must boil in Vinegar and Rosewater the root of Henbane, or of the
Mulberrie tree, and to hold this decoction in the mouth: otherwise, take a
Cloue of Garlic, and roast it a little under hot embers, afterward bray it,
and lay it upon the pained tooth as hot as you can: in like manner put one in
the ear of the same side that the pain is: Some do bray a Cloue of Garlic
with Salt, and lay it to the pulse of that arm that is upon the aching side.
Otherwise, take two drammes of the roots of Pellitorie bruised, of the leaves
of Sage, Rosemarie, of every one half a handful: Three fat Figs, and you
shall boil them all in ten ounces of Wine unto the consumption of all the
Wine: afterward, you shall take a quantity of the said Figs, and apply it to
the aching tooth as hot as possible may be: or else wash and gargle your teeth
with the decoction of ground Yu^e made in Wine, and to the consumption of the
third part of the said Wine. After the same manner you must apply upon the
pulses of the Temples a plaster made of Pitch, the powder of Allome, and a
Gall, very hot. It is good also for the ach of the teeth to put thereupon the
juice of Garlic, Motherwort, Rue, or some hot oil, as that of Sage, which is
singular in this behalf. Some hold it for a secret, to wear about the neck
the tooth of a man knit within a piece of Taffata: or a Bean found, in which
there is enclosed a Lowse, takes away the most strong pain of the teeth that
may be endured.

It is good to foment the loose teeth with the decoction of Rosewater and
Allome: Loose teeth.
or else of the roots of Cinquefoile and Allome: and in case you would cause
them to fall out, put in their hole or hollow place of the ashes of
Earth-wormes, or of the dung of Mice, or of the tooth of a Heart, for such ashes
will cause them to fall out by and by, without any Iron or Instrument. Or else
apply thereunto the stone of a Mulberrie: or else steep the root of Mulberrie
tree, stamped and bruised the space of five days in good strong vinegar in the
Sun, and there let it dry so as that you may make it into powder, and then
apply the same powder Unto your tooth: or else you shall apply thereto the
brains of a Partridge: or the juice of Watercresses in the place: or else put
into the hollow of the tooth the juice of great Celandine.

To keep the Teeth clean and bright, Black Teeth.
and to preserve them from the falling down of all manner of Rheumes, take a
pint of Fountain water, a third part of Rosewater, put therein two drammes of
Allome, as much of Cinnamon, boil them softly together in a Vial or earthen
Pot, well Leaded, unto the consumption of the third or fourth part, wash your
mouth and teeth therewith evening and morning: or else wash your mouth and
teeth in the warm decoction of small Sage, Rosemarie, and great Marierome,
boiled in white Wine to the consumption of the third part.

To stay the Canker of the Teeth, Red Teeth.
hold in the morning a great grain of Salt under your tongue until it be
there melted, then rub your teeth therewith.

To take away the stinking of the Mouth, Stinking Mouths.
it is good to wash the mouth with Wine, wherein has boiled Anniseed and
Cloves: or to chaw the root of Acornes: or else to chew Masticke long enough.

For the stinking of the Teeth, Stinking Teeth.
it is good to rub them with the leaves of Sage and the rind of a Ci^^on, or
with the powder of Cloves and Nutmegs: in the mean time there must be avoided
the use of Milke-meats, raw Fruits, sharp things, and such as are hard to
chew, all victuals of ill digestion, and all vomiting.

To white and take the wrinkles out of the Hands, Wrinkled Hands.
take the dross of oil of Linseed, steep it in rain water, and wash your
hands therewith: or else wash your hands with the juice of Citrons alone, or
some grains of Salt mixed therewithal.

For the Cough, take Hysope and Folefoot, The Cough.
of each one handful, Figs of Marcellis, damask Raisins, and Licorice, of
each an ounce, boil them all in water until the third part be consumed; use
this decoction twice a day, two hours before dinner in the morning, and at
evening one hour before supper. It is good likewise to take red Coleworts, and
to make them boil two or three boyles, with an handful of Folefoot, and a
slip or two of Hysope, and to use this broth twice a day.

For the Squinancie, Squinancie.
or soreness of the Throat, you must take a whole Swallows Neast boiled with
white Wine, and with the oil of Camomill and sweet Almonds, therewith to make
a Cataplasme, and to apply it unto the throat: or to drink by and by the
weight of a French crown of the tooth of a wild Boar powdered, with the water
of Carduus Benedictus: or to touch the diseased place with a Liniment made of
Linseed, and the powder of the tooth of a wild Boar: or else to apply unto the
place a Cataplasme made of the dung of a young boy of a good constitution, fed
for the space of three days with Lupines and well baked Bread lea^ened and
salted, and having Claret Wine to drink, and no other either meats or
drinks, and adding to the foresaid child's dung an equal quantity of Honey.

Against the Pleurisy, Pleurisy.
drink presently with the syrrup of Violets, or some other appropriate to the
Breast whatsoever, the weight of a scruple of Nettle seed, or of the Ash Trees:
or take three ounces of the distilled water of Mary's thistle, or of Carduus
Benedictus, or of Broom, a spoonefull of white Wine, six springs or strains
of Eggs that are very new, the weight of a French crown of the shells of
French small Nuts made into powder, eighteen grains of red Coral powdered,
all being mixed together, let it be given warm with as much speed as may be:
mundified Barley, and the seeds of Melons, Gourds, Cucumbers, and Poppie, are
in that case highly commended: roast a sweet apple under the embers, mix
therwithall when it is roasted the juice of Licor^ce, Starch, and white Sugar;
give thereof unto the diseased twice a day, two hours before meat: or else
take the weight of a French crown of the powder of a wild Bores tooth, and
cause him to swallow it, either with the juice of sweet Almonds and Sugar Candy, or with the broth of red Coleworts, or decoction of the water of
Barley, or some other such like, which is appropriate for the Breast: or else
burn to ashes the pizzle of an Ox, and give a dram thereof with white Wine,
if the ague be but small, or with the water of Carduus Benedictus, or Barley
water, if the ague be strong and great: and assure your self, that such
remedies are singular if they be used within three days of the beginning of
the sickness. The manner of making these ashes, is to cut the pizzle of the
Ox in gobbets, and laying it upon the harth that is close laid, to set a new
pot over it, and afterward to lay hot burning coals or hot embers about the
pot, which must be often renewed, until one be assured that it is burnt into
powder: and the better to judge of the time, he must think that this will not
be done under a whole day. It is good to lay a plaster of black Pitch upon
the grieved side: and where it comes to pass that the pain of the side
continues, and that the sick party cannot spet, cause him to use the
decoction of the flowers of red Poppie, or of the powder of them, the weight of
a French crown, with the water of Scabious and Pimpernell, and syrrop of
Hysope, if there be no great Fever; or Violets, if it be great. Furthermore,
for a Pleurisy which is desperate and past hope, take a sweet Apple, even a
very excellent one, and take the kernels forth of it, and fill up the hollow
place with fine Olibanum, roast it covered over and rolled in stupes under the
hot embers thoroughly, and then give it to the sick of the Pleurisy to eat.

For the spetting of Blood, Spitting of Blood.
cause him to drink the distilled water of the first little buds of the leaves
of the Oak, or the decoction of Comfrey, or of Plantaine, Horsetaile, or
Knot-grasse, otherwise called the herb of S. Innocent: or to swallow down
some small drops of Masticke, or Hearts horn, or Goats horn burnt, or Bole
Armoniake, or Terra sigillata, or Coral, or Amber, or the powder of the
innermost rind of Chestnut tree, or of the Cork tree: or fry the dung of an
Hog with fresh Butter, and of that cluttered blood which the sick party
shall have spet, and so give of these thus fried together to the sick party
to eat.

For the beating of the Heart, The beating of the Heart.
it is good to hang about the neck so much Camphire as the quantity of a
Pease, or to drink two or three ounces of the water of Buglosse and of Baulme:
some hold the distilled water following for a singular and sovereign remedy.
Take two Hogs hearts, three Stags hearts, or the hearts of three Bulls, Nutmeg,
Cloves, and Basil seed, of each three drams, flowers of Marigolds, Burrage,
Buglosse, and Rosemarie, of each half a handful; steep them all in Malmesey
or Hipocras for the space of a night, after distill them with a Limbecke, and
reserve the water for use, which shall be by taking three or four ounces when
necessity does require. The conserve of Betonie, and Rosemarie flowers:
Cinnamon water, Aqua vitae, and Imperial Waters, which we have set down in
our work of the beautifying of man's body.

For the faintness of the Heart, or Swouning, Swouning.
it is good to strain and wring the joint of the Ring or Physicians finger; as
also to rub the same with some piece of Gold and with Saffron: for by the
means of that finger his near communicating with the heart, there is from it
conveyed and carried some virtue, restoring and comforting the heart.

For the flagging and hanging breasts of Women, Flagging, wither^d, and hanging
Breasts.
make a liniment with the dross of the oil of Linseed, a little gum
Arabic, Tragacanth, Mastick, and Camphire: or with the juice of Succorie: or
apply thereunto ground Iuie, or the eggs of Partridges, which you shall change
oftentimes: or small Basins of the distilled water of young Pine-apples, or the
juice of wild Pine-apples.

To procure much Milk (...) of Milk.
unto Nurses, they must use the fresh and new-gathered juice of Fennel
oftentimes, or the juice of Smallage, or of Beets, or the powder of the roots
of Mary's thistle, adding thereto the seed of Fennel and a little Pepper: the
fore-hoofes of a Cow burned, and drunk with Wine, or Broth, or other
convenient liquor: or the powder of Crystal powdered very finely and drunk
with Wine or some broth: or let them eat of boiled Coleworts seasoned with
Pepper: or of the roots of Rapes boiled with Pepper.

To cause Women to loose their Milk, Abundance of Milk.
you must apply upon the nipples of their Breasts the roots of great Celandine
^odden and powned: or use a fomentation of very sharp Oxicrate upon the
Breasts: or else you shall apply a Cataplasme of the flower of Beans: or an
emplaister of Rue, Sage, Mints, Wormwood, Fennel, Branne boiled and mixed
with Oil of Camomill: or the leaves of young and very green Gou^ds: or of
Cray-fishes, all to brayed and stamped in a Mortar.

For the inflammation of the Breasts, The inflammation of the Breasts.
coming of the great abundant store of Milk, take the dyrt found in the
bottom of the Troughes of Cutlers or Grinders, and therewith cover the Breast,
and so you shall assuage the pain in one nigh^^ you may add thereto a little
of the Oil of Roses: or if the Milk be much curded without any great
inflammation in the Breast, you may apply unto it a Cataplasme of the flower of
Rice, or of pure Wheat, boiled till it become like pappe, with thick red Wine,
and apply it unto the teates upon plageats as hot as may be endured.

For belching Belching.
at the mouth, it is good to take fasting a Dredge made of Annise, Fennel,
Caraway, and Coriander seed: or else to drink Wine in the morning two or three
times; and that such, as wherein has been boiled Bay Berries, Annise,
Coriander, and Fennel seed; and apply upon the stomach a bag full of Rue,
Wormwood, Marierome, and Mints.

For the Hicket, Hicket.
it is good to keep ones breath oftentimes, and long, to stop both his ears,
to hold his head awry, and his mouth covered and upward, to procure himself to
neese, to labor much, to endure thirst, to cast cold water in his face which
has the Hicket, thereby to cause him to fear. Some are of opinion, that if he
which has the Hicket do count and reckon the first, saying one, or borrowing,
he shall have no more but that one.

Against Vomiting, Vomiting.
take a tossed of bread and steep it in the claret water hereafter described, or
in the juice of Mints, spread it over with the powder of Masticke, apply it
warm unto the stomach, renewing it every three hours. Otherwise, take two
handfuls of Mints, and one of Roses, boil them in Wine, take afterward two
ounces of tosted bread, and let it be well steeped in Wine, and afterward
compounded with Masticke and the said Mints and Roses, make thereof a plaster
to lay to the stomach before you go to meat. It is true, that if the vomiting
be with an ague, it will be good to boil the Mints and Roses, and to steep
the tosted bread in vinegar. In like manner, Mints brayed and mingled with oil
of Roses, applied unto the stomach, is a singular help for any kind of
vomiting: it is good likewise at the end of meat to swallow down one gulpe of
Water, or a morsel of Marmalade of Quinces, not drinking afterward: and in the
morning, two hours before meat, to swallow five or six Pepper-cornes whole
with Wine, or the sirrup of Mints, or of Wormwood, or green Ginger preserved:
It is also good to set cupping Glasses upon the bottom of the Stomach, or
under the Navel, and then chiefly when the party eats: to take rest after
meat, and to talk or cough any thing at all.

For the pain of the Stomach, Pain in the stomach.
fill a dish with hot ashes, sprinkle them with Wine, oue^ them cast a Linen
cloth, which may cover all the dish, apply this unto the pained place: or else
put unto the stomach a hot bag full of fried Salt: or else take the crumbs of
a good thick Loaf, and being dipped as it comes hot out of the Oven in the
Oil of Camomill, and wrapped in a Linen cloth, let it be applied unto the
pain: or else fill a Swines bladder with the decoction of the leaves of Bays,
Organi^, Marierome, Mints, Time, Camomill, Calamint, Melilote, Annise, and
Fennel seed, apply it to the pain, warm it again when it shall be cold: or
else make a cake with a handful of Wormwood, Mints, and Roses kneaded with
Rye, Leaven, and Wine, and apply it unto the stomach.

For the obstruction of the Liver, The Liver obstructed.
use a decoction made of Succorie, the roots of Parsley, Smallage, Fennel,
Dogs grass, Patience, Butchers broom, Cich pease, Capillus Veneris, Hoppes,
and Fumitorie: vse-likewise oftentimes the shauings of Iuorie.

For the heat of the Liver, Heat of the Liver.
there is nothing better than to use Lettuce, Sorrel, Purcelane, Hoppes in
pottage, and sometimes to drink the water of the said herbs fasting, or the
water of Endive.

Against the Iaundise, Iaundise.
drink fasting of the dung of Ganders the weight of a French crown, well
mingled with white wine, for the space of nine days: or else of the decoction
of the leaves and roots of Strawberries: or else take Missletoe of the white
Thorn, gathered before the Sun rise, about a handful, three or four roots
of Parsley, bray them all together with white wine, let them run through a
linen cloth or strainer, and drink of this evening and morning a reasonable
draught: This is a more excellent remedy than many others; which
notwithstanding women with child must not use, but in place of it you must
apply to the wrists and soles of their feet the leaves of Missletoe of the
Oak, of great Celandine, and Horehound, the whole being brayed with a little
wine, and made in form of a Cataplasme. Some commend highly against the
Iaundise, to take of the worms of the earth, to wash them in white wine, and
after to dry them, and making a powder of them, to give thereof a small
spoonefull in white Wine, or the decoction of Wormwood, or of Horehound: or to
drink fasting ones own urine certain days: or to drink for the space of
eight mornings with white wine fasting five trottles of ^ Goat. Some say, that
to carry in the left hand three leaves of wild Rocket, does cure the Iaundise.
Some also hold, that to wear under the soles of the feet the leaves of
Shepherds purse, or of great Celandine, next unto their bare feet, does the
like.

For the Dropsy, Dropsy.
it is good to make a drink with the seed of Broom, pouned and brayed in
white wine: or to make a drink of the juice of the root of Gladiolus or Asarum
with white wine: or to drink fasting his own urine for the space of certain
days: to apply in like manner unto the moist places a Cataplasme of Cowes dung
warm; with which, as Galen testifies, a Physician of Misia did maruellously
heal all manner of Dropsies: or to apply upon the swollen place shell-Snayles
alive, not washed, but carefully bruised. A secret remedy against the Dropsy,
is to drink with honied water the powder of Glass seven times burned and
seven times quenched in the juice of Flower-de-luce, or white wine.

For the pain or heaviness of the Spleen, Pain of the Spleen.
drink wine wherein has boiled Scolopendrium, Sperage, and Hoppes: or else
drink oftentimes fasting of the broth of red Coleworts half boiled, or of the
decoction of Roman Wormwood, or of Paul's Betonie, or of small Centaurie, or
Smiths Forge-water.

For the pain of the Collicke, Collicke.
there is nothing more sovereign than to wear about him a Ring or Box of
silver, in which is enclosed some part of the navel of an infant newly borne,
and that the Ring do touch the flesh. There is also nothing more singular, than
to drink, in a pretty draught of white wine, the red pill which is to be found
in the space and cartilaginous gristles of Walnut kernels, dried in the month
of August, and made into powder: or to drink four or five ounces of the oil
of Nu^s, or of Linseed, or of the shells of ripe Nuts, or the water of
Camomill, or the decoction of the seed of Hemp, or Wine wherein has been
steept for the space of ten or twelve hours the root of Enula campana
bruised: or the powder of a Stag^ pizzle, drunk with water: or the dung of
Hens, drunk with Hypocras made of honey and wine: or a Clister made of
Brine: or the heart of a Lark swallowed down while it is fresh and new: or
the said heart of a Lark fastened to the thigh. As concerning outward
remedies, some approve greatly to take the skin of a sheep all new, or the
kell of the intrailes of a sheep newly killed, and to apply it unto the
belly: or to make a bag of Millet, Branne, Wheat, and Salt fried together, to
lap upon the belly: A Cataplasme made of Wolves dung is also profitable
against the Collicke: the same dung drunk with a little wine does very much
good: the bones found in the dung of a Wolf, powned small, and drunk with
wine, have the like quality. Some say, that if you take ashes coming very
hot from under the coals of fire, and put the said ashes in a dish or pot, and
afterward pour thereon a good glas^e of Claret wine, and afterward cover the
said dish with ashes, with a linen cloth four double, and apply it unto the
belly, you shall find release and mitigation of your pain.

For the ^u^orall ^lux of the Belly, Flux of the Belly.
it is good to drink milk, wherein has been quenched a gad of Steel, or of
iron: or milk boiled with a half quantity of water, and that unto the
consumption of the water: or he shall take of a Stags pizzle with Ces^^rue
water: to use Rice parched: to take a dram of Masticke powdered with the yolke
of an egg: to make a Cataplasme with the flower of Wheat to apply all over the
Navel, but it must be wrought with red Wine, and after baked in the Oven.

For the bloody Flux, The bloody Flux.
give to drink with red wine the blood of a Hare dried and made in powder, or
the powder of men's bones: or else gather the dung of a dog, which for three
days has fed upon nothing but bones, and this you must dry to make into
powder* of (...) powder give unto him that is troubled with such Flux twice a
day in milk, wherein you shall have quenched many stones of the River, very
thoroughly heated in a very hot fire; continue this two or three days: or else
give to drink the distilled water of the great Burre: o^ the decoction of
shepherds Purse: or the distilled water of Woodb^nd: or else give to drink
the seed of Plantaine in powder: or the distilled water of the first buds of
the Oak: or the powder of Snayles burnt with the powder of Brier-berries, and
a little white Pepper and Galls: or of the Hearts and Goats horn burned: or
rather of the pizzle of a Ha^t prepared, as we have taught here above, in
setting down the remedies for the Pleurisy.

For to stay the flux of Blood, Flux of Blood.
drink a reasonable draught of the juice or decoction of dead Nettle: make
Clysters with the (...) of Planta^ne and Horse-taile: use the broth of
Coleworts ^odden v^rie tender: the juice of Pomegrants, and the substance it
self: Sallads of Plantaine and Sorrel: chaw oftentimes some Rubarbe.

To loosen the Belly, (...)
^ou must eat sweet Cherries, or Pea^hes, Figs, or Mulberries fasting: to s^p
the first broths of Coleworts, of Beets, of Mallows, or Lettuces, or of
Cich-pease without salt: to apply unto the stomach a Cataplasme made with
Honey, the gall of a Bull, and the roet of Sow-bread: or the leaves of Apples
of coloqu^^tida: to take a Suppositorie made of fat Bacon, or the stalk of a
Mallow or Beet.

To kill the worms Worms.
of little children, it is good to cause them to use preserved Rubarbe, or the
c^nserue of Peach flowers: to drink the distilled water of Gentian or the ^^ce
of C^trons, the juice of Mints or Basil, of Purcelane, Rue, or Wormwood, or
else to cause them to swallow, with a very small draught of Wormwood wine, of
the powder made of Worms, first dried and after burned on a fire-pan red hot*
and make it into ver^e ^ine powder: or of the powder of blessed Thistle, or of
Coralline, the weight of a French crown: also to apply unto the Navel a
cataplasme made of Wormwood, Tansie, and an Ox gall: and all this must be
done toward the later end of the Moon.

To stay the excessive pain of outward Hemorrhoids, Painet of the Hem^^(...).
you must make a Liniment of oil of Roses, wa^^ed in the water of Violets,
fresh Butter, oil of Linseed, the yolke of an egg, and a little wax: or else
to make a little cataplasme with the crumbs of a white loaf sleept in Cowes
milk, adding thereto two yolks of eggs, a little Saffron, and a little
Populeon. There may also a little Liniment be made with fresh butter and the
powder of Corke-tree burned. In the pain of the Hemorrhoids ther^ is nothing
more singular than the perfume made of shauings of Iuorie.

To stay the excessive flux of the Hemorrhoids, The flux of the Hemorrhoids.
it is a most singular remedy to drink a dram of red Coral, or of the
scumme of iron, with the water of Plantain, and also to make a fomentation of
the decoction of white Henbane: or in place of this, a Cataplasme made of the
powder of burnt Paper, or of the shauings of Lead, or of Bole Armoniack, with
the white of an egg, or of three Oyster shells finely poudred either raw or
burnt, and mixed with a little fresh butter.

For the stone in the Reins, The stone in the Reins.
you must drink often of the juice or water of the body of the Beech tree:
which water must be gathered in the Spring time, in as much as then the body
or the rind thereof being (...) or cut to the q^^cke, does yield a great
quantity of water, very singular for this purpose: The fruit of the Eglantin^
preserved before it be ripe, after the manner of Marmalate with Sugar, having
first taken the kernels from within, taken fasting to the end of the last
quarter, and first days of the Moon following, in drinking somewhat more than
a reasonable draught of white wine, or of the water of wild Tansie, or such
other, is very excellent therefore. He must also drink very often with white
wine the powder of the p^lling of Restharrow, or Buck-thorne: or of the gum
which grows round about the ri^des of Vines: or of the seed of Goose-gras^e
finely powdered: or to drink the distilled water of Radish roots and Nettle
roots, with a little Sugar: or the water of Broom* or of Dogs-grasse: or of
wild Tansie: the water or juice of Radish, wherein is dissolved the powder of
egge-shels burnt: or of the stones of Medlars: or of the eye of a Partridge: or
of the brain of a Pie: or of the inward skin of th^^ stomach of a Hen or
C^pon. Every man prayseth this decoction, whereof, Aetius makes mention in
his chapter of Sea-Holly: Take the roots of Sea-Holly (the pith taken out) and
make them very clean, steep them eight hours in Fountain water, after that
to boil them till the half of the water be consumed; in the end of the
boiling cast into the pot Licorice bruised: let this decoction cool at
leisure. And as for outward means, it is good to apply a Cataplasme made of
Pellitorie of the wall unto the reins, or else a Cataplasme made of the root
of Cypres and the leaves of Bell-flower boiled in wine. The best and most
sovereign of all the rest is to prepare a Bath, wherein have boiled the leaves
of water-Pa^sley, Mallows, Holihocks, March Violets, Pellitorie, flowers of
Broom and Camomill, and within the Bath, upon the reins, a bag full of
Branne and water-Parsley.

For the Colic, caused of Gravel, cause to boil the leaves and flowers of
Camomill in an equal quantity of water and white wine, to the wasting of the
third part, drink the decoction warm, suddenly the pain will be appeased.

For the difficulty of Urine, Difficulty of Urine.
drink the juice of Winter Cherries, or the decoction of Radish roots in white
wine, or the decoction of herb Patience, or of the Thistle, said to have an
hundred heads, or of Bell-flower, or of the white prickly Thistle, or of
Sperage, or of Dogs-grasse, or of Rest harrow: also apply upon the yard or
secret parts a Cataplasme or Liniment of Fleawort. Some hold it for a great
secret to drink white wine wherein has been brayed Sowes found in caves and
hollow places: or to make powder of the said Sowes dried, and so to give the
same to drink in white wine. Others do greatly esteem the distilled water of
the pillings of the root of Rest-harrow, first steeped in Malmesey.

For the stone in the Bladder, The stone in the Bladder.
it is a singular thing to drink the juice of Limons with white wine: or to
make a powder of the stones of Medlars, first washed in white wine and after
dried: of Broome-seed, Burnet-seed, and of the seed of Sperage, Holihockes,
Saxifrage, Melons, Pompions, Citruls, and of the herb good against pearls,
and to use these with white wine. There is an herb growing at the new Town
LeGuyard, called in French Crespinette, by those that dwell thereabouts, and of
this the young Lady of Villeneufue (sister to the late deceased Monsieur
Cardinal of Bellay) caused to be distilled a Water, which is singular against
the difficulty of Urine and the stone in the Bladder, as I my self have
proved diverse times. Some hold it also for a singular remedy to make a powder
of the stones of Sponges, or of the stone which is found in the head of
Cray-fishes, or of the shells of small Nuts, or of the gum of Cherrie trees,
and to take it with white Wine or the juice of Radishes: Or else the distilled
water of the stalks of Beans, red Cich-pease, and the seed of Holihock. The
which follows of Glass is a great secret, which being burned and quenched
seven times in the water of Saxifrage, and afterward made into a very fine
powder, and given with white wine unto the party troubled with gravel, does
break the stone in them in any part of the body. Another secret is that of
the shells of eggs which have brought forth Chickens, being brayed, brewed,
and drunk with white wine, which breaks the stone as well of the Reins as
of the Bladder.

For all such persons as piss in their bed whiles they be asleep, Pissing in
bed.
and cannot hold their urine, there is nothing better than to eat oftentimes
the lungs of a young Kid roasted: or to drink with wine the powder of the
brains or stones of a Hare; as also the powder of a Cowes bladder, or of a
Hogs, Sheep, or Goats bladder, or the powder made of the roots of Bistort, or
of Tormentill, with the juice of Plantaine, or with the milk of Sheep, or the
ashes of the flesh of an Hedgehog.

For the burning of the Urine, Hot urine.
let be taken of shell-Snayles and whites of eggs of each a pound, of the
great and small cold feeds of each half an ounce, hal^e a pound of the water
of Lettuce, four ounces of good Cassia, three ounces of Venice Turpentine,
powne that which may be powned, and let it all stand to mix together for the
space of a night, afterward distill them in a Limbecke in Mari^s bath: let this
water settle some time before that you use it; give thereof half an ounce
every morning, with a dram of Saccharum Rosatum, continue the use thereof as
long as you are able.

To make a woman fruitful which is barren, Barrenness in women.
let her drink four days after the purging of her natural course, the juice
of Sage, with a very little salt, and let her continue and go over this
course diverse times.

To stay the excessive flux of the flowers of Women, The men^^ruou^ flux.
they must drink, with the juice of Plantaine, the powder of the Cuttle bone,
or the bone of a Sheep foot burned, or the shells which Pilgrims bring home
after their pilgrimage to S. James, or of Coral, or of Hearts horn, or of the
shells of burnt eggs: or of twelve red grains of the seed of Pionie: or to
swallow with the yolke of an egg the powder of Tezill: or the scumme of iron,
first dipped in vinegar, and after made into fine powder. And as for outward
means, it is good to apply unto the Navel shell-Snayles well brayed, or the
red in the void space of the Nut, burnt, and powdered, and mingled with wine:
Make a Cataplasme of Soot, or of the scraping got from under the bottom of a
Caul^rton, mingle it with the white of an egg, or the juice of dead Nettle, or
white Mul^^^ne, and apply it unto the loins and bottom of the belly: Or to
fill a bag sufficient full of gros^e salt, to dip in fresh water newly drawn
out of the Well, and to apply it to the hollow of the Reins. Some make great
account of Cherry-tree gum infused in the juice of Plantaine, and cast into
the privy parts with small Si^ings: (...) to apply to the breasts the leaves
of Celandine.

For the white terms of Women, (...)
after that the body is purged, it is good to drink with the juice of
Plantaine, or the water of Purcelane, the powder of Amber, of Coral, or of
Bole Armoniake, or of Terra sigillata, or of Steel prepared, or of Sponge
burnt in a pot, or of the Sea-Snayle first burnt and afterward washed in wine.
And as for outward means, there must be made a Lee with ashes of Oak wood, or
of the Fig Tree, or of the Osier, in which there must be boiled the rind of
Pomegranats, G^^^s, pieces of Cork, leaves and roots of Bis^ort and of
Peruincle, beyond sea Roses, with a ver^e small quantity of Allome and Salt,
and of this to make a fomentation or a half bath.

For to cause women to have their terms, they must drink every morning two
ounces of the water of Mugwort, or of the decoction of Dogs-grasse, Cich-pease,
the seed of common or Roman Nigella, of the root of Smallage, Cinnamon, and
Saffron, the roots of Radish, of the Tasell, in which one may dissolve as much
Mirrhe as the quantity of a Bean. The juice of Sea-Holly, and of Tasell,
mixed with white wine, is singular in this case: A Bath also is very good, and
it may be p^epared with water of the River, in which shall have boiled Mugwort,
Mallows, Hol^hock, Camomill, Melilot, and other such like herbs, and within
the Bath to rub the hippes and thighs, drawing them downward, with a bag of
Mugwort, Celandine, Cheruile, Smallage, Betonie, seeds of Nigella, and other
such like* Some esteem it for a rare remedy for to take the weight of one or
two French crowns of the marrow of a Heart, to tie it within a little knot of
fine and clean linen, and to put the said knot into the woman her secret
place deep enough, but this to be after the body has been prepared and
purged.

For the suffocation of the Matrix, Suffocation of the Matrix.
the legs must be rubbed always drawing downward, and tying them hard, to
put the party thereby to great pain: put cupping-glasses upon the thighs,
rub the stomach, drawing downward from the pit thereof to the navel.
Furthermore, she must be made to smell unto things that stink and small
strong, as the feathers of Partridges or shoe soles burnt* and below, to apply
things that are very sweet smelling, as Cloves, Marierome, Amber, Time,
Lauander, Calaminth, Penny-ryall, Mugwort, Ciuer; the leaves of white Mulleine,
which has his stalk rising very high: you must also give her to drink the
quantity of a bean of Mithridate, dissolved in the water of Wormwood, or
fifteen red or black seeds of Pioni^, bruised and dissolved in wine. The only
remedy for this disease is, that if it fall out that the sick party be with
child, that then her husband dwell with her: for the remedies before spoken of
are dangerous for women with child. Sum do much esteem in this disease the
course following, that is, that the woman every week, to keep her self
free, should drink three spoonefuls of white wine, wherein has been boiled
and steept an ounce of the root of Brionie.

For the falling down of the Mother, The falling down of the Mother.
the party must be caused to vomit, to have her arms rubbed and bound hard
to move great pain, to set cupping-glasses upon her breasts, and to cause her
to smell unto sweet and odoriferous things; and below, to apply things that are
of a strong and stinking smell: There must be given her to drink the powder of
Hearts horn, or of dry Bay leaves with red wine that is very sharp: In like
manner, a Cataplasme made of Garlic stamped and dissolved in water: or
Nettles newly braied and applied unto the belly, causes the Matrix to return
into his place. Holihocks boiled with oil and the fat of Quails, made in
form of an empla^ster, and applied to the belly, are very profitable. Ashes
made of egg sh^lls, wherein Chickens have been hatched, mixed with Pitch, and
applied unto the belly, do put the Matrix again into the place. Some are of
opinion, that one leaf of Clot-burre, put under the sole of the woman's foot,
drawech down the Mother, and being applied unto the top of the head, does draw
it up on high.

For the inflammation of the Matrix, The Inflammation of the Matrix.
it is good to make an iniection with the juice of Plantaine, or of Nightshade,
or of Houseleeke, or to apply a Cataplasme made of Barley flower, the rinds of
Pomegranats, and the juice of Plantaine, Houseleeke, or Nightshade.

For the inflammation of a man's yard, The Inflammation of the yard.
the same Cataplasme will be very sovereign, if there be added unto it some
quantity of driered Roses: or else take the new dung of a Cow, fry it in a
pan with the flowers of Camomill, Brier, and Me^^lot, lay it to the cods, you
shall perceive the swelling to depart quickly.

To take away the stinking smell of the feet, The Stinking of the feet.
put within your shoes the scu^^me of iron.

For to make a woman fruitful that cannot conceive, take a Do great with
fawn, kill (...), and draw out of her belly the membrane wherein the fawn
ly^^h, turn the fawn out of the said membrane, and without washing of it,
dry it in the Oven, after the bread is drawn forth: being dried, make the
inner part and place where the fawn lay into powder: give of this powder three
mornings unto the woman, and that by and by after midnight, with three or four
spoonefuls of wine: (...) her not rise of four hours after, and advise her
that her husband may lie with her.

If a woman with child have accustomed to lie down before her time, To be
brought in bed before due time.
it is good that whiles she is with child she use, with the yolke of a new
egg, a powder made of the seed of Kermes, otherwise called Diers grain, and
of fine Frankincense, of each an equal part: or else that she use oftentimes
of the powder of an Ox pizzle, prepared in such sort as we have set down
among the remedies for the Pleurisy: or els^ that she wear continually upon
some one or other of her fingers a Diamond, for ^ Diamond has the virtue to
keep the infant in the mothers womb. Some say also, that the slough of an
Adder, dried and made into powder, and given with the (...) of bread, is
singular good for the staying of untimely birth. The Eagles stone is commended
for this above all other things, which being worn under the left ar^epit, or
hanged at the arm of the left side, does keep the infant, and hinders
untimely birth.

To bring to bed the woman which is in travail of child, Hard and painful
labor.
you must tie on the inside of her thigh not far from the place by which the
excrement of ordure passes, the Eagles stone, and so soon as the child is
borne, and the woman delivered, to take it away: for the same purpose to give
her the decoction of Mugwort, Rue, Ditta^e, and Pennyryall, or of the juice of
Parsley drawn with a little vinegar, or of white Wine, or Hypocras, wherein
has been dissolved of the powder of the Canes of Cassia, of Cinnamon, of the
stones of Dates, of the roots of Cypres, of the flowers of Camomill, of the
root of round Aristolochie or Birthwort, or the juice of Tota bona with white
wine, or else the leaves of Tota bona stamped, laid upon the secret pa^^^ and
round about. And when a woman is in travail of child, and loses all her
strength, it is good to give her bread steept in Hypocras, or a spoonefull of
the water called Claret water, The claret water.
which must be prepared in this sort: Lay to steep in half a pint of good
Aqua vitae, according to the measure of Paris, about three ounces of Cinna^on
well shaued, by the space of three days, in the end whereof let the said water
ru^ne through a clean linen cloth, and dissolve therein an ounce of fine
Sugar, after put thereto about the third part of old red Rose water, and let
all stand together in a bottle of glas^e to use when need requires. This water
is principally good for all the diseases of the Mother, as also for Fainting,
Swowning, weakness of the Stomach, difficulty of Breathing, of making
Water, and many others.

To cause the afterbirth The afterbirth.
to come forth, the remedies next above delivered are very good and profitable:
but above the rest, it is good to drink with white Wine, or Hippocras warm,
the powder of Beans, or the flowers of Saffron, or the flowers of Marigolds.

For the Throws which come after childbirth unto women, Throws of wom^n
after childbirth.
you must give to drink a spoonefull of the foresaid Claret water, or of the
water of Peach flowers, Nutmeg, Carabe, and Ambergrise: you must make a
Cataplasme to apply unto the belly with the yolks of eggs hard roasted, or
fried with oil of Nuts and Iasmines, putting thereto of the seeds of A^^^se
and Cummin powdered, the flower of Beans, fresh Butter, and oil of Rue and
Dill.

If the Matrix after childbirth be out of frame, it is good to apply unto the
belly a Cataplasme made of Cowes, Sheep, or Goats dung, adding thereto the
seeds of Cummin, Fennel, Anni^e, and Parsley, with a quantity of very good
wine: and for want of this Cataplasme, the belly may be covered all over with
the kawle of a newslaughtered Sheep or Goat: as also to have a dish of the
Plane tree, or a test of earth, and after you have rubbed the edges of the said
test or earthen drinking-pot with a head of Garlic, to apply it unto the
Navel.

For the Rupture, For the Rupture
otherwise called the falling of the guts down into the flank, it is good to
apply unto the place a Cataplasme made of the flower of Beans and the lees of
white Wine, or a Cataplasme made of the root of the great and small Comfrey,
and of stone-Pitch, with a little Masticke, or double linen clothes dipped in
the juice or liquor which comes out of the small fruit of the Elm, and upon
this Cataplasme to wear a Trusse. It is good also to drink, for the space of
nine days, a drink prepared of the juice of the roots of Salomons feale, and
female Fe^^^, the ^eave^ of Bugle and Sanicle, and this to the quantity of a
small draught: Or else (...) in the Oven, in a pot well luted, red Snayles,
make them into powder, and (...) of this powder for the space of fifteen
days, or longer if need be, with such (...) is made for little infants, or
with pottage, if they be past the Teat. For them (...) more dainty and
delicate, you shall distill the said Snayles in Mary's Bath, and (...) of the
distilled water to drink the same space of time: or else make a powder of
(...) moss of the black Thorn, drink of it with thick red wine the weight
of a (...) crown every morning; applying in the mean time a certain pap or
thick (...) substance, such as is to be had in the Paper-Mills, and tie upon
it a Trusse.

For pain in (...) feet and hands, Gout and ach in the hands.
boil a good handful of Mugwort in a sufficient quantity of (...) Olive,
unto the spending of the third part, make thereof an Ointment for the (...)
place: Give also to drink the weight of a French crown of the seeds of (...),
with the decoction of one of the herbs called Arthritica.

For the Sciatica, Sciatica.
you (...) to the grieved place a Cataplasme made of the crummes of Citizens
bread, (...) or boiled in Cow or Sheep milk, putting thereto two yolks of
eggs and a (...) little Saffron: otherwise there must be provided a Cataplasme
of the roots of (...) and Holyhocks, the leaves of March Violets and of
Mallows, the flowers of ^^^momill and Melilote, all boiled in the water-broth
of Tripes, after washed and wroug^^ together with yolks of eggs, flower of
Li^seed, Hogs grea^e, and oil of Camomill: (...) else, and more easily, you
must make a Cataplasme with Cowes dung, flower of Beane^, Branne, Wheat, and
Cummin seed, all beat and made into a mash with honied vinegar: it is true,
that if the grieved part do grow unto a whitish color, and be much puffed up,
it will be good to add unto the former Cataplasmes stone-Pitch and a little
Brimstone. It will be good also to draw the juice of Danewo^t, of Elder and
Iuie, and to boil them afterward with oil of Rue and Worms, and with a
little Wax to make a Limment. A Cataplasme made of the dung of an Ox or a Cow,
and wrapped in the leaves of the Vine or of Coleworts, and heated among the
embers. And in case you would draw out of the vttermos^ part, under the skin,
that which is settled in the inner places of the ioints, then apply this
Cataplasme made of the dung of Stock-doues or House-doues, an ounce, of Mustard
and Cresses seed of each two drammes, oil of old Tyles an ounce, mix all
these very well together.

For the shaking of the parts of the body, use a long time the decoction of
one of the herbs Arthriticae, called (...) and Sage: eat also oftentimes of
Pine Apples.

For Sinews oppressed, Sinews oppressed.
take the ripe seed of Danewort, put it in a violl half full, fill it up with
oil Olive, stop it very close, and let it boil four and twenty hours in a
Posnet full of hot water, and as often as the hot water shall be boiled away, you
must put other in place of it all the time of the four and twenty hours;
which being expired, take away the said violl of water, and set it in a
dunghill ten whole days. You may also make oil of Danewort for the same
purpose: fill an earthen vessel, well leeded to the half, with the juice of
the leaves of Danewort, and power thereupon so much of oil Olive; set this
vessel, well stopped with paste, in an Oven, after the bread is drawn; there
let it stand till the juice be wasted: keep this Oil for Sinews that are
cold and benumbed: Or more easily apply unto the place the dung of an Ox or a
Cow fried with strong vinegar or the oil of Acornes: or the gum of the wild
Peare-tree softened with Capons grea^e, or the oil of Linden or Iesamine tree.

For the prickings of Sinews, For the pricking of the sinews.
take Snayles with their shells, bruise them, and add thereto a little of the
flying dust that is to be gathered upon the walls of the Millhouse, and apply
it to the place pricked: or else rub it with the oil of Worms.

For Sinews that are pained, For the pains of the sinews.
take raw Worms of the earth, bray them and lay them hastily and with speed
unto the benumbed sinews. Or else infuse in the Sun the flowers of Elder in
the oil of Nuts, and rub therewith the pained sinew, (...) and chafe the fame
with the oil of Balsam.

For all other sorts of pains in the joints, Pains of the joints.
it is good to make an emplaister (...) juice of red Coleworts and Danewort,
the flower of Beans, flowers of (...) and Roses made in powder, and to apply
them unto the pained place. Other (...) in thin shauings the root of the
great Comfrey whiles it is yet green and (...) plucked up our of the earth,
spread that which you have shaued or scrap (...) a linen cloth in manner of a
Cataplasme, and apply it unto the pained. (...) Otherwise, take the roots and
leaves of Danewort, the leaves of Scabious* (...) Co^^frey, and wild Sage,
boil all together in wine, after let it pass (...) put thereto oil of Spike,
Aqua vitae, and the oil of Neats (...) take a very fat Goose pulled, and the
garbage taken clean out, after (...) her with (...) that are well liking, and
chopped very small with common (...) and roasted at a small fire, and look
what droppeth forth, let be reserved for (...) for the grieved place. Some
likewise apply for the pains of the ioints (...) whelps upon the pained
places. Galen says, That he was wont to softer (...) such hardness as is
wont to happen about the knees, by applying unto (...) Cheese all mouldie,
stamped with the broth wherein a salt Gammon of (...) has been boiled.

To take away the Swellings procured of Wind, Windy swellings.
you must take fried salt, and (...) it betwixt two Linnens upon the Swelling:
or apply a Cataplasme made of the (...) of white Wine, the branne of (...), and
new Ox dung.

For such Swellings as are (...), make a Cataplasme with the leaves and flowers
of Violets, Red pimples or swellings.
flowers of He^^ane, leaves of Nightshade, flowers of Camomill and Melilo^e,
all boiled in wine and water, strayned through a Searce, and applied unto the
aching place: Or else draw the juice of Houseleeke, with a little red Wine, and
the flower of Barley, make an emplayster for the place. The dung of Go^^^ has
power to wast, spend, and consume the hard Swellings, how hardly soever
resolved and wasted, especially the old hard Swellings about the Knees,
mingling the same with Barley flower and water and vinegar in form of a
Cataplasme.

To ripen an Impostume, To suppurate an Impostume.
apply unto it the dung of Goslings, which have (...) kept from meat three
whole days together, and after fed with the gobbers of a fresh E^^e: It is
good also to apply raw Wheat champed or chawed a long time: A Cataplasme made
of the leaves and roots of Mallows, Holihocks, Onions, Lillies, crum^ of white
bread, all ^od together, and after strayned through a Colander, adding thereto
the volke of an Egg and a little Saff^on: It is true, that if the A^ost^me be
very cold, there may be added to the decoction of the Cataplasme abouesaid the
roots of Elacampane, Danewort, Lil^^es, and Brionie, flowers of Camomill and
Melilot, O^ons, and Wheat Leauens. To ripen a Nail, otherwise called a Fello^
or Cats-haire, A nail, otherwise called a furuncle or cats-tayle.
take raw Wheat a long time chawed, or the flower of Wheat, the yolke of an
Egg, Honey, and Hogs grease, after heat them all together, and make a
plaster to lay to the sore: or else lay upon it Sheep dung steept in
vinegar, if in (...) you mind to soften and resolve it.

For Tetters Tetters.
you must use the juice of Purcelane, Celandine, Plantain, Nightsha^^e^ and
Limons: and if this medicine appear not to be strong enough, it will be good
to mix some red Tartar amongst, and with this composition to rub the spotted
places. Otherwise, infuse for the space of a whole day in strong white vinegar
the roo^ of herb Patience, cut into shiuers, rub the place where the Tetter
is with one of the shiuers three or four times a day: Or else boil ten
grains of Sublimate, and half a dram of Aloes, in equal quantity of
Plantaine and Nightshade water, unto the consumption of the one half: Or else
steep the powder of a Sla^e in very good vinegar with salt* and rub the place.
Otherwise, take the gum of Cherrie tr^e, a very little Brimstone, with twice
so much salt as Brimstone, steep all together in the strongest vinegar you can
get, and with this composition rub the spotted places: Or else rub the place
with your fasting spettle, or with the gu^^^ that grows about the Vine: but
before this, you must rub them with Salt Nitre, or else with the herb
Nicotiana, applying both dross and juice together unto the place.

To take away the marks and pits of the small pocks, The pits of the small
Pocks.
take an ounce of Oil, or of the flowers of S. John's wort, half an ounce of
Venice Turpentine, as much of Sperma coeti, melt it all upon the fire in a dish
of earth well glased; when it begins to boil and to swell upward, take it
from the fire, and let it cool, rub and chafe the places of black spots with
this ointment, and continue it so long, as till the pits be filled up.

For Ulcers and Apostemes which happen about the Nails, Ulcers about the
nails.
lay upon the soar a little worm which is found in the head of the Tasell
when it is dry.

For hard Swellings, For schirro^^ tumor^.
take Mallows, Holyhocks, the roots of Lillies, Pellitorie, the leaves of
white Mullein, seed of Line and Holyhocks, flowers of Camomill and Melilot, let
all be boiled in equal portions of water, wine, and vinegar; after pass them
through a Colander, adding thereto the flower of Barley and Beans, the powder
of Camomill and Roses, Hens grease, and fresh and new Butter: make a plaster
to lay to the soar. Likewise it shall be good to lay hot thereunto a
Cataplasme made of the dross of Bee-hiues dissolved in white wine and fried in
a Frying pan.

For such at are fallen from on high, Falls from on high.
give the weight of half a French crown of this powder with good wine,
Mummia, Tormentill, Rhaponticke, Sperma coeti, of each a dram: or else give
the weight of a French crown of the powder of the seed of Garden-Cresses, of
Mummia, of the seed of Houseleeke prepared, and Sugar Candy.

For a green wound, A green wound.
you must take Garden Baulme, the great and small Comfrey, and a little salt,
poune them all together, and apply them upon the wound. It is good also to drop
into the wound the juice of Nicotian, or for the more profitable use thereof to
apply both the dross, as also the juice thereof stamped, and to bind up the
wound by and by, and assure your self, that within three days it will be
recovered. Otherwise, take the Elm apples, the flowers of S. John's wort, and
of Rosemarie, the knops or buttons of Roses, put all together in a
glasse-bottle full of oil Olive, stop the bottle diligently, and set it to the
Sun so long as till all be so far consumed as that it may seem to be
rotten; afterward let it run through a linen cloth diverse times, and then
keep it in a violl to drop into wounds. The readiest and most sovereign
remedy is the juice of Nicotiana, and the dross or substance likewise, and
also the ointment made thereof, which we will handle hereafter, viz. in the
seventy six chapter of the second Book. This ointment is very singular: Take
Veruaine, Agrimoni^, Be^onie, and Pimpernell, of each a handful, wash them
diligently; and being washed, swing them well, stamp them together in a
mortar; being stamped, put them in an earthen vessel well glased, with seven
pints of white wine, to boil till half of it be consumed, the vessel in the
mean time being close covered, and the fire burning clear and softly: after
draw the vessel somewhat further from the fire, and let it cool unto the next
morning, then strain it out a little, warm the grosser parts, that it may so
be forced through some hairie strainer, and add thereto of white Pitch melted
by it self, and also strained through a hairie strainer, a pound, half a
pound of white Wax in grains, Masticke and Turpentine of each one ounce, make
thereof an ointment of good consistence. Likewise there is nothing more
singular than to take of Greek Pitch, Brimstone, and Olibanum equal parts, to
bray them together with the whites of eggs, and after you have stanched and
wiped away the blood in handsome sort, to join and bring together the edges of
the wound, and to apply it thereto with a linen cloth and a Cataplasme,
afterward to bind and roll it up with double linen clothes, and so to leave it
for certain days: or else boil the leaves of Carduus Benedictus and flower
of Wheat in Wine unto the form of an Ointment, wash the Ulcers twice a day
with Wine, afterward lay thereunto this Ointment: Or else wash the wound with
the decoction of Dent de lion: more easily thus; Take the dyrt which you find
under Buckets, Troughes, or such like, and apply it unto the cut, it closes it
up incontinently.

For all wounds, Old or new wounds.
as well old as new, ulcers, and whatsoever cuts in the flesh, take the leaves
of Plantaine, Spearewort, or small Plantaine, Mallows, All-good, of each a
handful, French Sage about four and twenty leaves; let all the foresaid
herbs be well picked* washed, and after stamped very well all together: this
done, take five quarts of old Swines grea^e, put thereinto a hot pestill, and
cause it to melt, then boil it with the said herbs, and when you see that
the liquor of the herbs i^ consumed, you shall strain it, and put thereunto
as much Frankincense as a Nut, green Wax, and Perrosine, of each as much as
two Nuts, melt them, that so they may all be brought unto the form of an
ointment, of which you shall make use for all sorts of wounds. Otherwise, take
Brimstone most ^inely powdered and searced, put it in a Glasse-vessell, and
power thereupon so much oil Olive as will do more then cover it by four or
five singers, set it out unto all the heat of the Sun you can for the space
of ten days, and stirring it about many times with a Spatull of clean and
fair wood, and keeping the said vessel close shut continually, to the end
there may not any dyrt fall thereinto. At the end of the ten days empty out
all the oil, by leaning the glass softly to the one side (seeing it has
extracted all the substance or essence of the Brimstone) into another
Glasse-bottell by the help of a funnell, and let not any of the dross or
residence go in withal: after which, you shall stop the bottell very
carefully, and at such times as you would use it, you shall dip Lint, white
linen Cloth, Cotton, or black Wool in it, and apply it unto the parts that
are hurt, whether by Ulcers or Cuts, as also unto Impostumes, and that so long,
as until they be cured: You may power in oil again the second time upon the
residence (left after the oil powered out, as beforesaid) and do as was done
before. Make account of these two later Remedies as of those which will not
fail you.

For the Boil called Anthrax, Carbunculus, The Carbuncle Anthrax, etc.
and other such pestilent tumors, see that you apply unto them Rue brui^ed and
mixed with very strong Leaven, Figs, Cantharides, Onions of the Land and Sea,
vnquencht Lime, Soap, gum Ammoniacke, and a little Treacle; for this
emplaster draws forth such kind of tumors: Or else take a Toad, dry her
either in the Sun or in the Oven, make her into powder, and put of this
powder upon the Carbuncle, and it will draw forth all the venom: Or else apply
unto the Carbuncle a Frog alive, and if she die, then another, and do^ this so
often as until that one do live, and so you shall draw out all the venom.

For ulcers coming of the Pocks, Ulcers of the Pocks.
and such other malign ones, take ten pints of water, quench therein hot
yrons so long as till the ten pints become but five, and in these five pints
infuse for the space of four and twenty hours a pound of vnquencht Lime,
after that strain the water, when it is strained, dissolve therein fifteen
grains of Verdegrease, and as much of Vitrioll, and twenty grains of
Camphire: this water is singular to mundifie, cleanse, and dry up Ulcers.
Otherwise, set to boil in a new earthen vessel very clear water, when it
begins to boil, put into it by and by vnsleckt Lime, and presently
thereupon power it out into another vessel all new, let it rest there so long,
as until (after it be scummed) it become clear, the Lime falling to the
bottom of the vessel in manner of pap; in the end you shall gather the water
swimming aloft, by leaning the vessel and letting the Lime abide unstirred in
the bottom: and this water thus gathered shall be reserved in a clean violl
or other vessel well stopped, that so it may serve for your use; in which,
being warm, dip a linen cloth, and apply it in stead of an emplaister unto
the Ulcer, and renew it often.

To draw out miraculously a Pellet, A wound with shot.
make a tent of a Quince, and for want of it, of Marmalate of Quinces only,
without any addition of Spices, or other things, anoint it with the oil of
eggs, and put it into the wound or hole made by the shot of the Pistol.

For inward wounds, Inward wounds
in which there can no tents be put, there must be drunk oftentimes the
decoction of Auens, and the outward wounds washed: or else take Mugwort, great
and small Comfrey, whole Betonie, Agrimonie, the roots of Rubia, otherwise
called the Diers herb, the roots of small Plantaine, otherwise called
Carpenters herb, Sage, the leaves of Brambles, Parsley, pricking Nettle,
Marigolds, Sanicle, Bugula, Mouse-eare, Burnet, Dendelion, Plantaine, the crops
of Hemp, female Fern, Buglosse, Gentian, Veruaine, Birds ^oong, ground Iuie,
water Germander, Catmint, herb Robert, Cinquefoile, Tansie, all the Capillar
herbs, of each one half handful; Damask Rai^ins their stones taken out,
Licorice, the seed and flowers of S. John's wort, the seed of blessed Thistle,
of each an ounce, the three cordial flowers, of each four ounces; all these
being thus carefully picked, and made clean, let be brayed very thoroughly,
after strained through a hairen strainer, with one pint of white wine: you must
cause him which i^ thrust through to drink of this drink a little draught
fasting, or one hour before he eat, and as much before his supper. If these
juices displease thee, in stead of braying, bruising, or stamping of the things
aforesaid, you may make a decoction in common water, adding in the end of the
decoction, white Wine, honey of Roses, and syrrup of dry Roses. In the mean
time the wound must be cleansed with white Wine warm, and there must be laid
upon it a leaf of red Coleworts warmed at the fire, and reasonably green: and
there must care be had to keep the wound from salt and thick meat, from
strong wine, great pain, and use of women.

To cause knobs to wast and go away in any part of the body whatsoever, Knots
or knobs.
take the oldest and most mouldre Cheese that you can find, knead it with broth
wherein there has boiled a piece of fat Bacon ^r Lard a long time, make
thereof a plaster to lay upon the place: or else stamp in vinegar Conchula
Indica with Myrrh, apply it to the place, and you shall find a marvelous
effect. Otherwise take nine pints of urine, wherein boil for a good while two
handfuls of Baulme and Dent de lion in a pot of Earth very close covered, and
that so long, as until all come to a pint, after strain out the herbs in
the liquor stray^ed out, put half a pound of Hogs grea^e very new and never
salted, four ounces of Aqua vitae, boil them all together the space of half
an hour, after put thereto the oil of Pike and Rosemarie, of each an ounce,
Quicksiluer the weight of two French crowns, mix them all together, and
stir them well with a Spatull, and by this means you shall make an ointment,
with which you shall use to chafe the members troubled with knots before the
fire.

For hair that is fallen by the disease called Tinea, The falling of the ha^re.
or otherwise: Rub the bare and bald place with a piece of dyed Cloth until it
bleed, afterward anoint it with an ointment made of Honey, oil of Linseed,
and the powder of small Flies, burnt upon a tyle red hot: or with Mise dung
brayed with honey: or with shells of Nuts burnt, powned and mixed with wine and
oil.

For ulcers Ulcers.
that are hard to be cured, gather with linen clothes spread upon the grass
before Sun rise in the month of May, the dew of the same month, afterward
wring out the said linen for to have the dew, which you shall boil and scum,
and in boiling dip therein diverse bolsters or plegers of fine linen, which you
shall apply unto these malign ulcers: afterward when you shall perceive that
these ulcers do not continue any longer so foul and filthy, and that they
begin somewhat to show to have fair flesh, boil in this dew water a little
Allome and Olibanum, and by this means you shall heal them thoroughly. Or else
make a powder of the raw or burnt shells of Oysters, or of the dung of a dog,
which has gnawed and fed upon nothing but bones for the space of three days*
after you have dried the same dung, and made it ready to apply unto the
ulcers, there is not any thing to be found that will more dry up the same: Or
else make a powder of a rotten post.

For Kibes on the heels, Kibes on the heels.
make powder of old shoe soles burned, and of them with oil of Roses anoint
the Kibes: or else lay unto the Kibes the r^nd of a Pomegranat boiled in wine.

For the blewrieslse coming of strokes, or otherwise, Black and blew spots
through blows.
steep in boiling water a cloth having salt tied within upon a knot, and with
this foment the bru^^^^ place.

To take away Warts Wart.
or brawnie tumors in the joints, rub them with the (...) of T^thymal, or
apply thereunto the powder of Sauine, or of Hermodactilis mixed with Oxymel
Squilliticum, or with the juice of Marigolds: The dung of Sheep wrought with
vinegar and made soft and applied does heal all hanging Warts.

For the Nolime tangere, Nolime tangere.
it is killed if that Nicotiana be applied thereunto, as we will further
declare in our second Book and 76 chapter.

To kill Crab-lice, Crab-lice.
make a decoction or Lee of the leaves of Wormwood, Aron, and N^t-tree in very
strong vinegar.

For all Burning Burning.
or swinging with fir^^, take the decoction of Radish, with the lee of
vnquencht Lime: or an Onion roasted under the embers, or oil of Nuts with
water: or the yolke of an egg dissolved in oil: or Hens dung tempered with
oil of Roses: or moss of the black Thorn, the finest that you can find,
dried in the Oven, or in the Sun, made into fine powder, and with the milk
of a woman which gives suck unto a boy, to make a Liniment to annoint the
places burned: or else take salt water or brine, dip therein a linen cloth,
and apply it unto the burning: or common Soap, with honey and butter: or the
juice of an Onion: or the oil of an Egg: or else dissolve Allome, Copperas,
the ^at of Glass, and a little Camphire in Fountain water and good vinegar,
power this water oftentimes from pot to pot, dip a linen cloth in the same
water warmed upon ashes, and apply it to the place: or else take two whites of
eggs, beat them together with oil of Nuts and Rose water, adding thereto the
remainder of such water as Quick lime has been quenched in, st^rre them all
yet once again well together, and afterward let them stand and settle.

For Ringwormes, Ringwormes.
Scabs, and all manner of sorts of Itchings, which happen in the hands, legs,
and other parts of the body, take the water of a Smiths Forge, and put a
handful of salt to melt therein: with this water, made warm, wash the place
where the Ringworme spreads; when the scab is dry, annoint it with the
cream of Cowes milk. Or else take of Venice Turpentine two parts, wash it
five or six times in fresh water, or in Rose water: after that it is thus well
washed, add unto it on^ part of new butter salted, the yolke of an egg, and
the juice of a sour Orange* make hereof a Liniment, and anoint the scabbie
places therewith before the fire. Or else for little children take the juice of
Nettles and Populeon, and make thereof a Liniment: Or else take Soot finely
powdered, mix it with strong vinegar, therewith you shall anoint the place,
having first rubbed it well, even to the raising of redness in the skin.

For the Canker, The Canker.
take honey of Roses, Roch Allome, salt and white wine, boil all together till
the ha^^e be consumed, and then strain it through a linen cloth, afterward
keep the water for to wash the Canker. Some do greatly allow and like of the
distilled water of Cowes dung newly made, to wash the places troubled with the
Canker.

For the falling of the hair, The Moth in the ha^re.
called the Moth, wash the head of the patient with Ox piss till the blood
come, and afterward cast upon it the powder of the white of Hens dung dried
in the O^en; or of fine Soot, mixed with strong vinegar.

To make any man's hair black: To make the ^a^^e black.
Take such quantity as you shall think good of Galls, powder them and put
them over the fire in an iron chasingdish, and let them continue there till
they become very black; then power upon them by little and little the oil of
Olives, always turning them to and fro, in such sort, as that they may drink
up all the oil, and after become dr^e again, insomuch, as that they being
taken from the fire, may be pouned very well: whereunto add of Vitriol,
Roscmarie, Sal gemm^, the dry earth whereof tyles are made, and Cloves, all
these being likewise made in powder. On the other side, boil in wine the ^ind
of the Walnut, and of the Pemgranat, and Allome, as much of the one as of the
other, so long as till the Wine become black as ^inke, strain this Wine, and
cast into it your powder: before you use it, scour your ^ead with some good
lee, and then having dried it again, afterward wash it with this Wine wherein
these drugs be, and then put on a coise, and so keep it for five or six hours
after; in the end wash it very well with water and wine, and dry it: the
hair will abide black for five or six months.

Against the biting of a man dog, The bit^^g of a mad dog.
give to eat the root of sweet Eglantine, ^oment the place with the urine of a
young infant, or with the gross part^ of the decoction of Rue, Figs, red
Coleworts, and salt mixed with honey and butter.

If the Husbandman, or any of his people, have been bitten with a Snake or
other Serpent, The bitings of Serpents.
let him drink presently an indifferent draught of the juice of the Ash tree
pressed out with white wine, and let him apply unto the bitten place, in manner
of a Cataplasme, the leaves out of which the juice was pressed: or let him drop
into the hole, made by the Snakes bi^ing, three or four drops of the milk of
the Fig Tree, or of Figs, or some Mustard seeds powned with vinegar: or
else take the leaves of white Mullein, Auens, red Goose-berrie bush, of each a
handful, boil them all in vinegar and urine of a man, a like much, unto the
consumption of the half: drink an indifferent draught of this decoction, and
foment the bitten place with the leaves.

If it fall out that a Snake or any other Serpent be crept into the Farmers
body, A Snake crept into the body.
or into the body of any of his servants, lying asleep with their mouths
open in the Meadows, Gardens, or other places, there is nothing more sovereign
to force the fame again out of such a body, than to take at the mouth, with a
Funnell, the smoke of a perfume made of some old shoe sole (for the Snake
detesteth such stinking favors above all other things) and to drink the
decoction of Veruaine made in white wine: A thing tried and approved.

If a man have swallowed down a Horse-leach Horse-leach^s.
in drinking water, you must give him fleas with strong vinegar.

If any Rat, The stinging of Spiders.
Spider, Fly, Waspe, Hornet, or other venomous Beast, by his sting or biting
have caused your flesh to rise, rub very gently the offended place with the
juice of Houseleeke, and incontinently the pain^ and swelling will cease: or
else rub the place, with your own spettle: or else put upon the stung place
the dung of a Cow or Ox very hot.

To kill Lice, Lice.
rub the place with the juice of Broo^e, mix it with the oil of Radish, or of
Iu^iper, or with the decoction of S^auesa^^: or else boil within an earthen
pot, well leaded, equal parts of Olibanum, and lard of Bacon, make them in
form of an Ointment, pass them through a S^arce, and keep it afterward to
rub the head withal, or any other place where Lice are.

(...) the danger ensuing of the eating of Mushromes, Mushromes eaten.
drink with honey and vinegar Hens dung brayed, and you shall within an
hour be healed of the heaviness and strangling fits of the stomach: or else
drink the lee made of the Vine branches with a little salt.

And for as much as in the most part of the diseases above named, and such
others, it is needful that there should some purgation be taken to cast out
the hurtful humors which gather in the body, the wise huswife may provide and
make this purgative following: Take Virgins honey one pound, Rubarbe, or Seen,
or Agarick, even of any one of them, or all three made into powder, four
ounces, mix this powder with the honey, and let it stand in the shadow sixty
days in a potwell covered* stir it every day, and take away the froth which
you shall find on the top of it: the honey will keep all the force of the
medicine, and will cast up in a scumme the substance thereof, in such sort, as
that still it will abide without mixture. To make this composition the more
pleasant, you may mix therewithal some one or other drug that is pleasant and
of a good relish. If you further desire to be instructed in diverse other
remedies which are readily and easily to be gotten, look in our Latin work
called Thesaurus (...) paratu facilis.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Kine and Calves.
FOr the better keeping of Kine, let the Huswife procure and cause (...) maids
to ouer-looke oftentimes and see that all things be well in the Cow-house; A
clean cow-house.
for there is nothing that does them so much good, and keep them so well in
health and good liking, their meat and ^odder excepted, as the clean and neat
keeping of their houses: let them rub them along the back, about the neck and
head, and no more, with a wispe of Straw hard wryth^^ together, and made
somewhat rough. At their coming from the Pasture, and in (...) morning after
they have been dressed, let them carefully fill up the holes that are in their
house floor, wherein their piss might stand and stink, and let them cast
Sand or Gravel upon the floor, that they may have the faster and surer
setting of the^^ feet. The putting of Ki^^ to the Bull
Let them not be put to the Bull before they be upon their third year, nor any
longer than unto their twelfth year: for if they be put too sooner than they
be grown up to their full strength and growth, they will bring forth Calves
half cast, small and little, weak and feeble. And again, if you go about to
continue the^^ bearing after twelve years, their Calves will not be so strong,
not of so comely a shape. Yet in our neighbor Countries, as great Britain,
and other places of (...) temperature, their Cattle will bear well till
sixteen or eighteen years of age, and some till twenty, The time of the
year^ fittest for Ki^^ to be put to the Bull.
but not generally. You shall lead them thereto throughout all the time of the
month of May, June, and July, when the grass does most flourish: and again,
about this time they are chiefly set to go a bulling, seeking for the Bull of
themselves, without being led unto him: And you shall know their inclination to
the taking of the Bul^ by their hoofes, if they be puffed up, or swollen, as
also by their continual lowing, and by their leaping upon the Bulls back. The
profit which rises by their taking of the Bull at this time is, for that they
will happen about ten months after (which is the just time of their going
with Calfe) to calue, and that being at such time as new grass does draw on,
it will be an occasion of greatly increasing their milk, and upon this
occasion also their Calves shall be a great deal the better fed. To the end
they may hold bulling the better, you must see that at such time they be kept
bare and lean, for so they will hold a great deal^ better: Sienes of a good
^ull.
On the contrary, a good Bull for breed must be fat, well set together, and
well meated, having for two months space before been fed with Barley and
F^^ches. He must also be chosen more long than high, of a red hair, large
betwixt the shoulders, strong legged, round trussed and bodied, broad breasted,
short (...), broad browed, fierce countenanced, terrible to fight, black eyes,
short horns, long tail, Feeding of Cattle.
and full of hair. But in England and other places they never use to feed
their horned Cattle with Corn, for they find it of small or no profit, Grass
or Hay being ever sufficient: and though in France the red color be ever most
preferred, yet as Serres also affirms, the black is fully as excellent: for
the red exceeds but (...) proving an extraordinary virtue in the milk, but
the black is ever the hardest, best flesht, best ^allowed, and has the
strongest hyde. And if it happen that the Cow refuse the Bull, or the Bull her,
they must be brought to have a desire the one to the other, by holding near
their nosthrils the tail of a Heart burned, or else using some other
composition, A C^w with Calf^.
whereof we will speak in the Treatise of Horses. During the time of their
going with Calfe, they must be kept from leaping of Ditches, as (...) from
leaping of Hedges or Bushes: and a little before the time that they do calue,
to feed them in the house, or yard adjoining to the house, and that with good
Prou^^der, or Blossoms, not milking them at all; for the milk that they have
then cannot be but naught, and becom^neth hard as a stone. When they have
calued, they may not be milked to make any Butter or Cheese, until two months
be past: after which tim^ you shall send them again to their pasture, not
suffering their Calves to suck them any longer, except it be at night when
they return from Pasture (so long as they feed upon fresh Prouander, which you
shall have in readiness for them) and in the mor^ing before you send them to
Pasture. In what state soever they be, you shall not let them drink above
twice a day in Summer, and once in Winter, and that not of River or Flood
water, but of some water which is wa^me, as Rain water, Fenne or Well water,
having been drawn a long time before, for Well water by reason of the
coldness might somewhat hurt them. The Cow would have a clear water, as the
Horse a troubled.
It is true that the Cow will not refuse any water that is without fault, so
that it be clear; for she loves clear water especially, as the Horse, on the
contrary, that which is puddly and troubled, being a sign of his goodness,
if so he ^umble the water with his foot before he drink. And as for ^ Calves
newly calued, you must leave them with good litter of fresh straw, until such
^ time as she have licked, cleansed, and wiped them, and for some five or six
days after: ^ for the being of the Cow with the Calfe does heat and settle the
Calfe. After such ^ time you shall put it by it self in some Shed, providing
it good Litter, and renewing ^ the same oftentimes, and thence you shall bring
them forth when you would have them suck, and carry them thither back again
so soon as they have sucked: And if you see, either that they will not suck,
or that being willing to suck, they can do nothing but offer to take the
paps, without sucking any thing; you shall look under the tongue The Barbs
under Calves (...).
if they have not the Barbes, which is a whit^sh fleshinesse growing under the
tongue, almost after the manner of the Pip: which (and if it be so) you shall
take away gently, without slaying the tongue, with little nipping Pincers,
washing the place afterward either with red Wine of it self, or with the
infusion of Salt and Garlic stamped together; for this disease will cause
them to languish unto death* by keeping them from sucking. Let the huswife also
be diligent in taking away the Lice that may breed upon Calves, Lice and Scabs
of Calves.
and make them languish and thrine nothing at all, as does also the Scab when
they have it: and this is to be known by their skins, if they become hard and
stiff after the manner of little ridges, and that stroaking your hand along,
you feel the skin hackt and rough like a File, and the hair staring and
standing upright. For the healing of such scabs, she shall rub them with Butter
or with Oil of the setlings of the Lamp all over the body where the scab is
seized. But as it is a great deal better to prevent diseases than to cure
them, the huswife shall cut off all entrance from these two annoyances, if she
cause to be rubd with the wispes of straw unbound her Calves twice a day: if
she suffer not their piss to stand in puddles under them: if she see that they
be kept with fresh Litter and dry, causing their dung to be carefully cast out
from among their Litter.

But to return to the keeping and ordering of Kine, Kine.
the huswife shall appoint times for the milking of them, as that they be milkt
evening and morning at a convenient hour, and when they be at red: That the
Milk be strained so soon as it is taken, and that Butte^ be chernd with
leisure, but not any loss: that the Cheese be well crasht, pressed, and freed
from their Whey; and especially, that her Pots, kneading Troughs, Strainers,
Slices, and Che^se presses, and other implements serving for the Dairie, be
kept neat and clean: and that none of her maids have any thing to do with
either the Butter or Cheese when they have their terms. In the morning before
going to field, she shall cause the Calves to be gelded, To g^ld the Calves.
and that before they be two years old, and not after: for Calves grow the
more when they are gelded in the time of their growth, because thereby their
bodies are made the more moist. When they are gelded, in respect of their pain
and grief there shall be given them Hay small shredded and mingled with Branne,
until they be come again to their former stomachs and appetites. They must
not be gelded either when it is very hot or cold, or in the old of the Moon.
Being more than three years old, they shall be put to the Neat-heard, to begin
to prepare them for the Draught: and likewise she shall deliver him her Ki^e
with Calfe, and those which after nine years do not bring forth any more
Calves, for yet they may serve to draw in the yoke.

Furthermore, she shall make much account evermore of the Cow The marks of a
good Cow*
which is of a mean stature, of a long body, a large flank, four or five
years old, of a party black color, or spotted with white and black, her
bag great and side, a great (...), broad betwixt the brows, a black eye,
and geat horns, not turning in one (...) another, nor yet short or small, but
bright, black, and of a wide and well-spread shape, her ear very hairie, a
narrow iaw, a thick and gross muzzle, wide (...), and sniuelly, little and
black lips, her hair glistering and thick set, her legs (...), her thighs
gross and thick, and her neck long and gross, her back large and broad,
her tail long even to the heel, her hoo^es short and even, a broad breast, a
great and gross brisket, and her dugges great and long. As concerning the
diseases of Calves and Kine, they shall be handled, as shall be said hereafter
in the Chapter of the Neat-heard.

The dung of a Cow made hot in the embers, being wrapped in certain (...)
leaves, or in the leaves of Colewort, and applied in form of a Cataplasme,
(...) appease the pain called Sciatica: being fried with vinegar, does ripen
the Fings evil: being fried in a Frying-panne with the flowers of Camomile,
Melilote, and Brambles, it diminishes the sw^lling of the Cods: applied very
hot upon the pl^ces troubled with the Dropsy, it cures them thoroughly: and
applied unto any place stung by Bees, Waspes, and Horne^s, it takes away all
the pain.

CHAP. XIIII.
The way to make green Cheese, Butter, and other sorts of Cheese.
SHe shall be careful, Milk:
as well for the feeding of her people, as also for the gayning of the penny,
diligently to set on work her daughters and maid servants about the good
ordering of the Milk of her Kine, in the making of the Butter and Cheese
thereof. And first as concerning Milk, she must not make any account of that
which comes from the Cow after she has new calued, to preserve and keep
it; for besides that it is naught both to make Butter and Cheese, it is also
very dangerous for to use: Like as we see, that mothers which nurse their
children, make no account of their first milk to give it (...) them; the
reasons whereof you may learn in our Book of the diseases of Women. After the
Milk is milked, The keeping of Milk.
you shall set it in a place where it may be warm, to the end it may be kept
the longer, and become the thicker in short time; in as much as Heat does
safeguard and thicken the Milk, as Cold does sour it and make it to tur^^ by
and by: and therefore to avoid this danger, it is good to boil it, and
thereupo^ to stir it much before you let it rest, if peradventure you be not
disposed to keep it three days or somewhat more. She shall know good Milk by
his whiteness, pleasant smell, Good Milk.
sweet taste, and reasonable thickness in substance, in such sort, as that
being dropped upon ones nail, it ^unneth not off presently, but stays there,
and abides round a good while. She shall not let her Milk be kept long, as
above a day in Summer, especially in Autumn and the Spring, in which seasons,
Milk, because of the heat and temperature of the time, would be spoiled and
presently turned: but as soon as she can, she shall gather her Cream, green
Cheese, Butter, pressed Cheese, Whay, and other commodities, which a good
huswife is wont to raise according to the time: although in Winter the Kine
yielding small store of Milk, as being then with Calfe, she may gather three
or four meals together, which will not so soon be spoiled by reason of the
coldness of the Winter, which makes the Milk to thick^^ presently. Likewise
at this time she shall gather but small store of Butter, but shall turn all
her Milk into Cheese. It is true, that seeing Cheese is not of so great price
in Winter, neither yet so good and dainty as in Summer, Spring time, and
Autumn, by reason of the grass, that therefore it shall be no great danger to
gather the Butter cleaner from the Cheese in Winter than at any other time.

She shall gather her Cream from the uppermost part of her milk presently
after that the milk is drawn from the Cow, and cooled a little: and with this
Cream, Cream.
to ^ake Creame-chee^e, ordinarily accustomed to be sold in Summer, to be used
at (...) of smaller account, or in the end of dinner and supper. The Italians
with ^uch Creame-cheese, or Pa^misan, do mix fine Sugar well powdered,
together with Rose water.

The milk curded and thickened without Runnet, will make little Cheeses, Fresh
or green Cheese.
which the Parisiens do call Ionches.

The Normans do boil milk with Garlic and Onions, and keep it in vessels
for their use, calling it Sour milk or Serate. Sour milk; or Serate.


The Whay Whay.
may serve for the feeding of the Hogs and Dogs, as also in the time of Dearth
for sustenance for the Family, if she boil it but a little.

For to make Butter, Butter.
she shall reserve the newest and fattest milk that she shall ^haue, whereof
she shall gather no cream: and she shall make account, of ten pounds of milk
to make two pounds and a half of Butter. To make this Butter, she shall beat
or cherne it a great while in Vessels made for the purpose, especially whiles
the times of greatest heat endure, seeing such heat is the cause that Butter
comes not, and is not made so soon as at other times. If she will make
account to sell it, she shall salt it, and put it in pots of earth, such as we
see brought to Paris from Britain, Normandy, and Fl^nders. The Butter of a
yellow color is the best; and that of a white color is the worst: but that
which is gathered in May, is better than either of the other.

As concerning the making of Cheese, The making of Cheese.
she shall choose the most gross and fat milk, being pure and newly drawn,
to make Cheese that shall keep a long time: and of such milk she shall gather
neither Butter nor Cream; but such as it comes from the Cow, such shall be
put in Vessels for to coagulate and turn to curds. The way to curdle it, To
curd the milk.
is to mingle therewith of the Runnet, of a Lamb, Kid, or Hare, or the flowers
of wild Thistle, or the seed of blessed Thistle, or the juice of the Fig Tree,
which comes out of the Tree when one cutteth the green bark thereof: or the
leaves and hoarinesse which grows at the small end of the Artichokes, or
Ginger, or the inner skin of a house-Hennes stomach, or the spawne eggs of a
Pike, and with these it is usual to make Cheese to be eaten in Lent: or the
black mutable Thistle, therefore called Chameleon niger. Let her beware of
casting in any the least quantity of vinegar, for one only drop of vinegar is
sufficient to hinder the turning of the milk into curds. But above all, the
best and most principallest Runnet The best runni^
is the small Cheeslep bag or stomach of a young Calfe, not above three
weeks or a month old, well washed, salted, cleansed, and seasoned with Cloves,
Mace, and a little Nutmeg, and so kept in a close pot with Bryne, and so used
according as occasion serves. The pot in which the milk is, must not be
without some quantity of heat for to keep it warm; and yet notwithstanding
it must not come near unto the fire, as it may not stand far off: And when
it is curded and gathered together, it must be put presently into slices,
tormes, or fats, for it is profitable that the Whay should run out, and
separate it self from the Curd. But chiefly, and above all other things, it
is required, that the maidens which shall meddle with the making of Cheese,
should be cleanly, f^t for the purpose, their sleeves from about their hands
and arms folded up, and above all, far from being troubled with their
terms. In like sort, the people of the Country of Auergnac, which make great
reckoning of their Cheese, do choose the young children that are but of
fourteen years of age, and those proper, neat, and handsomely trim^ed up,
not having scabbed or scur^e hands, neither yet of an intemperate heat: for
they think and persuade themselves, that such filthiness of the hands does
hinder the full curding and joining together of the Cheese, and so does make
them full of eyes.

If she determine to dry, Hard Cheese.
harden, and keep them long, she shall the more carefully look to the
strayning forth of the Whay and clear Milk, and after to set (...) in rows
upon (...), Lattises, or Cheese-heigh^^ fit for the same, and that withal it
be in a cellar, or in some dark and cool place: or else to take them up into
some high place, having store of air; provided always, that the Sun have
(...) power over the Cheese. She shall shift them every day until about the
fourth or fifth day, at which time they will begin to cast a slowre, as though
it were the flower of meal, and then she shall cast a little small salt upon
them. The next morning she shall turn the other side, and do the like
therewith: after she shall turn them every day; and, if need be, make them
clean on both sides and about the edges with a rebated knife made of purpose,
such a one as will not cut. After some time, when (...) knows that they are
somewhat dry, she shall put them in another place, as upon boords laid as it
were upon ladders: she shall cleanse and scrape them often, and keep her boords
clean also: and if by striving to keep them long, they become hard and
bitter, she shall cover them over in Gravel, or in Barley flower, or in
Cich-pease, or else she shall cover them with the leaves of Dragons, which
likewise do keep them from being eaten of Mites, and that they do not become
mouldie. And in case that worms do eat them, she shall take away this
vermin, and anoint them with oil of Linseed, or the drossie parts of the
same, which will preserve them singularly (...) or else she shall put them in
a great heap of Millet corn or Linseed, which will keep them fresh and cool
in the hotest times, and hot in the coldest times. And seeing the deepest point
of skill about Cheese, is to bestow them so as that they may best mellow, she
shall bring them together in the end, and put them in presses, the clothes
taken out, and set near the walls of cellars under the ground upon small
boord^, having moistened them before with oil Olive, or Linseed and vinegar
mixed together.

She shall judge that for good Cheese which is fat and heavy, The goodness of
Cheese.
the meat of it close and well compact, of color somewhat yellowish, sweet to
^ast, pleasant to smell, and nothing mouldie, neither yet full of mites or
worms, and which is made of pure Cowes milk, without mixing any sheep milk
therewith, for it makes the Chees^ less sauorie and more whitish: It is true
indeed, that it may be made to look yellow, some Saffron mixed therewithal, as
is usual amongst the inhabitants of Poictou. An old Cheese all mouldie, brayed
and mixed with the decoction of a salt gammon of Bacon, and applied in form of
a Cataplasme, does soften all the hard swelling^ of the knees.

CHAP. XV.
Of Hens.
AS concerning the ordering of Pullen, which is the chiefest thing that a good
Huswife is to regard, there must care be had that the Henne-house be every day
made clean, The Hen-house kept clean.
even so soon as the Pullen be out, and the dung p^t aside for the fatting of
the Meadows: Baskets for Hens to lay in.
The Baskets for them to lay in oftentimes shaken up, and refresht with new
straw and neasts, and their Pearches and Ladders scraped every week: Pearches
and ladders made clean and rubd down. Their d^^nking ^^ought kept clean.
The roof or upper part of the house shut in every night at Sunne-set for
fear of Fulmers, and opened every morning at Sunne-rise* Their Water-pots to
let them drink at, must be kept clean, and filled with clea^^ water every
day, and that twice in Winter, and thrice in Summer: Let their water be clear
always, least otherwise it cause them to have the Pip; which thing happens
as soon unto them of the filthiness of their water, as of the want of it: Let
her (...) to be cast out upon the dunghill oftentimes fresh straw right
ouer-against the Bar^^, Fresh straw on the dung ill.
where the Pullen use to scrabble; The dustin, of Pullen.
and near unto the same place let her cause to be put sand, To take away the
le^s of Hens ^aying.
dust, or ashes, to procure them the pleasure of dusting themselves in the
Sun, and pruning of their feathers: Let her cause to be removed far from
them the residence of wine or dross of the Press, of whatsoever fruits, and
from the place of their haunt, for such things keep them from laying. And it
further behooves her to have this care, as to see that throughout all the
Henne-house there be neither Lath broken, nor any place of the walls having any
Lome fallen either without or within, or any shee^ of Lead lifted up or raised,
Beasts to be provided against as enemies to poultrie.
thereby to prevent the danger of Ca^s, Foxes, Weasels, Poleca^s, Fulmers, and
other beasts, given to rauin abroad in the night: as also the Kite, Hen-harrow,
and Owl, which sometimes will not let to swap into the very Brood-house to
catch and carry away the Chickens.

And to the end you may not lose any of them, you must cut off the great
feathers of one wing from such as use oftentimes to fly over walls, that so
also by this means you may keep them out of your Gardens; for they would take
it up for a custom, and it would keep them from laying. And for a surer
prevention of the foresaid mischiefs, The wings of Cocks and Capons must not
be cut.
over and above that which has been said (for it is not good to clip the
wings of Cocks or Capons) you must fasten and set rows of thorn faggots upon
the tops of the walls of the said Gardens and all other places elsewhere.

The Brood-house The Brood-house.
shall be built aside from the Farme-place, far off from the lodging of the
chief Lord, because that such birds are loathsome, do foul every thing, and
spoil whatsoever household furniture: turned toward the East, from the Winter
and Northern quarter, near unto the Oven of the Kitchen, if it be possible,
to the end that the heat thereof, which helps them to lay, and the smoke
which is very wholesome for the Pullen, may reach even unto it.

It shall have a little window right upon the East, by which the Pullen may
come forth into the Court in the morning, and go in again at evening: it
shall be shut at night, to the end they may nestle themselves more safely from
the danger of such beasts as are apt to offer them wrong: without, and on the
side next the Court, they shall have pretty ladders, by which the Pullen may
fly up into the window, and into their house, to roust and rest themselves for
the night time. This Henne-house must be well laid with Lome, and smoothed both
within and without, to the end, that Cats, Fulmers, and Snakes, and other
dangerous beasts, may not come near unto the Pultrie: and that near unto this
Henne-house, in the midst of the Court* there be certain Trees or Arbors for
sour Grapes, to the end that Pullen may have shadow under it in Summer, and
that Chickens may have cover and defense against the Kite, the Owls, and other
such ravenous birds. It is not good that they should sleep upon the plain
floor, that so their ordure and dung may not hang unto their feet, for thus
they would grow to have pain in their feet, and to become gow^ie. For this
cause, you must set all along the Henne-house, a foot higher than the floor,
and two feet one from another, ^quare Pearches, not round, because that if they
should be round, the Pullen could not sit fast upon them. Right ouer-against
the Henne-house, and a little way off from it, you shall prepare a dunghill for
the benefit of the Pullen after this sort and manner: Cast a great deal of
earth into a great hole of purpose made for such an end, which you shall
besprinkle with the blood of Oxen and other beasts, killed only for the Hide;
afterward you shall cast a reasonable quantity of Oats upon the same, and you
shall turn the said earth the uppermost lowermost: in a small time there will
be engendered such a great quantity of worms, as that the Pullen shall have
picking work there for a long time; and the gras^e which shall stick there,
will correct the fat which they shall get by the worms which they have picked:
And when you shall see the provision of worms to fail, you may begin again
your watering of the earth with blood, and sowing of Oats thereupon, as at the
first. Some to have fa^ Capons, and of a pleasant flesh, when the Mulberries
are in season, do plant Mulberrie trees in their Courts: for Capons, and all
other manner of Fowls, which feed upon Mulberries, become marvelous fat, and
of an excellent taste and verdure.

To every dozen of Hens one good Cock is sufficient: howsoever those of
former days do allow one to every five; and he must not be of color white,
nor yet gray, but red, tawnie, or black; his body well compact, his crest or
comb very upright, red, thick, not notched, toothed or gasht with cuts, a
well raised neck and high, (...) pinions and flight of his wings great, his
ears great and very white, his bill (...), thick, and crooked, his eye
black, in a circle that is red, yellow, or azure; his (...) of a rose color,
standing of a white and red mixture; the feathers of his neck long, golden,
and changeable; his legs very scaly, thick, and short, his claws short and
fast; his spurs stiff and sharp; his tail upright, gros^e, thick, and
crooking backward over his head.

The taw^e or reddish Hen in like manner is the best, The marks of a good
Hen.
and that which has the feathers of her wings black, though she her self be
not altogether black: for the gray or black color is but little worth,
because they be hard to bring up, and sparingly given to lay eggs; and yet
moreover, they be small, always lean, unhealthful, and their flesh of small
rell^sh. The stature of the Hen must be indifferent, her head great, her
comb upright and very red, her body great and square, her neck thick, and
breast large. The dwarf or little Hens do lay oftener than the other, but
they are not so fit to be set on eggs to bring forth Chickens. The greater
Hens are not so given to lay: wherefore Hens of middle size are to be
preferred before the other, foreseen that they have large wings, and their
bodies thick set with feathers: and if they have five claws as the Cocks,
they are more wild, and not so tame as others. The Hen that has spurs, The
Hen with spurs.
spoyleth her eggs, hatcheth not so ordinarily, and sometimes eats the eggs
she sits on. The Hen which is given daintily to affect and feed upon the
grapes, The daint^e-mouthed Hen
being the thing that keeps her from laying, will be kept from seeking after
and eating of them, by giving her the (...) of the wild Vine; for this does
cause such a roughnes^e or edge in her as in those that have eaten sour
fruits. The Hen that is too fat, or which has the flux of the belly, lays
wind eggs. The young Hen is nothing skillful either to fit or to lead
Chickens: wherefore you must fat the Hen with spurs, and the Chauntres^e or
crowing Hen, and her that scratcheth and allureth the other Hens, by
clocking, a^ the Cock is wont to do; and that, by plucking first the greatest
feathers of her wings, and giving for to eat great store of Mille^, Barley, and
Paste, cut in gobbets, brui^ed Acornes, Bran mixed with pottage, the husks of
Rice, Pannickle, and Oats, or the crumbs of Wheat bread steept in the water of
Barley flower, and to keep her in a close place where she cannot stir, and to
pull the feathers of her head, thighs, and r^mpe. Such Hens thus fatted by
the hands of a man, may be recovered at any time of the year, but the fle^h is
not of ^o good relish as when they grow fat going abroad at their liberty:
which thing happens and falls out more commonly at one time of the year
than at another, the very right and natural season of their chief fatting
being in the months of January and February, for indeed in these months
Hens are nothing inferior unto Capons. The o^er-fat Hen.
The Hen that is too fat, shall be made lean by mixing of Fullers earth with
her water, and of the powder of a softened Brick in her meat. And if she have
a loose belly, you must give her for her first meat the white of an egg
roasted and beaten in a Mortar with the double quantity of Bulleis. And for
the mad Hen, The mad-brained Hen.
which breaks her eggs and eats them, you must cast Alablaster upon the
yolke of an egg, so long as till it be hard therewith, and so to make this to
serve (being fashioned like a shell) for her neast: or else to make an egg of
Alablaster or Fullers earth, A young Hen clocking.
and to put it in her neast, A young Hen good only to lay eggs.
and to leave her no more but that only egg^ after she has laid. An old Hen
is good to sit.
Unto a young Hen which falls to clocking, To take away a Hens desire to
sit.
you must take one of her small feathers, and thrust it through her nosthrils:
for it is not for a young Hen to do any thing but lay eggs, and for the old
to sit. Our Huswiues (in that point too severe and injurious) do pluck away
all their feathers from under their wings, even all over their bellies, and do
therewithal cast them into the water to cool^ their hea^ withal; or else they
keep them fa^ting four days together in a Chick^^ Cowpe. And if you be not
disposed to keep a Hen to brood, you must by and by, or within two days
after that she has brought forth her young, let her forth again to have the
company of Cocks, to the end she may forget them and begin again to lay^ and
therewithal to rub the pulled belly of a great and fat Capon, Capons to brood
and lead Chickens.
and one that is young, with stinging Nettles, and after to deliver him the
Chickens to brood and lead.

The Hen is subject to the spots of the eyes when she is old: The diseases of
old Hens.
to the rheum and distilling of watrie humors at her nosthrils, by having
taken cold, or having drunk frozen water, or at least such as was too cold, or
by reason of the Henne-house being left open in the night, or by having rousted
upon the trees in the open air, or finally by not having found the house open,
or some other covert to run under, in the time of rain: Unto the looseness
of the belly, when their meat is too thin, or when they have eaten some
herbs apt to work the same, or when the Henne-house has been open all
night: Unto the Pip The Hen Pip.
of the tongue, either for want of drink, or for drinking troubled and filthy
water: To fleas and vermin Fleas and vermin^ about Hens.
when they sit, or when they have not wherein to tumble and roll, or to make
themselves clean, or when their dung is let to continue a long time together
in the house: And to the bitings of venomous Beasts, which haunt the dunghill
and old walls, as the Scorpion, Snake, Spider, Shrew, Lizards, and New^es of
the wall.

For the scab and inflammation of the eyes, Physic for Hens.
you must bath them in the water of Purcelane, or in Woman's milk: and for the
spots, you must rub the eye with Sal Ammoniack, Cummin, and Honey, brayed
together in a Mortar, and that as much of the one as of the other, except you
have the skill to take them up, or to cause them to be taken and lifted up with
a needle.

For the rheum, For the rheum in Henn^s.
you must put a feather cross their nosthrils, and wa^me their water, and
sometimes chafe their feet, especially little and young Pulle^s, which are wont
to be wrapped in cloth a certain time for the same, or else in feathers, and
then put into a pot, and set in a warm Oven, or near unto some fire in some
fit and convenient place: And if the rheum or matter of the stuffing of their
nosthrils be settled in some place, as under the eyes, or toward their bill,
you must lance the impostume gently, and give passage for that to come forth
which is therein contained, and put in place a little brayed salt.

For the looseness of the belly, For the looseness of the belly in Hens.
some make them me^t of the husks of Barley steept in wine, and incorporated
with wax; and some do mingle with their water the decoction of a Pomegranate
or Quinces.

And if that Pullein be costiue, For costiue^esse in Hens.
especially the younger sort, they are provoked with a wild oat: and some use
to pull off the feathers of their rumpe, and upon the inside of their thighs,
to the end that their dung may not be long detained and kept within their
bodies, because that so it might stop the passage: and as for Hens, it is
sufficient to put honey into their water by themselves.

For the Pip, To take the Pip from H^nes*
some use to wash their bill with oil wherein has steept a cloue of Garlic:
and some make them to eat stauesacre amongst their meat: and for to cure the
younger sort, some put them in a sieue made to dress Fetches, or Darnell, and
perfume them with Pennyryall, Organie, Hysope, and Line: and some do hold the
head of the Pullet over the fume, the bill gaping: and in case of extremity,
to take it quite away from them, some do use to open their bill, draw out
their tongue very gently and softly, and after with their nail raise the
higher part, and draw down to the end, or lowest part thereof, the white which
is seen to grow upon the top of the tongue; and after it is raised up and
rooted out, without any breaking of skin, they rub the tongue with spettle, or
with a little vinegar, or else they touch it with a bruised cloue of Garlic.

For fleas and vermin, Against Fleas and Vermin.
they must be washed in wine wherein has been boiled Cummin and S^auesacre,
or else in water wherein have boiled wild Lupines.

Against the biting of venomous Beasts, Against the ^itings of venomous Beasts.
you must annoi^ the place with oil of Scorpion^, and apply upon it some
Mithridate; and further, cast some small quantity of ^reacle into their
water-pot, and cause them to drink.

For the danger of Beasts, Against Beasts that eat Pullein.
especially of Cats and Fulmers, which come in the night time unto the
Henne-house to eat the Hens and eggs, old Writers do give counsel to cast
at the entry of the door, and to scatter thereabouts, bunches of Rue, as also
to put some tender sprouts of the same under the wings of the foul: or else to
besme^^^ about the walls of the Henne-house, and round about the window, the
gall of a Ca^ or of a Fox.

Furthermore, to keep Pulleine from Foxes, Against Foxes.
that they do not eat them, it is good now and then to mingle amongst their
meat the flesh of a Fox sodden and shret into very small pieces: for, as some
say, their flesh does keep and retain a certain smell thereof, which is the
cause that Foxes dare not come near unto them.

Hens begin to lay in February and March, The laying of Hens.
and some of them in those months being part of their first year. They which
begin to lay at a year and a half, or (...) two years, are better to be
liked: and then they must be very well fed, and that some times with Oats and
Fenugreeke for to heat them. And if you be desirous that they should lay great
eggs (for commonly the fattest Hens lay the smallest eggs) (...) and temper
Fullers earth among their meat: or else put powned Brick among Brain, and
temper them together with a little wine and water, and make them an ordinary
meat thereof: or else make them all their meat of Barley, half boiled with
Fetches and Mille^: or else perfume them in the night with Brimstone, for this
will keep them sound also: if you give unto them young Nettles chopped and
boiled with Branne, they will lay great store of eggs.

They leave laying about the third of November, To have eggs all Winter time.
which is at such time as the cold begins: but if upon curiosity you would
keep by themselves some of the fairest to lay eggs all Winter long, you must
feed them with tosted bread steept from evening to morning, and give them to
their breakfast: and for their meat in the day time and at night to cast them
some little quantity of Oats, Barley, or Wheas, which does warm them: or
some Mustard seed, which above all other things causes Hens to lay eggs
good store, that is to say, in the sharp cold times of Winter; which thing you
shall prove very true by experience, if you make trial of it: or else to seed
them with Earth-wormes, which will also cause them to lay eggs in great
number. You must not let them sit presently after their first year of laying*
and when they are past three years old, you must eat them. You must also
dispatch and make away with those that are barren and lay not at all: and as
for those that do lay very much, you must change their Neasts often, and mark
their eggs, to set them in time, if it be possible. When they are casting off
their feathers, otherwise called of the common people moulting, you must not
suffer them to go out of the place whereinto you have shut them, except it be
to refresh them when it is very fair, and then to keep them that the Eagle
and Kite do not fall upon them.

It is usual to set Hens the second year of their laying, The time to set
Hens.
and so the third and fourth: and so let any set many Hens at one time, and
under their straw some pieces of iron, for fear it should thunder, or else
some Bay leaves, or the heads of Garlic, or else some green grass, for some
say that this is good against the Pip and the monstrous fruit. They are put
there in the growth of the Moon, after the twelfth day of the new Moon until
the foureteenth, says Florentine; and Columella says, from the tenth unto the
fifteenth, to the end that the Hens may hatch in the next new Moon, for to
that end they stand not in need of any more days than one and twenty. And the
Neasts of these Hens must be made in the bottom of a Tun or Pipe, to the
end that when they come off they cause not any thing to fall or roll. Some
perfume the straw that they are to sit upon, before they lay the eggs therein,
with Brimstone, to keep the Hen for hatching before her time. And you shall
set under her the eggs that you have marked, and of those the fairest and
newest, and if it be possible, those of her own: And look that they have
been laid since the seventh of February, and before the two and twentieth of
September: for such as are laid at any other time, are nothing worth, no more
than those which were first laid, or yet those which were laid by the Hen
without the help of the Cock: and there must alwaie^s care be had that they be
odd, that is to say, in January fifteen, in March nineteen, and after April
one and twenty. The greatest part of the inhabitants of Lions do admit of no
other number than three and twenty. After the second of October they set not
any more, neither indeed ought they, if it be not in Ouens, according to the
use of the inhabitants of Maliha, Ouens to set eggs in.
and some of those of Beauceron: But Hens are too much punished and put to
pain to breed and bring up Chickens in Winter. As also there is a common
opinion received, That after mid-Iune Hens are small worth, and cannot
encrea^e so rightly; and well to the purpose.

If curiosity draw you to set eggs under Hens which be not their own, To
set eggs of other birds under Hens.
as those of the Goose, Peacocke, or Indian Hen, or else of Ducks, then let
them be put under the Hen some seven or nine days before, and after add
thereto of her own some such odd number, as has been spoken of before: But
and if they be Fesants eggs, you need not to set the Hen any sooner upon
them, then and if they were her own; for they require no more time to be
hatched in: To have Henne-birds or Cock-birds.
And if you would have them all Henne-birds, then set such eggs as are more
round and blunt, for the long and sharpe-pointed ones are commonly Cock-birds.

Some are careful not to put one after another into the Neast, A Ceremony
observed in setting of eggs.
but set them in rows in a Wooden Platter, and thence let themslide down
into the Neast very softly. And care must be had, that neither Cocks, nor any
other Hens, may go in to sit upon them: and to that end twice every day to
set meat and drink so near unto the Hen, The Hens meat and drinks must be
set within the thing she siteth in.
as that she need not rise for to feed her self; for if but for her meat she
once cast off her care of them, it will be much ado to get her to return unto
them again, if she be not a free and very kind Hen. If the Hen have small
care to return unto her eggs, to sit upon them equally, it will be good
sometimes to turn them over softly when she shall be from her Neast.

There are some women that cannot stay to the end of the Hatching: The
impatiencie of women.
but about the fourth day after the setting of the Hen, they will be heauing
every one of them up one after one to look upon in the clear Sunshine,
and if they see not bloody streams or threads within them, they cast them
out, and put under others in their places. And in like manner, at the one and
twentieth day, if they find that she stays from hatching, they take off the
Hen. But good sitting Hens will not return any more to their Neasts, after
that the eggs have been touched. Likewise the good Huswife says, That as for
the eggs which are under the Hen, they ought not to be touched till they be
hatched. Likewise they must be well chosen and viewed in the Sun betwixt both
her hands before that they be put under the Hen. To try the eggs that must
be set.
Such as do any thing doubt that the eggs are not all good, and that the
Chickens cannot come forth by reason of the hardness of the shell, must not
fail to bath them about the eighteenth day in a hollow dish and warm water,
and to take away such as swim above the water, putting the rest under the Hen
again. But you must not force the Hen to rise off the Neast in your thus
doing.

You shall greatly pleasure the Hen, if when the Chickens begin to chirpe,
and there be found some which will not let the Chicken come forth, by reason of
the hardness of the shell, that then you help her to break the same:
howsoever indeed this is the part of a good conditioned Hen, as also to fly
at your face if you come near to her, after she has once heard them cheap or
chirpe under her.

The little Chickens, The Hen Pip.
newly hatched, must be put under a Sieue, and lightly perfumed with Rosemarie,
for to keep them from the Pip: and for the space of two days you must not
give them any thing to eat, but put them under some Hen that has not many,
and which is not either of Partridge color, or wild and untamed, that thereby
they may be kept warm whiles the other are in hatching: or which is better, to
put them to follow some Capon so soon as they be hatched, rather than any
Hen; for by that means they will be better defended both from Cold and
ravenous Birds, as also better fed: besides that, hereby the Hen will be the
fitter to fall to laying of eggs again. It is true indeed, that there must
choice be made of a ^ound and courageous Capon, to pluck away his feathers
from under his belly, and to nettle him with the strongest and most stinging
Nettles that you can get, and after to make him drunk with bread steeped in
wine, and to put him under a basket made of Osiers, with his brood of Chickens,
and so leave him these some time* to the end he may fall in love with them. So
soon as he shall be at liberty, he will bear them up, keep them, lead
them, and become a more foolish, doting, or true lover of them, than the Hen
her self would have been: Howbeit, the natural dame is very careful, and
given to keep them under her wings very wisely, without doing them any manner
of harm or hurt. When as therefore they be two day^^ old, you must crumble
them some soft Bread and Cheese, or else some Barley meal, and Garden Cresses,
softened and infused in wine and water, with a few of the leau^^ of Leekes
chopped very small, and a little sodden, and this will be good for them
against Rheumes and the Pip: And after this time, for the space of fifteen
days, they must be kept under a Cowpe with the Hen or Capon: and then at the
end of those days to let them run about both leader and followers, giving
them still the same nourishment to feed upon. And if you have many sitting
Hens that have hatched at one time, give and put the Chickens of the one unto
another of the eldest and most used to lead, or else to a Capon, as has been
said, and let the younger Hens return again to the Cock: but see that you
put not above five and twenty or thirty unto any one Hen, because she will
not be able to cover or brood above that number. Again, there must good care
be had, that the Hen which le^deth them be not cursed and brutish, that so she
may not hurt them as she is scratching, or set them in a heat by flying;
neither yet that she be given to much climbing, or gadding into such places as
her little ones cannot follow her into. Wherefore it shall be good not to
suffer them to go so soon to the Courtyard, but rather, for the space of
forty days, to keep them that they go not from the place where they were
hatched. You must likewise beware that the Snake do not breath upon or hiss
at them: for the smell of such breath is so pestilent unto them, as that it
generally kills them all. The remedy is, to burn oftentimes, near unto
their Cowpe, Hart^-horne, Galbanum, or Women's hair, for the fume or smoke of
these does drive them away.

It is a pain to go about to hatch Chickens without the heat of the Hen: To
hatch Chickens without the heat of the Hen.
and although the thing may be done, yet it is not so certain nor so
profitable. They are set on a row, the sharp pointed end upward, in an Oven
very meanly warm, and upon warm Hens dung, which must be renewed every
six days; and over and under them thus set, some do put bags of Feathers,
and they must be stirred now and then: after the eighteenth day, they must be
bathed in warm water; and the one and twentieth, they must be helped to break
the shell. Again, it may be done otherwise: The same day that you set a Hen
(to the end that you may the better remember, because it is not so easy to
number the days as to tell the eggs) you may take as many eggs as you have
set, and put them upon bags full of Hens dung (well dried, sifted, and
compassed about with Down, or such soft Feathers as are on the inside of the
thighs) and made after the manner of Neasts. And again, others do make a bed
of the said Down upon the bags, and upon this bed they rank^ their eggs, as
has been said, and after covering them with other Down and bags above, in
such sort, as that the Down and bags lie close round about, and every where
touching the eggs: which done, after three or four days, they must be ^urned
once every day, and that so softly and nimbly, as that they may not hit one
upon another: And at the twentieth day (being such time as the Hens begin to
pick the egge-shells) you must help to make way for this your brood to come
forth, and after put them to some Hen that has but a few. But there is
nothing beyond and besides natural inclination and disposition to be attempted
in any thing.

The Hen will sit all Winter as well as in Summer, if she have meat made of
Branne, mixed with the leaves and seed of dry Nettles.

You must make choice of such eggs as are of black Pullets, Y^ know a good
egg.
as much as are more wholesome, dainty, full, and substantial than those of
other Hens, by how much they want of being so old: let it not be above two
days old, let it be white and long, according to the common verse, The egg is
good, and for delight,
That's long and new, and white in sight.


To know if the egg be new, you must make such trial as we have set down to
be used, to prove and know such as are good to be set.

The huswife that makes account to sell eggs, How eggs may be kept in Winter
and Summer.
must in Winter keep them warm upon straw, and well covered; and in Summer
cool in Bran, according to the advice of old Writers: but (be it spoken under
correction) I am quite of a contrary mind; for the Straw is cool, and the
Bran hot: Add further, that eggs kept in Bran in Summer do corrupt the
sooner. They which do cover and powder them with salt, or lay them in brine,
do impair them, and leave them not whole and full, which will be a hinderance
in the sale of them: and there is no doubt but that the egg does take some bad
relish also by that means. The Cellar is a good place to keep them in both
Winter and Summer.

I do not intend here to make any discourse, which of the two was first made,
the Egg or the Hen: Look for the deciding of this curious question in the
end of Macrobius, and in Plutarch his Opuscula: And you shall learn a great
deal better of Aristotle and Pliny, than of Hippocrates, how the Chicken is
made within the egg of the white, and nourished by the yolke, seeing that the
yolke is of more easy digestion than the white.

As concerning the cutting of Cock-Chickens, To g^ld Cockreld.
it must be done shortly after that their dam has forsaken them, and that they
run not chirping after her, but begin to crow and to fall in love with Pullets;
for if they escape the first year and half, then there is no order to be taken
with them: and you must take the best bodied, and those which are best thriuen
and set with feathers, and yet not grown to that full perfection and natural
growth of feathers which Cocks are garnished withal: for after you have made
choice of such as shall serve for the benefit and leading of your Hens, to
keep them, as those which are the best made, and most bold, you must cut the
other, for to feed and fat either in the Cowpe or in the Chaffe-house.

Some men (as for example at Man's and in Bretaigne) do put out their eyes, To
fat Capons.
as they do unto Gossings, and give meat of corn half boiled, capons of
Means and Bretaigne.
and of paste well crushed and braked, and made into gobbets, and thus they
become fat within forty days at the most: but they must be well looked to,
and have all their feathers pulled from about their heads, to the end to keep
them from vermin.

As concerning other particulars, of the Hen, of the Egg and of the
Medicines which the Husbandman may draw from them for the good of his health:

The Hen will hatch Chickens of diverse colors, Chickens of diverse colors.
if ^hee sit upon eggs drawn with variable and diverse or painted colors: as
also she will hatch Pullets of very pleasant color to behold, if you make
her tread by male Pigeons, or Partridges, or Feasants. To be brief, you shall
have Pullets, Pigeons, Feasants, and such other kinds of Fowls of diverse
colors, if you provide above, beneath, and on every side of their Cowpes, or
other place where they make their abode, places of receipt and couertures, of
such color as you shall wish them to be of.

Hens will lay great eggs, Great eggs.
if you pound Bricks, and mix them with Bran and wine, bray them all very
well, and give them to the Hens to eat: or else make a fine powder of Brick,
mix it with Barley Bran, and give it them to eat. Some for the very same purpose
do mollify the Fullers earth that is red, and mix it among the Hens meat.

If by the space of four days, To make eggs soft.
or seven at the most, you steep an egg in very strong vinegar, you shall so
soften the shell, as that the egg may easily be so handled as that you may
draw it through any sort of ring that you shall wear upon your singer, and
thrust it into such a Violl as you your self would wish to have it put in:
likewise you shall bring it to his former shape, if you steep it in cool
water. In like manner, an egg steept in Aqua vitae for some space of time,
does quite wast and spend it self.

If you would keep eggs long, How to keep eggs.
that they should not break, set them so orderly in baskets, as that they may
stand right up, and that the end which is sharpe-pointed may be upward, and by
this means a man may carry such a burden of them as shall be laid upon him,
without breaking any of them. Likewise this is a thing very true and well
approved, that an egg has so firm and strong a frame, as that no man, be he
never so strong, is able to break it betwixt the palms of his hands, being
taken and holden long-waies.

It has been observed of a long time, What eggs will keep best.
that the eggs laid after the new of the Moon in the month of August, or in
the wane of the Moon in the month of November, as those likewise which are
laid on the day of the Nativity, or on the day of the Ascension, are lasting
and durable, and not easily corrupted. Whereof there cannot be devised any
other reason, than that in some of them the shell is made hard, and not to be
pierced through of the air by the coldness of the time: and in the other
there is a most quick exhaling and expending of that which might be corrupted
within the egg, by the heat of the tune and season then being.

Some find within the stomach of a Capon a stone, The stone in a Capons
stomach.
of the bigness of a Bean, which makes a man strong and lusty unto the act
of carnal copulation; and withal, makes him loving, favorable, and gracious
amongst women.

Some hold it for an undoubted truth, To roast an egg without any fire.
that for want of fire an egg may be roasted, being turned and whirled about a
long time in a sling.

An egg will take any form of character that you will, An egg written upon.
on the inside thereof, if you write upon the shell with ink made of Galls,
Allome, and Vinegar, and after that such writing is dried in the Sun, put the
egg in brine that is very strong, and after boil it and take away the shell,
and there you shall find the writing.

The shell of the egg emptied all out, An egg lifted up into the air.
and filled with May dew, and laid forth afterward in the Sunne-thine at noone
day, is easily lifted up into the air without the aid or assistance of any
other thing.

An egg armed with thread, and put into the midst of a hot burning fire,
keeps the thread from burning at all.

A Hen slit in two, The applying of a Hen to draw forth venom.
and applied all hot unto the bitings of venomous beasts, draws out the
venime thereof: or otherwise, if you take and pluck the fundament of any
living foul very bare, and apply it to the parts offended by the stinging of
a Snake, or to the Carbuncles and Buboes rising of the infection, does the
like. And this shows, that a Hen has a natural contrariety against
poison. And this may further be known, because that Hens do eat venomous
things, as Toades, Vipers, Snakes, Aspes, and other Serpents, without their
taking of any harm thereby.

The inward membrane of the Hens stomach or maw, The innermost skin of the
Hens stomach, against the flux of the be^^y and gravel.
as also of a Capons, dried and powdered, is a sovereign thing against the flux
of the belly, gravel in the reins, and difficulty to make water.

The broth which is made of a Hen, or old Cock, is good to loosen the
belly: and yet more effectually, if one stuff a Hen with Mercury,
Germander, wild Saffron, The broth of a Hen good to loosen the belly.
and such other herbs. Also the broth of a Hen or Cock is singular against
every disease, if she be stuffed with herbs appropriate and fit for the cure
of the said diseases.

The stones of a Capon, The stones of a Capon.
nourished and fed with meat steeped in milk, are sovereign for the speedy
restoring of them which are worn away and consumed by continuance of long
sickness.

The fat of a Hen washed in Rose water, The fat of a Hen.
is good for the chops and clifts in the lips, as also for those which happen
in the hands by reason of Winter cold.

The gall of a Hen or Capon dropped into the eye, The gall of a Hen.
does take away the spots of the eyes, if you mix it with the water of
Eyebright.

The dung of a Hen dried and finely powdered, Henne-dung.
and applied to the eyes which have lost their hair, causes the same to come
again, if you mix it with honey, or oil of Linseed: If it be tempered with
oil of Roses, and applied, it is good against burnings: being brayed with
vinegar and honey, it cures within an hour such as are near strangled by
eating of Mushromes, for it makes them to vomit a thick and flegmatike
humor. A Physician in Galens time did cure all manner of old Collickes, giving
the sick to drink of this dung with Hypocras made of honey and wine.

A hard roasted egg eaten with vinegar stays the flux of the belly, A hard
roasted egg.
if you mix with it the powder of Hearts horn.

A Cataplasme made of the yolke and white of an egg well beaten with the juice
or water of Plantaine and Nightshade, The yolke and white of an egg.
applied unto burnings, does quench and extinguish them.

The white of an egg beaten, The white of an egg.
and with the powder of Frankincense, Mastick, and Galls applied unto the
brows, does stay the bleeding at the nose.

The yolke of an egg swallowed alone, The yolke of an egg.
stays the Cough, and such other distillations as fall down upon the lungs
and other parts of the breast. The yolke of an egg, which is laid in the full
of the Moon, does cleanse and take away all manner of spots appearing in the
face. The thin membrane or skin which is on the inside of the egge-shell dried,
finely poudred and mixed with the white of the egg, does heal the clifts of
the lips. The egge-shell made into ashes, and drunk with wine, does stay the
spetting of blood, and is good to whiten and cleanse the teeth, to comfort and
incarnate the gummes. The egge-shels, out of which there have come Chickens,
being poudred and mixed with white wine, do break as well the stone of the
reins as of the bladder. The white of the egg mixed with vnquencht Lime, the
shell of an egg burnt to ashes, old Tyle well poudred, and Bitumen, makes a
Cement very excellent to glue and join together again the broken parts and
pieces of Glasses. An egg spread upon wood, or any kind of garment, does keep
the same from the burning of the fire.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Geese.
THe Country Farm being for the most part unprovided of the bene^^ts and
easements of water, especially running streams, is not so fit to breed and
nourish Geese: except for private commodities sake it fall out, that the Farmer
do make him some Fish Ponds or standing Lakes of his own, Geese love to bath
and tumble themselves in the water.
and at his own proper costs and charges: For the Goose, as well as the Ducke,
does love to swim, and to cool, plunge, and tumble her self every day;
neither do they tread almost any where else but in the water. There is great
profit, and there is great loss also thereof: profit, because the charge of
keeping or feeding them is not so costly, The Goose is a bird of great profit
and disprofit.
as their watch and ward is good and gainefull; being indeed better than that
of the dog, as has been showed long ago by the Geese of the Capitol in
Rome, who awaking the soldiers and standing Watch, were the cause that the
enemy was repulsed and driven back: Again, she declares when Winter draws
nigh, by her continual squeaking and crying: she lays eggs, hatcheth
Goslings, affoordeth feathers twice a year, for the Bed, for Writing, and for
Shafts, which are gathered at the Spring and Autumn. The loss or
discommoditie is, because they crave a keeper; for otherwise they will bruise
and knap off the young siences of Trees, the herbs of the Garden, and the
shoots of Vines, as also iniure and hurt the Corn when it is shooting and
putting forth his stalk, as well by breaking it, Wild Geese.
as by dunging upon it: in such sort, as that in the Countries where wild Geese
(which are fowls keeping together in flocks as well as Cranes) do make their
greatest and principal haunt, as in Holland, Heynault, Artoys, and other
where, there is found sometimes a great piece of Corn all wasted and destroyed
in less than half a day. And the house or tame Geese do no less harm, if
they be let alone and suffered to do it; for they pull up the corn by the
root: besides that, where as they dung, there will nothing grow for a long time
after.

The best Goose and Gander is of color either white or gray; and she that is
of a mixed or two colors, is also of an indifferent goodness: notwithstanding
the white does abound more in laying of eggs than the others, and has also a
better flesh; and it is good to make choice of such a one as has the knee,
ioints, and space between the legs great and large. The Goose goes over her
laying time thrice a year, if she be kept from sitting and hatching: but
indeed it is a great deal better when she is set upon eggs, because the young
ones thereby brought forth do nourish better than the eggs, as also do
increase the flock: And at every laying time, some lay twelve eggs and more
sometimes, others but five at the first, four at the second, and three at the
last; and these three several times come betwixt the first of March and the
last of June. The memory of a Goose.
And they do never forget the place which you shall have brought them to at the
first to lay in: so that look where they lay their first eggs, they will lay
all the rest; and in the same place also set them, if you will. Likewise you
must not let them lay out of their walk or fold, and for that cause you must
keep them shut in at such time as when you think they will begin to lay: and
if you take not up their eggs, they will begin to sit so soon as they have
their full number: but and if you take them away as they be laid, they will not
cease laying till they come to an hundred, yea two hundred eggs; yea, so long,
and so many, as some say, as until their fundament stand gaping and open, they
not being able to shut it, because of the effect wrought by their much laying.

Geese love not almost to sit any but their own eggs; To set Geese.
and at the least you must se^ that the greater part that you set her on be her
own: And she is not commonly to be set upon fewer than seven or nine at the
least, nor upon more than thirteen or fifteen at the most, and you must look
she be set upon an odd number. And who so puts under the straw whereupon
she sits some Nettle roots, does prevent that the Goslings, when they be
hatched, are not so soon hurt. Some Geese in a good and favorable weather do
hatch in five and twenty days at the most. And near unto the place where the
sits you shall place steeped Barley in such quantity, as that she may take
it out of much water: for she loves not to leave her young ones, for
sometimes she will rather die for hunger; and to the end also that she may not
stand in need to stir or raise her self, except a very little for to feed,
seeing that thus her eggs might take cold. And furthermore, call again to
mind that which has been said of the Hen: you may also set Hens upon
Geese eggs, and that with better su^cesse than if they had been set under the
Goose her self, but then not above seven or eight.

The young Goslings must abide ten days shut up with the Goose, The ordering
of Goslings.
and be fed within with Barley meal tempered with Honey, Bran, and Water, and
now and then with Let^^ces and tender and new Sow-thistles; after that, with
Millet and Wheat steeped and softened: and at the term of these days to
acquaint and accustom th^^ to the Meadows with their dame; but let them be fed
before they go thither: for this bird is so rauenously given, as that through
sharpness in their hunger they pull the gras^e and young sprouts of Trees
with such force and violence, as that sometimes therewith they break their
own necks. They must be kept from Nettles and Pricks, from the Bay tree and
Mugguet, for they be bane unto them: in the house, from Wolves and Foxes, Cats
and Weasels.

Goslings intended to be fatted, How to (...) Goslings.
must be chosen when they be four months old, and then the fairest and
greatest must be chosen. They must be put in a Cowpe in some Cellar under
ground, or in some dark and warm place, where the younger sort is to be kept
thirty days, and the elder sort two months. They must have given them thrice
a day Barley and Wheat meal tempered with Water and Honey, for the Barley makes
the flesh white, and the Wheat makes them fat, and makes a great liver. Some
do make them meat with new or dry figs and leaven, and give them drink
abundantly, using to roll their meat all over in Br^n. Others pull the
feathers of their head and belly, and also the fat feathers of their wings, and
do also put out their eyes for to fat them: Above all things, you must not
pinch them in their meat and drink, because they are great eaters, and given
much to drink. Thus you shall have them fat at the most within two months.

The common meat of Geese, Meat for Geese.
is all manner of Pulse tempered with Bran and warm water. Many do give them
nothing but Bran somewhat grossly boulted, and Lettuces, Succorie, and Garden
Cres^es, for to get them an appetite: and they set them this meat morning,
evening, and at noone: and for the rest of the day they send them to the
Meadows, and to the Water-Pooles, under the custody of some little small
Jack, who may keep them from going or flying into any forbidden places, as
also out of the Nettles and Briers, as also from feeding of Henbane, which some
call the Goose-bane, and from Hemlockes, which set them on such a deep sleep
as that they die therewithal.

Ancient Writers have not permitted more than three Geese to one Gander, but we
do freely allow six, and cause to be taken from them the Down or soft
feathers on the inside of their thighs, The quills of dead Geese are not so
good as those of the live.
and the great feathers of their wings to write withal in March and September:
for the quils of the dead Goose are not so sit for all uses, no more than is
the wool of slaughtered sheep, or those which die of themselves. And seldom
do we see much fewer than thirty Goslings in one room, howsoever our
predecessors would not put any more than twenty together, for the greater do
beat the les^er, and hurt them: and for this cause they must be put into the
Goose-house, and kept asunder with hurdles, in such sort as sheep are kept
asunder: and they must have new straw oftentimes, and that such as is clean
and very small, for their house must be always dry, and oftentimes made
clean for fear of vermin.

And moreover, The diseases of Geese.
they are subject unto the same diseases and casualties that Hens be, and
therefore they must be tendered after the same manner: Which that I may not
repeat, I would have you to search it out in the places concerning the same.

The Gosling, though she be of hard digestion, in as much as she is a
water-fowle, and also abounding with superfluities; yet indeed the Goslings,
which exceed not two months old, are very much commended in the Spring time
by reason of their daintiness, as the old are in Winter stuffed with great
C^^^nuts: her liver also is of very pleasant taste and eating.

The grease of Geese is profitable in this point; Goose greese.
if it be mixed with the juice of an Onion, and dropped into the ear, it
assuageth pain, and draws out water. The Goose tongue dried and made into
powder, is good against the retention of ones urine. The stones of Geese eaten
by an incontinent woman after her natural courses, do not only provoke
carnal copulation, but also make apt to conceive. The dung of Geese dried,
powdered, and taken in a morning the weight of one dram with white Wine, does
thoroughly cure the Iaundise, if it be continually used for the space of nine
days.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Ducks, Drakes, Teales, brant Ducks, water-Hennes, small Ducks of the Lakes,
Swans, Cranes, Storks, and other water-fowles.
THe Ditch or Fish-poole, A place for Ducks to set in.
which we have appointed to be in the midst of our Court and Straw room, may
serve for the Duckes and other birds living in the water: And near unto the
said Pond there must be provided for them a low roof, lightly covered, for
them to sit under in the night, as also in the day, as they please: for as for
any great diligence and industry to be used about these foul, indeed there in
no such need, except it be for the keeping of them from Cats and Weasels,
Kites, Eagles, Vultures, and Serpents, which are ve^e noisome unto them. In the
place of their haunt they must have some Corn cast, Pulse, The ordinary food
of Ducks.
and the dross of the Riddle or S^arce must be cast about the edges of the
Pond: and also within the same, to cause them to be pudling in the mire, you
(...) also let them have the liberty of such Ponds as you put your fish into
which you mean to salt, as also of the next River, as you do your Geese:
notwithstanding, it were good that some should see that they haunt or frequent
not your Ponds with fish, because indeed they will eat up the small therein.
But in other points they need not so much attendance, seeing for the most part
they are nothing in love with Gardens. And as for their Neasts to lay in and to
sit, they make themselves: and there is no care greater than this, namely, The
eggs of Ducks see upon by a Hen, are better than if they were hatched by the
Duck her self.
to know their haunt, especially that of the wild ones, in or about what place
of the Ponds they use, that so you may take their eggs to put under some Hen
to sit them, thereby to make them tame: for the foul that is thus or dered
will be better than that of the yard, and which stirs not out of the Court,
or from about the sides of the streets to tread.

To take such wild Ducks as are about your Ponds, to make them tame, you must
cast the lees of wine or red wine in that very place of the Pond side, Wild
Ducks may be will taken when they are drunk.
where you (...) accustomed to cast them meat of wine and corn with leaven and
flower tempered together, and you shall take them when you see them drunk: or
else to take of the root and seed of Henbane a good quantity, and lay it to
steep in a basen full of water a whole day and a night, afterward put
thereinto Wheat, and boil all together until the said Corn be well steept
and swelled, afterward you shall put of the same Corn in the said place, for
the wild Duckes will run unto it, and as soon as they shall have eaten it,
they will fall down all astonished and giddie. This kind of foul is made fat
in such manner as the young Geese, that is to say, with the same food; only it
remains, that you should give unto them, besides that, the small of the fish,
and so you need not to cowpe them up: and as for your common ones, the more you
suffer them to run, the better it is for them.

You may make your profit of this bird, in as much as the flesh thereof is very
pleasant to eat, especially about the neck and breasts, the feathers thereof
are ^maller, better, and more wholesome to sleep upon than those of Geese. She
lays eggs is great quantity, but not so good or delicate as those of the
Hens; but yet of use (...) make Cakes, fried Meats, and other dainty
Devises: add hereunto, that you may set them under Hens.

When this bird trimmeth her feathers with her bill, it betokens Wind. The
blood of Ducks.
Also some hold the blood thereof, hardened and drunk with wine, is good
against all manner of poison. The Drake cures the Colic.
The Drake applied alive unto the belly, is a sovereign remedy for the (...)
of the Guts and Collicke: insomuch, that some say, that this disease thus
cured, returns unto the Drake, and that in such sort, as that he dies of it.

Teales, Teales.
young Ducks, Young Ducks.
water-Hennes, Water Hens.
and small Ducks Small Ducks.
of the Pond, will never be made tame, but otherwise you may more easily take
them than you can the wild Gee^e. We may say as much of the Woodcocke Woodcocks.
and Curlew, Curlewes.
and other birds h^^^ting the Water and Rivers, Birts of a double life.
and live notwithstanding upon the Land: for which cause they were called by
men of old time birds of a twofold or double kind of living and feeding.

Swannes haunt and love to resort to some particular places only, as in
watrie, wandering, Swannes.
and solitary places. There are great store to be seen in such places toward
To^^s, Angoulesme, Coignac, the River of Sharant (which is reported to be
floored with Swannes and paued with Trouts) Sameure in France, as also in
Flanders, and toward Valentia, Valentia the vale of Swans.
which some say to have been, in that respect, called the Valley of Swannes,
and may be made tame, and may be put either in Ponds or i^ Fennes, but indeed
they destroy and spoil very much fish. Sometimes they feed upon the green
Corn, as the Gosling or wild Goose, and do make great spoil^ and wast
therein. It is sufficient for two pair to take their pleasure in your Pooles,
How many Swannes are enough to be together.
or four, if they be very great, and one pair only is enough in your
Fish Pond: and they must have a house apart in the Orchard or Garden covered
over a little, and free from disturbance, often made clean and refreshed, for
they defile very much. If they have not enough whereon to feed in the place of
their abode, you must cast them some softened bread, or some of the smallest
fishes. This is a great eating foul, and chargeable to be kept: he makes his
Neast himself, and hatcheth but once a year, and three eggs at the most at a
time, but he is a very beautiful and pleasant bird. There is a certain kind
of Swanne which has his right foot divided into fingers, and fashioned with
nails and claws or tallons, as birds of the prey have, whereupon in striking
into the water, he catches and footeth his prey, but his left foot is
fashioned after the common manner of others, and with it he roweth upon the
water. Such a one was seen and killed at the Abbey of Iuilly near Dampmartin,
in the year 1554. This kind of Swanne feeds no where but in the water, and
upon his prey, and is altogether wild, and cannot handsomely be tamed: but the
common Swanne is not such a one.

Socrates in Plato says, that this bird is dedicated to Apollo, because of the
gift of divination which he has, by which he foreseeth his death, and sings
very sweetly and melodiously when he perceives the same at hand, as seeming
thereby to foresee what good Death does bring with it. I have observed, that he
does not only foresee his own death, but also the death of men, especially
when he appears in such places as he was not wont to haunt: Witness hereof
is S. Bartholomew his day in the year 1572, two or three days before which
were seen many Swannes, flying, swimming, and diuing in the River of Seyne,
betwixt S. Clou and the Port of Nully.

Cranes are not much unlike to Swannes, Cran^^.
and are not birds of continual haunt, but yearly removing from the Countries
that are more hot unto those Countries that are more cold. Their departure is
about September, and their return shortly after the Spring seed time: and
although they do addict themselves unto watrie places, yet they feed, for the
most part, of that which the dry land yields, and not of things affoorded by
the water, for they live and feed upon Corn as do the wild Geese. There is no
cause why you should make any great account of the Crane: for although he stay
a certain time with you, yet he lays not any more than two eggs all the
year long. Wherefore if you be willing to keep of them, you may do it rather
to please your sight withal, than for any hope of increase, for they neither
lay nor sit any more than two eggs. And further, their flesh is of a very
hard digestion, especially if it be new killed: but if you will eat it, stay
some time after the taking of them, and hang them upon the arm of some
Fig Tree, that they may grow tenderer: Also eat them rather a long time
after they have been dressed, than whiles they are yet warm. When you see
them fly aloft in the Air, without making any noise, then look for fair
weather: but and if you see them rest themselves upon the ground, be ye assured
that it will be rain.

If your Farm be near unto marshes and places, where Snakes, Lizards,
Adders, and other such like Beasts abound; you may set up some small Spire or
Turret about your house, or plant upon some piece of high mounted ground some
well-spread Tree, Storkes.
of a great height, for the alluring of Storkes to the same, that they may
help to free your house of those said venomous beasts, for they will kill them
to feed their young ones therewith. But yet persuade not your self, that you
can easily draw and allure them, nor yet retain and keep them, Summer being
once passed; for upon Winters return they will be packing into another
Country. Notwithstanding, there are some, which not having been disturbed in
the time of their ayring and bringing up of their young ones, do every year
repair to their wonted airs, and that by a long ^light out of a far
Country, and do air and neast themselves willingly also in the tops of high
Towers, not frequented, as judging the place to be such as will not suffer any
man to do them annoyance. And in the mean time you need not take any care of
their Neast, laying, sitting, or feeding, for they be birds careful enough of
themselves, and not needing the help^ of any other, and which do come and go
in such sort as one cannot perceive them; in such sort, as that we may rather
see them when they be commen, than foresee their coming, for as much as their
coming and going is in the night. Some do think that they have no tongue;
make no account of them for to eat them, seeing they are of a very evil juice
and venomous feeding: and yet this good is in them, that he which shall have
eaten of a Storke, shall not have his eyes bleared or running all that year.
It is observed in this bird, that the young do feed the old that breed them,
when they cannot fly any more, nor get their prey.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Feasants.
IT is a point of great curiosity to keep Feasants, Hens of Numidia.
which Columella calls Hens of Numidia: but he that can do it, has both
pleasure and profit; and he must be such a one as almost does nothing else: for
this bird is chargeable to maintain; she will have her house by her self,
raised high, and leaning to the enclosure or wall of the Court, and long also,
that her troughes may be in the air, and where the Sun gives. And every
several bird must have her own room: and yet there must be but one door unto
their Henne-house for the cleansing thereof and giving of them meat. The rest
of their house shall be all open upon the forepart, and yet in such sort, as
that it shall be sure and fast, by being thick latted, and of cloven boords,
about the height of a fadome below, and very well covered above.

Feasant Cocks and Hens are hard to tame, Feasant Cocks and Hens not so
^asie to make tame.
if they be not so hatched, or else taken within the year: for the elder sort
grow sullen and malecontented, and do accord and buckle themselves either to
lay or sit. And as for the young, they must be gently handled, until they be
well trained, and can easily be content with and apply themselves to the
enduring of a constrained air, and that such a one as is not like to that
where they were taken. There must be one Cock to every two Hens. The Hen
has but one season wherein she uses to lay, and that is March, at which time
she begins and so continues until she have orderly laid twenty, and after
she fitteth them all together, or else fifteen of her own, and some others of
another kind, if you put them under her: and she sits thirty days; and in
the time of her sitting, you must use her with the like diligence that you do
the Hen: but this must be all within her own house. The young ones being
hatched, shall be fed with flower of Barley boiled and cooled, and afterward
with the flower of Wheat: and sometimes you shall mix herewith, or else give
them by themselves, some Gras-hoppers and eggs of Ants: and you must
oftentimes give them fresh water, and clean, for they are subject to the same
diseases that the Hen is.

Men of old time were wont to fat their Feasant Cocks and Hens for
Feastiuall days, To fat Feasant Cocks and Hens.
or Banquets and Feasts only, and not for brood, and gave unto them the first
day honied water and strong wine, to cause them to forget their natural place:
after that, of the flower of Barley tempered with water, of ground Beans, and
of clean Barley, of whole Millet, of Turnep seed, and Linseed boiled and dried,
mixed with the flower of Barley: and for to heat and cleanse their stomachs,
they gave them Mustard seed for five days, and so fatted them up in their
Cowpes for threescore days.

This is the thing that diverse Cooks of Paris, with certain other rich
Victuallers, do know very well to do: and they must (as says Columella)
give them their ^eat to eat, to the end they may be fat when they are used in
Banquets: for but few of these wild Feasant Hens do give themselves to lay
and bear the yoke of ser^itude both together.

CHAP. XIX.
Of Peacockes.
THe Peacocke is a bird of more beautiful feathers than any other that is: he
is quickly angry, but he is as far off from taking good hold with his feet:
he is goodly to behold, very good to eat, and serves as a watch in the inner
court; for that he spying strangers to come into the lodging, he fails not
to cry out and to advertise them of the house. It is true that he is not kept
with a little cost and meat, being a great eater, and quickly digesting his
meat: noisome to the house, for that he spoyleth the Gardens, if there be not
some little Meadow ground for him to frequent: he breaks the roof and high
place of the house: And the Cock being ouer-ranke by nature, does break the
Hens eggs, thereby to keep her from sitting, that so he may the more freely
enjoy and use her. The Cock lives a long time, as from twenty to five and
twenty years, but the Hen somewhat less, both the one and the other
somewhat troublesome to rear and bring up whiles they be young, but they need
not to have any great care taken of them after they have once left the dam,
except it be in keeping them from hurting the Corn. They love a hot and
temperate air, and that is the cause that they are not brought up in many
Countries of France, but with much ado. The place where they most abound in
all the Country, is toward Lisieux in Normandy, for from thence there come
great numbers to Paris, for great and sumptuous Banquets and Marriages: There
they make them fat with the dross of Cider and Perrie.

People of old and ancient time did cast Islets on the backside of their
Gardens, The Peacock^ walk.
only for Peacocks, and there set up some little shed for them at their
pleasure to repair unto, and another for the party that should feed them. And
in Italy unto this day they use, in places near unto the Sea shore, to bring
up Peacocks in Islets somewhat near unto the Sea, that so they may prevent
such harm as the Fox might otherwise do them; which was also the drift why
our ancient predecessors took the same course: but we* which make not so
great account of them, are content to keep them in some room over the Hens,
even in the highest part of the Henne-house, for they love to rowst on high,
and in an open air, sitting very often for that cause upon trees, but we
provide them some place below whither to repair in the day time. This place
must be kept very clean, and looked diligently unto, even as the Henne-house,
The diseases of Peacocks.
for this bird is subject unto the same inconveniences and diseases that Hens
be, and must have the same remedies administered unto them. The place of their
abode and haunt must be strewed with Straw, or green Grass, The nature of
Pea-hennes.
for the Hens do lay but seldom, sitting down low, as is manifest, in that
her eggs are found oftentimes dropped down from her under the Perch: and this
happens by their falling from her as she is asleep. These birds bring
forth very well after they be three years old; but before nothing, or very
little.

The Pea-henne has three several times or seasons of laying in the year: The
sitting of the Pea-henne.
but she that is set, has but one, and passes over her other times in
hatching and leading of her young ones. She begins her first laying time at
mid February, and lays five eggs one after another: at the second, she
lays four or three: and at the third, three or two. If the Cock and the
Hen tread not, you must bring them to it by such food and meat as will set
them in heat, as with Beans roasted in hot ashes. And to know when the Cock is
in the pride or heat, you need no other sign than his viewing of himself, and
covering of his whole body with the feathers of his tail, and then we say he
wheeleth.

When the Pea-henne sits, A Peacock of a white color.
she withdraws and hides herself from the Cock in the most secret place she
possibly can; for he cease not to seek her, by reason of his excessive
rankenesse and lustiness of nature: and if he find her, he beats her, to
cause her to rise from off her eggs, and then breaks them. If while she
^itteth, she be covered with a white Linen cloth, she will bring forth
Chickens all white, and not of the color of the Vine bud. And to that end you
may shut her up in Cowpes or Houses ouer-layd or garnished with some white
Cloth or Paintrie, to the end that whatsoever she looks upon while she
sits, may be of a white color. At the end of thirty days, when the young
ones are hatched, and the Hen diligently fed in the place where she did sit
them (as we have said of the Hen) she must be put under a Cowpe in some
place where the Cock cannot come; for he hates and hurts his young ones,
until they be grown to have a coppell upon their heads: and at such time as
this is growing out of them, they must be kept very warm, for then they be
very sick, and for the most part die.

You must feed the young ones the first day with Barley meal tempered with wine
in manner of thick pottage: The feeding of young Peacocks.
and for the thickening of it, some put thereto soft Cheese, well kneaded,
pressed, and purged from Whay, for Whay will hurt them greatly. Sometimes they
must have Grasshoppers given them, their feet plucked away, Weesels, Spiders, and
Flies for their Physic; for they drive away vermin na^rally, so that there
is scarce any found where they haunt. After six months they eat boiled Barley
as the dam does, and are suffered to run abroad: but even then they must be
kept from cold and rain, for they chirpe and hang the wing by and by,
especially in this Country, where they are hard to bring up, if they be not
hatched by mid June: for when Autumn does find them very young, they do
never hold out Winter.

They which will have the Pea-hennes to hold their three several times of
laying, The laying of Pea-hennes.
must set their first eggs under Hens that are great, well governed, and
old, and that in the beginning of the growth of the Moon, that so the
Pea-hennes may hold on their several courses of laying. And as we have
already said in the feeding of Hens, there must be put under the Hens some
five of the Pea-hennes, and nine of her own: after the tenth day, the nine
Hen eggs shall be taken away, and other nine put in their place; by this
means you shall find, by the end of thirty days, that all will be hatched
together: And thus you shall use many Hens at one and the same time. And
seeing the Pea-hennes egg, for the greatness of it, cannot be well turned by
the Hen, you shall turn it your self very softly at such time as the Hen
is a feeding, and mark with ynke the place you leave uppermost, that so you
may know thereby whether the Hen do turn them, or no, for else you might
possibly lose your time and labor: and when all are hatched, give all the
Chickens to one only Hen, and the young Pea-chickens to a Pea-henne, and see
that the Hen leading her brood, do not haunt where the Pea-henne and her
Chickens do come, for so she would leave her own, for the disdain and
jealousy she conceiueth in seeing the fairness and greatness of the others.

Peacocks are very sick when they moult, The diseases of Peacocks.
and then they must be heartened with Honey, Wheat, Oats, and Horse-beanes:
They are very hot in the Dog-dayes, so that then you must not let them want
fresh and cool water: and every Cock would have five or six Hens for
change, for he is grieved at them that are ready to lay, and fails not, if
he can, to break their eggs.

The flesh of Peacocks is melancholic, The flesh of Peacocks is hard.
and of hard digestion: but to make it tender, you must kill your Peacocke in
Summer a day before you eat him, and in Winter four days, and hang some
heavy thing to his legs, or else tie him upon some fig tree staff,
because the wood of the fig tree has virtue to make flesh tender that is
tough and hard: The roasted flesh of a Peacock is well kept a whole month, and
loses nothing either of his smell or good relish: The dung of Peacockes is
very sovereign against the diseases of the eyes, if it may be found: but the
Peacock so much enuieth the good of man, that he eats his own dung, for
fear that any man should find it.

CHAP. XX.
Of Indian Hens.
Whosoever he was that brought us these birds from the Island of India, Indian
Hens good coffers to bury Oats in.
lately discovered by the Spaniards and Portugalls, whether we call them
Cocks or Peacockes of India; has more fitted and provided for the tooth than
for any profit: For they may rightly be termed Cofers to cast Oats into, a
devouring gulf of meat, and wherein there is no other pleasure to be taken,
but only in their cry and furiousness, when they are come to be great ones;
or continually chirping whiles they be little: besides that, both the one and
the other are ill-fauoured and ougly to behold, for the deformity of their
heads; for the male has no comb, as our Cocks, but in stead thereof a red
fleshinesse, and under his chinne a great wide and long throat, which swells
and changes into many colors when he begins to be angry. That a Peacock
is better meat than a Turkies.
It is very true, that his flesh is fine and delicate, but without taste, and
of hard digestion: And this is the cause why men use to powder them, larde them
much, and season them with Spices. There is much more pleasure and goodness in
the flesh of a Peacocke.

The meat fit for this kind of Bird, What meat is fit for Turkies.
is the same that is good for Hens, and so made, and with like diligence: and
because his property is to be abroad, to feed upon Grass, Worms, and
Herbs, therefore it remains that we set down what is required over and
above: And the Farmer may well say, That look how many Turkies he has in his
yard, even so many Mule Colts has he in respect of their feeding. Their
ordering is less troublesome that of the Peacockes, save that they do not so
well endure and abide the cold, neither do they require to be pearched so high
in the open air: but they eat up and make great wast in Gardens, and are
filthy as Goslings, and therefore some must be ready to make them clean
every day. In Winter they must be set in a warm place, and dry: their perch
must not be above eight or ten foot from the earth, because they do not fly
high.

As concerning their laying and sitting, The times wherein Turkies do lay.
it is altogether like to that of the Peacockes, and their eggs may as well be
set under Hens, and led afterward by the same, whiles the Turkey Hens do
accomplish their several times of laying.

Their diseases and remedies are also all alike, The diseases of Turkies.
so that it were in vain to speak of them here again.

The Huswife shall not make any great account of Turkey eggs; Turkey eggs.
at least, he that loves his health, shall not esteem of them for to use
them: for Physicians hold, that eggs of Turkies engender gravel, and minister
cause to breed the Lepro^ie.

CHAP. XXI.
Of Turtle doves, Partridges, Quails, Stock-doues, and Thrushes.
THe place to put these kinds of Birds in (serving rather for food and
pleasure than for breeding) shall be ordered after the manner of the
Feasant-house, that is, after the manner of a great Cowpe, so leaning against
the wall of the back-yard, and open toward the light, wouen and wrought with
the strings of a small Bow, put through wood, after the manner of Bird-cages,
with a door of the same: And within, especially toward the corners, there shall
be great store of Perches, and branches of boughs of Juniper, Bays, and other
trees, within which there shall be tied against the said wall small baskets to
allure them to lay and sit in, if so be they have any inclination thereunto. It
shall be of the height of a man: and overthwart, and every way, you shall hang
Perches, stayed up at both ends, for seats for them to sit upon; and under
their Perches much fresh straw, which you must often renew when you make them
clean. On that side toward the light, all along their house, you shall weaue
and work in two boords of a good length, and a third underneath them, and
there shall you make places for the^ to eat their meat, and to set their
water-pots for them to drink, which you shall refresh and make clean very
often. These birds are all of them such as use to got together in flocks, and
delight in hot air, and in cold weather fly over the Sea out of one Country
into another. And therefore to tame them in such manner, as to make them like
our house-birds, would be a very hard and difficult thing: And again, we
make no further account of them than for their daintiness and delicateness;
which is the cause why they are of such request in Feasts and Banquets.

Of all these forenamed kinds of Birds, there is none more apt to tame than
the Turtle doves, Turtle doves.
neither yet sooner fatted: for to take them after they be somewhat great, and
sly well, you must give them wine, for by the means of it they do quickly
fall to forget their liberty and freedom; for this bird is of a great
stomach, and bears it therefore very mournefully, when she perceives her
self taken: for which cause also they almost never lay when they be restrained
and kept in, neithe^ yet seed fat in Winter; quite contrary to Thrushes: They
feed upon Barley, F^^ches, and almost all other kind of grain: they desire
fair and clear water, and often renewed, What meat Turtles feed upon.
and a large water-pot, that they may bath themselves therein sometime
Especially they love Millet and Pannickle, and make no less account of Wheat,
of which sorts of Corn a bushel will satisfy six score Birds: And you must
not forget Gravel, which must be laid by their water-pots for to be their
physic, and some also in some of the corners of the house, for them to
scratch in. If they hang the wing, The diseases of Turtle doves.
and st^rre not out of their Basket, you must take them and look to the^
bills, whether they have the Pip, or no; and, if need be, to take it from
them: and ^o their feet, to s^e if their own dung make them not that they
cannot stir: or under their wings for vermin; and in all other places to
cure them, as has been said of Hens. The blood of the right wing of a
Turtle dropped into the eye, is excellen^ good against the stripes and ulcers of
the eye: And their dung is good against spo^^ in the eyes.

Stock-doues Stock-doues.
may be fatted and fed after the very same manner, but they are greater
eaters, and more hard to tame: in Winter they love a sup of wine, and do grow
very fat, so also do the Turtles. Again you must take heed not to forget
your Gravel.

The brown or Woodcocke-coloured Partridge is more easily tamed than the
spotted, Partridges of brown color, and spotted.
or any other sort; likewise they have not so delicate and fine a flesh: being
notwithstanding well fed, they are little inferior unto Feasants: and you must
handle them after the same manner, and give them all one meat, but that
Partridges love ^ow and then to eat Corn, and feed upon green Grass. The
male Partridges are ^erie hot, and the Hen does lay a great sort of eggs:
The Cocks also do beat one another for the Hens, until the one has
overcome the other; and he that ouer^ommeth, ouer-croweth the other which is
overcome, and makes him follow and ^ome behind him, after the manner of the
Hens.

The Hen Partridge is so fruitful, that she conceiueth at the only voice or
^light, or breathing of the Cock. The meat that they most delight in, is
Millet and Pannicke.

The eggs of Partridges often eaten do bring fruitfulness unto barren women,
The eggs of Partridges. The gall of a Partridge.
and great store of milk unto Nurces. The gall of a Partridge does clear the
sight, and mixed in equal quantity with honey, does heal the bruises of the
eyes: the blood ^f Partridges has the like virtue.

Quails Fierce Quails.
(being birds living altogether upon the earth rather than in the air) do ^ot
make or build themselves any Neasts, any more than all other birds which are
^eauie, and cannot so well fly: They be very fierce, and in that respect they
are not ^ccustomed to have either so much scope or light as other birds.
Likewise we see that they are wont to have their Coupe covered with nets or
skins, least in flying up ^n high, and rising with some boisterousnesse, they
should beat themselves to death. Some provide them Meat-pots and Water-pots
apart, that is, to every bird his own ^rouision and diet: They love green
Corn and Wheat, and Mustard seed is their ^hiefe and principal feeding. They
eat in those Countries whereinto they go (being ^lsewhere than in this our
Country) great quantity of Hellebore. And this is the ^cause why Didimus
says, that their flesh is laxatiue, and that it does procure the turning
sickness and headache, that it causes the falling sickness, conuulsion, and
distension of the Muscles, and for that cause that they ought to be stuffed
with Millet, or boiled therein: or else if any should find themselves ill
after them, for to drink the decoction of Millet, or of Mittle tree berries:
and it will be good also to give the same to Quails to eat. The Cocks are
nothing less hot than the Partridge: The Hen so soon as she has laid her
eggs, sits them, and by and by after the has hatched her young ones, she
draws them into some other place, to the end that such as go about to take
them, may not find their place: They be birds using to flock together, and
they go away at Spring time, and return in Winter, and in the beginning of
Autumn.

Thrushes are not naturally breeding in this Country, Thrushes*
as being an excessive cold place: and hardly at any time do they endure this
air, and therefore it were but foolishness to go about to fat them here.
This bird is addicted to hot Countries, as also to such places as where there
are great store of Olive trees: for they do greatly delight in Olives, and
grow fat at such season as they grow ripe. It is a bird also given to make
great havoc and spoil: for the Thrushes do pour down themselves upon the
Olive trees in great flights, and having eaten their full, they also carry
away at their departure one in their bill, and one in their claws, after the
manner of men of War. They are found also and made fat in the mountain and
hilly Countries, but it is in Winter time: for they gather fat, and fill
themselves in cold weather, if it be any whit moderate. The men of old and
ancient time did much esteem them, Sous.
and sold them in the time of the Romans for ten Sous a piece. The value of
this bird in times past, and yet also.
Thus also to this day do the Italians and Spaniards; and in this our own
Country, those of Lions, Prouence, and Auuergnac: but they are not so great on
this side the mountains, as they are beyond. This bird is more sullen than
any of the before named, and dies shortly after she is taken, if she be
carried out of her ordinary air, or if she be not put presently amongst other
old tame ones: They must have their meat cast them upon a very clean floor,
The ordinary meat for Thrushes.
and far from their Perches: and some cast them dried figs stamped with the
flower of meal, and that so much, as that there may something remain more
than they can eat: And sometimes, for change of diet, they may have cast them
the fruit of Masticke or Mulberrie tree, or the berries of Iuie and wild Olive
trees: and yet notwithstanding their meat-pots must always be full of Millet,
for this is their chief meat. Again, you must see them provided of clear
water as well as other bird^ before named.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the Doue-house.
THe profit that comes of the keeping of a Doue-house, The profit of a
Doue-house.
is nothing less than that of the keeping of a Hen-house; especially in
respect of the selling of young ones, and others, which every year increase
in^^merably: for there are some Farmers which sell, at every flight, two
hundred and three hundred pair unto the Victuallers. The care to be had abo^^
them is not so great as that about other birds, neither the cost so great, in
as much as they get their own livings the most part of the year, and in that
they lay six or seven times a year two eggs a piece: yea, and oftener and
greater, if you change the young House-doues Pigeons with those of the Cote,
after that they be once eight days old, to the end they may accompany the
Cock Pigeons which go by themselves without any Matches: but this must be
done so cunningly, as that the dams do not perceive it. It is true, that this
bird is of great charges, and w^steth much in respect of grounds: and for this
cause there is no ground Pigeon-house allowed, but to such as be Lords in see
simple; neither yet very often any Dofeu-houses in upper rooms, except it be
to such as have a competent quantity of arable ground.

Let us then prepare to our good liking, Where a ground Doue-house is permitted
and lawful to be had.
and for the ease of the Huswife, a ground Doue-house, out of the noise of
folks, the dashing of Trees one against another, and the roaring of Waters,
and let it be set in a place somewhat raised: or else let us build it right in
the midst of the base Court, which is the place of our Country house, before
in this Book appointed, and that after the fashion of a stone Tower made for a
Windmill, or somewhat nearly resembling it: but let it be distant: flight or
two from any water, to the end that the old Pigeon may warm that which she
brings for to give to her young ones: For it is certain, that as the Pies
and Sparrowes, the male and the female Pies and Sparrowes, male and female, do
sit.
do sit by courses, and as while the one of them is seeking her food abroad,
the other is sitting upon the eggs; so do these for the safety of their
young ones, until such time as they be out of their holes abroad. And I would
not have you to understand, that the Doue-house should only lie open vn^^ the
East quarter in this Country, but that it take part also of the South, because
this bird does greatly delight in the Sun, beating and casting his beams
upon their house, and entering in at their windows and loope-holes, or higher
lights, especially in the Winter time: and further, that upon the South there
be provided a sh^^ting and opening window in Winter, to give some heat unto the
Pigeons. There must not any window be made upon the North side: A door window.
or if there be any, for to let in the cool air in Summer, yet it must be
very close stopped up while the cold endures. Let the South window be turned
toward the Barn door: and by the side of the said dote let there be a
Water-pot set upon a pillar of stone for the Pigeons to drink at, and let that
Water-pot be made in manner of a basen, divided into many partitions to drink
at, to the end, that when the Pigeons have picked up the Corn scattered from
the Fan, or striked abroad by the Flaile, they may have their water near and
easy for many to come by together, either to drink or bathe themselves in.
And you must procure and see that this Doue-house be built and laid with a good
and broad foundation, well covered, and the floor close beaten and loamed
over, to prevent the danger of the dung, which does undermine and corrupt the
foundation. It must also be well and close laid and drawn over with Morta^
within, Beasts to be kept out of Doue-houses.
and the ehinkers or clefts which may grow must oftentimes be searched out and
stopped, for fear of Rats or Mice, which is a mischief often happening where
there is not any plaster to come by: and it must also be drawn over in like
manner on the outside, for the crackes that happen in Lime and Sand are in
stead of ladders for Fulmers, Weasels, Cats, and other beasts to climb up by.
And for the very same cause you shall make round about the Doue-house, on the
outside, two outcasts of hewed stone, or round rings of plaster, as broad as
three or four chesse of stones: the one of these rings or out-laies shall be
about the midst of the Doue-house; and the other close under the window, at
which the Pigeons use to go in, and upon which the Pigeon also may sport and
turn her self round. As concerning the falling window and chief entrance
into it, it must be made higher than the dor-window, and larger also: And yet I
mean, that this window without be round compassed with white plates well
nailed to the walls, A draw lattice window.
and that is shut with a falling lattice thick wrought, made to rise and fall
by an engine evening and morning, thereby to prevent the danger of Owls and
Iennie whuppers. The holes made of earth trodden with straw, are more kind for
the Pigeon than those of Board, or square Tyles, or of Plaster, howsoever they
be subject to grow full of chinkers and vermin, which infeeble the Pigeons
when at any time they seize upon them: And therefore, if you will have them
good, you must draw them over with a strong crust of Lime within and without.
Again, howsoever you make them for matter, yet they must be made so large, as
that the Pigeon may turn her self in them, keeping her feathers vnruffled;
and so high, as that the Pigeon may stand upright in it, and not touch the top
with her back. If either of these two points be missing, then she leaves her
hole desolate and forsaken, and oftentimes the house to.

It will be good also, in respect of some beasts which are enemies unto
Pigeons, to hang in the Doue-house the head of a Wolf, which partly by the
smell, and partly by the shape, drives away such beasts: or else to stick
some branches of Rue in the windows or doors of the Doue-house. Upon the
pinnacle of the ^oofe make the picture of a Pigeon, either of Potters clay, or
of Plaster, to draw such as fly by, thither. Provide in some place about your
Doue-house good store of Pots for Sparrowes, with sticks of thorn to hang the
Pots on, and others to rest the Sparrowes upon: and withal, beware that this
mournful birds do not take up his habitation in your Dout-house, for he
would make wild and estrange your young Pigeons.

To store a Doue-house, To store a Doue-house.
you must first consider the contents of it, as whether it be made to contain
many, or but a mean sort, or but a few, and so to put therein an answerable
number of Pigeons: Twenty pair of Pigeons are enough for three hundred holes:
Likewise if the Doue-house be of a thousand holes, or more, then so small a
company would not be enough; neither indeed would they love it, they being of
so small a number, but would go away or die in the end.

The Pigeons wherewith you mind to store your Doue-house must be young ones,
taken when they are half down and half feathered, together with the old ones
their dams, and so put at liberty in your Doue-house, or rather in great
Cowpes, and cause them to be fed with Fetches and water with some skillful
handler of Pigeons twice a day, so long as till they become to eat and drink
by themselves: for by this means they will soon have forgotten both their old
house, as also the old ones, and so will yield themselves willingly to tarry
in such Doue-house, as wherein you will first lodge and put them; which the old
ones would not do: for being translated from another place, they would find
out the way to take their flight directly to their former and first home, so
soon as you had made them way to get forth, how far soever they had been
brought. The Pigeons good to increase store, are the ash, brown, and black
colored; the rough-footed or coppild ones are too mournful, and keeping too
much at home: so in like manner are they which are of color like to a Snailes
belly; the pie-coloured ones and the hooded ones, those which glister like
gold about their necks, and have their eyes and feet red, are the freest of
all other. The white are strong to bring up, but most subject to the Kite and
other ravenous birds, because they are very easily perceived as they fly by a
far off. You must make your choice of the May flight, because there is no
such fear of them for the cold: They grow more easily, and thrive better, and
are sooner able to get their own meat. Above all things, let them not be
pinched of their meat in the months of April and May, because the old are
very many of them sitting, or else have already hatched.

For to make them familiar and tame, To tame Pigeons.
give them some Honey, or some little pieces of Bread, afterward some Fetches,
then Cummin (for these seeds allure them very much) and sometimes Wheat among
the ridled scraps, and let them not go out till after fifteen days of your
putting of them in, during which time you shall cut their wings: you shall
keep a net spread over the windows, to the end that they may have the light
of the day, and yet not be able to get forth: About the end of fifteen days
you shall permit them the fields, taking away the said nets, and yet not before
night approach, the time being cloudie, dark, and inclined to rain: for they
will not go far from the place of their late enlargement, neither will or
can they possibly but return unto the Doue-house, if it were but to hide their
heads that night: In doing whereof, they will learn to mark the place of
their receipt, and not forsake or leave the same, having never had the ^ast of
any former choice in any far removed place, to return thither again.
Further, if you lay upon the window, made for them to light upon at the coming
to the Cote, a loaf made of red earth, Cummin seed well bruised, Honey, and
Brine, all being well boiled together, and dried in the Oven; for having picked
upon this lump, they will never fail to return thither again, they are so
much given to the pleasing of their taste: And further, by the very sent and
smell of this remaining about their bills, they will be the means to allure
others along with them even to their Cote, which for the foresaid commodity
sake they will learn never to leave or forgo.

You shall also keep them from flying away, if you give them Lentils steeped
in honied water, or boiled in some cuted wine: or else dry Figs, mixed with
the meal of Malt and Honey. Some say also, that Pigeons will never go away,
if there be set upon the Turret of the Doue-house the head of a Bat, or the
branch of a wild Vine: or if the doors and windows of the Cote be rubbed or
anointed with the oil of Balm: as also that Pigeons when they fly into the
fields will bring home others with them, if you rub their wings with the said
oil of Balm: or if you give them, before their going thither, Fetches,
besprinkled with wine: or shall have steept in such liquor for them the seed of
Agnus castus; for other Pigeons, after they have smelt the savor of your
Pigeons mouths, will not fail to come with them to their Pigeon-house.
Perfume oftentimes your Doue-house Perfumes for the Doue-house.
with Juniper, Rosemarie, and sometimes with a little fine Frankincense; for
that does mightily retain and keep them, and causes them to love their own
house more than any other. When you shall perceive that they begin to lay,
give them th^n what liberty you can: and you shall see, that by casting of
them morning and evening a little clean Corn under the Barn wall, and far
from the dung, and in causing the Water-pot, wherein they bath and refresh
themselves, to be oftentimes made clean, To draw Pigeons to a place.
that they will draw diverse others from other places, insomuch, as that your
twenty pair in forty days will have stored your house with twice, yea
thrice so many; for they bring forth young thrice, and those which are good,
four times a year: and you shall not need to care for any thing, but to
keep the Doue-house clean. And for this cause it behooves him that has the
charge of the Doue-house to go into it once a week at the least, and that in
the morning, or at the times of relief, when as the Pigeons are in seeking
their meat, and abroad in the Country thereabout: for seeing that they do
ordinarily keep their noonetide in the Doue-house, if he should enter in at
that hour, he should make wild and estrange the young ones, yea the old ones
themselves. In going in, he shall whistl^ them, and cast them something to eat,
to the end they may be accustomed with him, and acknowledge him? He shall
empty and fill up again their Water-pot with ^leare water, he shall pare the
floor, he shall cast out such as he shall find dead: he shall make clean the
holes, to the end that they may not gather any Fleas, Lice, Punies, or Mothes:
especially in Summer he shall not put up again into their holes ^uch as may be
fallen out: he shall cull out the barren, that he may put them in some ^lace by
themselves, that so he may fat them, and afterward either eat or sell them: And
if he perceive the train of any Snake or Adder, he shall set a long earthen
pot upon the tail or bottom, and shall put within it a Pigeon, and plaeing it
right in ^he trade and walk of the Adder, he shall set by it some kind of
little foot-pace, or ^uch other thing, whereby she may creep up unto the top
of the pot, and cast her self in afterward; for the Adder cannot come forth
again: and so you shall cleanse and rid the Doue-house. It is true, that
Pigeons do require some cost in Winter, ^hen either through Frost or Snow, or
when the Corn is shot, they cannot find any thing in the field: but this
pain is not passing two months continuance, or there^bout, that you need to
feed them with Corn, with the dross of the Wine Press, or the stones of
Grapes; of which things there may be store and provision enough ^athered,
during the Vintage time, upon a great heap in the house Court. Likewise (...)
this time they afford you a flight, which is called the March flight, and they
are ^he most fat, tender, and dainty of all the year.

You shall keep well the dung which you take from the Pigeons, Pigeons dung.
not mixing it with that which the Kine make, or the Calves, or Sheep, for it
is very hot, and ser^^eth to fat and amend the fennie and wet places of your
part of Corn ground, or of your Meadows, or the young Plants and tender
Herbs, and to refresh and relieve all Trees subject to coldness and
moisture. You may also make your use thereof for ^he Sciatica, in making a
Cataplasme thereof with the seed of Cresses and Mustard, and putting thereto a
little of the Philosophers oil: as also against Headache, if wrought in a
Mortar with the oil of the kernels of Peachstones, you apply it to the place
that paineth you.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the Neat-heard.
NOtwithstanding that we have yielded and given the ordering of the Kine unto
the Huswife, and that Oxen are to be kept and ordered in their meat after the
same manner: notwithstanding, in Countries, and about such Farms, as where
they are kept for the Plough and sale, there ^s provided a man, which has no
other charge but to think upon and order them, observed and noted that he has
almost as much pains and labor to take about these as about a Horse. It is
true, that a Cow is not of so great charge to maintain and keep, neither in
respect of her meat, neither yet of her handling and managing, neither yet in
furniture: but the force and strength whereby the Ox does cleave the ground,
and draw the Cart, requires one that should do nothing but attend them:
notwithstanding that, he must feed two for one; and that three of the best Oxen
in Bourbon, or in the Forest, do not so much as one good Horse of France, or of
Beaux. In like manner it is out of doubt, that the labor of Oxen is not
admitted of but where mere necessity forces, because there is no convenient
and commodious keeping of Herds of Horse, or where Horse is not to be come by,
but out of some far Country. For though the feeding be good and singular for
Oxen, as in Flanders, and elsewhere; yet it falls out so, that if they can
have Horse to do their work, they do like better thereof than of the Ox:
Even as in Prouence, Languedoe, and Auuergnac, men do use the labor of their
Mules and their young Colts rather than of Oxen and Kine, because they effect
not, or dispatch their work (...) well, or yet so speedily: howsoever, yet the
labor of the Ox is marvelous good* available, and profitable in strong
grounds; for they draw the Ploughes deep into the earth, and turn over great
furrows: as may be seen in Italy, where there are great Oxen, long and broad
breasted, in Gascoigne, Bourbon, Poitou, Aniou, and Main. Again, men of
ancient time used no other beast but Oxen, because that Oxen are more sparing
for the profit of the Farmer; for they are contented to feed upon pasture,
without any other food or prouender, besides the great profit and good
provision coming of them: for being either shoulder-shot or bruised in ani^
part, or grown impotent and unable to work by reason of old age, they are
(...), either for to sell, or to kill and salt for his use; profits and
commodities which the other kind of Cattle (I mean the Horse) do not afford.

The Oxe-house must be built of stone, The Oxe-house.
paued with gravel, or sandy ground, somewhat descending and sloping, that so
the moisture may not stand. It must also stand upon the South, that so it may
be the more dry, and less subject unto cold and frostie winds: it shall be
nine foot wide, and only of such height, as that the Ox may stand upright,
and the Oxe-keeper may have space enough to go round about them, to see and
serve them with fodder: as also to the end that seeing Oxen will be striking
one another with their horns, the weaker may have space to withdraw himself.
The Rackes must be so high, as that the Oxen cannot easily reach them.

The charge of him that is to keep the Oxen, The Oxe-keepers charge.
is to be gentle and loving unto the Oxen, dressing and giving them their meat,
providing them good litter, either of straw, or some other thing, to rub them
every evening before they lie down, and in the morning to eurrie them and
wipe them clean gently, washing their tails often with warm water: To keep
their house clean, and not to let Hens or Swine come therein; for feathers
will kill Oxen, and the dung of a diseased Swine engenders the Murraine or
Plague: To give fresh straw unto these Cattle, and to cast to them in Summer
the green sprouts and tender ^hoots of the arbors of Vines, or others; and in
Winter, of Bean stalks and grass evening and morning. Let him be skillful to
discern when Plough Oxen have labored much or little, that he may accordingly
give them a proportionable quantity of meat, and also such as shall be
necessary: he may not let them take pain or labor in very hot or very cold
weather, neither yet when it is very moist: he may not let them drink quickly
after their travel: but if they (...) heated, so soon as they be come home,
he shall cast a little wine into their throa^, and shall not tie them to their
Manger, until such time as their weariness be ouerpast. When there comes
together any company of Festival days and rest, (...) shall grease their
horns, and under the pasterne, together with the hoof: or else ^e shall put
under an Onion, roasted very soft betwixt two coals, tying it thereto with a
cloth. Let him oftentimes make clean and refresh their pasternes, and not
suffer them to cleave or rend: and to that end let him every year cause to be
repaired the pauement of his Oxe-house, which will serve also to keep away
beasts and (...) which are wont to annoy Oxen. Let him remove them one far
enough from another, least they should strike one another. When they labor
not, let him water then twice a day in Summer, and once in Winter, and that in
clear, clean, and cool water: For as has been said heretofore, the Ox
seeks after the water that is clear and most bright, as the Horse after that
which is troubled. Let him carefully look upon their coming from field,
whether any of them have got any thorn in his foot, if they be sweatie, if
the Collar or the Yoke have caused them any hurt about their head, or if they
be chafed about the neck, if they have been much pricked with the Goad, or with
the Gad^^ie, or Horne^, and let him accordingly apply something for the healing
of them.

The gelded Ox is better meat, The gelded Ox more profi^able for work than
the Bull.
better merchandise, and better for labor than the Bull, whose flesh is more
hard and tough, like a Hide, and more troublesome to drive: wherefore, of a
hundred Calves that the Oxe-keeper may have, he shall not ^eepe above two to
bull the Kine; the rest he shall geld, all of them about when they ^re two
years old, The time to geld Oxen.
for after this time he cannot do it commodiously. It would be ^one in
Autumn, and in the later end of the Moon; and the ashes of Vine bran^hes mixed
with Lytharge must be applied to the wound, and three days after pitch ^elted
and mixed with the said ashes: you must not let him drink the day wherein ^e is
gelded, The manner of gelding the Ox
and he must for the same day also eat but a little meat. The manner to geld
him is to take with two straight rules of wood as it were with quitches or
pin^ers the strings of his stones, then afterward to open the purse and cut out
his stones, ^n such sort as that he leave the upper end thereof whereto the
said strings are fastened: for by this means the calfe is not so much subject
to effusion of blood, neither yet will it be altogether spoiled of courage, not
having all his pride taken away, but some little left behind and reserved which
may still express his first and natural form. Having gelded him, you must
feed him well that he may be fit for labor, and feed him according to the
seasons and times, cheering and cherishing him by sometimes giving him a little
salt, sometime robbing his head with your whole hand, str^aking his back, and
rubbing the rest with loving and gentle speeches: notwithstanding so long as he
is in the house, let his horns be tied, and he close made fast to the cratch.
Couple him with another of the same greatness, grosenesse, age, and strength,
tie them the one by the other, lead them into the fields tied together, to the
end they may one of them love another: let them oftentimes see the Oxen that
draw the plow, or which till the ground, or do any other manner of work: and
to the end they may loose their natural wildness, lead them to hear the
noise of mills, of men, of forges, and other things which make great rumbling:
near unto the time when you would have them to draw, which is from two years
and a half to three, give them the yoke and beele fit for beasts of their age,
and sixty days after you shall fasten them to the waine with the teame, to
draw it through the fields, or four days after you shall fasten unto the
teame a piece of wood or other load. In the end, accustom them to be put to
draw before Oxen, which are in the plough encouraging and cherishing them and
that without any strokes, until such time as they be made cunning: trouble
and weary them not too much with labor the first year.

If you buy Oxen for labor, To buy Oxen.
take them of the same coast and quarter that your Farm is: for they cannot
acquaint themselves so easily with a strange air, as horses do: and if upon
occasion you buy them in a strange Country, then buy them such as were bred in
a barren and plain Country, and those will thrive and take well with every
place, whether the air be hot or tender, or subtle and thin. Furthermore, it
remains that you choose them of three years old or thereabout, for sooner you
cannot train them to labor, though you have bought them: do not labor them
much for the first year, and especially in the time of great heat, feeding
them rather with good hay than with grass; so they will grow able by little
and little to endure all pain, and will fear the heat the less, and will
continue sound and cherefull a longer time, yea and they will spend you less:
for your cartell not feeding upon grass, you shall gather the greater store of
hay in your meadows, and better then and if your beasts had broused the
grass, being but young and peeping out of the ground. You shall know how old
they are by looking in their mouths, To know the age of an Ox.
for within ten months of the first year they change their fore-teeth: and
six months after the next, and at the end of three years they change them
all, and when they be in their middle and best age their teeth are white, long,
and even: but when they grow old, shey become short, uneven and black.

Laboring Oxen must not be too fat nor too lean, Laboring Oxen.
and those which eat softly and with leisure do abide and continue better in
their strength. The good Ox must be of a mean size or stature, The
description of an Ox.
gentle to handle, ready, and quick when he is spoken to, not craving the
goad: and yet notwithstanding quick also when he is pricked, and going forward
readily: in regard of his nature well limmed, short and broad, of a square
body, stout and stiff, having a round muzzle, great ears very hairy and
matches, a wide and curled brow, a great and black eye, hair curled, and
(...) it were waued, horns strong, quick, of a reasonable greatness, and
black, his br^^ke: hanging down even to his knees, his head short and well
compacted, (...) shoulders and breast, a great dewlap and belly, a round rumpe,
firm and sound legs* a long tail unto the ground, small and thick tufted
toward the end, straigh^ and plain back, stretcht-out ribs, large reins,
strong thighs and ^inewie, a short and broad hoof, short hair, shining
thick, and thick set, color black and red: this is the best: The second and
next thereto is the Bay, the Pie-coloured, and the spotted: The white is the
worst of all: The gray and yellowish are indifferent, his hide and skin thick
and well fed, betwixt four and eight years old; for at this age he is in his
full strength and lustiness.

The Ox thus made, The living age of an Ox.
will serve you to labor and work till he be ten years old, and after
that, you may fat him and ^ell him, for he lives till fourteen or sixteen
year old: You may also fit for the Geares, and unto work, such Kine as ar^
barren or gelded. But and if you buy Oxen already trained to the Yoke, and
fitted for the Cart or Plough, your Oxe-keeper must deal very advisedly with
them at the first, whether it be at the Plough, or any other labor, and find
out his manners, and how he has been handled, and what qualities the bringer
of them up has used and accustomed them unto, to the end they may be nourished
and continued i^ the same, to make their work the better: but and it you will
acquaint and fit any of your own heard unto labor, your Oxe-keeper must take
the pains, and must, for the more his and their ease, know their nature, and
(if I durst so say) the complexion of such as he would handle and break: if he
be a slow and sluggish beast, To know the complexion of an Ox.
if ^e lie down often, if he be quick, furious, and headie, swift to lift and
lay about his heels, or to use his horns: if he be dull of the prick,
trembling, going backward rather than forward, fearful to go into the water:
then you must first beat him from these faults, before you go about to
head-stall him, if so there be not any other thing that might rather hinder
and forbid him. And know, To take away f^ults is a young Ox.
that for to do these things is somewhat too soon before he be three years
old, and somewhat too late when he is past five. Meat and fair words do
accustom an Ox to the yoke sooner than fear. And there is no course more
expedient, than that which unn^^men do use about a young dog not yet made
ready to range, coupling him with another dog, which is already fitted,
old, and stayed: for it your Oxe-keeper do couple a young ox as yet a nouice,
with a well experimented and sure old one, and yet so as that they be of one
pitch and strength: (for this is a principal thing to match them in
greatness, strength, and nature) then he which has been already accustomed
to work, will guide and direct the unpracticed unto all the turnings of the
yoke, To match Oxen.
to all the fashions of the cart and plough. And if the ox be hard to be
nur^^red, and yet a comely beast, and in your judgment fit for the draught,
then put him in a great yoak^, betwixt other two of his own starure, which are
gentle and well reclaimed to their work, and in three days you shall see him
to buckle himself handsomely unto it also.

And if you will only tame them, acquaint him by little and little to endure a
rope, To tame Oxen.
and the fastening of it to his horns: and after a few days tie him fast to a
stake, Fasting for Oxen.
and there let him stand fasting some certain time: if he be stomackfull, when
his heat is somewhat ouerpassed, cause him to smell your hand oftentimes, that
so he may be acquainted with ^ou, and claw him betwixt the legs, and every
where else, speaking him fair. Afterward* let him draw a Bri^e or two made
fast in the yoke: and now and then set him to the empty tumbrell, A Brife is a
kind of ground that ^ath (...) long^ va^^^^ed.
and cause him to draw a little pretty way, after put into the tumbrell some
load, to try his strength, and in like sort acquaint him with your cries,
words, and goads.

If you have bought an Ox ready used and accustomed to draw, The way to
correct Oxen.
and that you do not know his complexion, you must try and find it out when
he is yoaked, as if he be restie, trembling, furious, or if he will lay
himself down in the heat of the day, and not to correct him for his faults,
neither with whip, neither with blows with the Goad; for the one makes him
furious and raging, and the other hardens ^im: but rather to bind his legs,
and so let him stand and fast a certain time; for ^his fault comes seldom
to a^e but such as are ouer-fed. Likewise there is a cer^aine manner and way to
be followed in feeding of them: and the lack of skill ^herein is not a little
fault, neither in respect of the soundness and safety of the beast, neither
yet in respect of the easiness of the work, which is attained when the Ox
(...) rather somewhat fat than too lean: for the beast that is high ^ed, if he
be outragi^usly heated by too much labor, is in manifest danger of death, by
reason of the ^oulting and running of his grea^e throughout his body: and
though he escape and ^die not, yet will he never do any good.

Oxen are not to be fed so frankly and full in Winter, when they labor not:
They love the straw of Pulse, Ordin^^ie mea^ ^or to g^^e Oxen.
as of Fetches, Pease, and Beans: they are fatned with Barley ^oyled, and
Beans bruised and broken: And as for Hay, it is not grudged them; and though
he has it not so largely as Horses have, yet it is his only meat when he
^aboureth. In the Country of Limosin, and elsewhere, where there is great
store of great Turnips, men use to fat them therewith: but such a beast is not
so strong, neither his flesh so fast and ^olide. The young sprouts and buds of
Vines do refresh them in Summer: and some do willingly give them faggots to
browse upon at night. They leave above all other things the young buds of the
Vine, and of the Elme-tree: and such like account they make of the dross of
the Wine Press. The sheaues of Wheat and Rye are good for them: and sometimes
Branne mixed with siftings* both these puff them up, and make them nothing
strong. The Acornes do make them scabbed, if they do not loath them, and if
they eat not all their fodder. Coleworts boiled with Branne make them to have a
good belly, and do nourish somewhat: so likewise does Barley straw mixed with
Branne. There may be mingled amongst their prouender the dross of the wine
made for the servants, but not before it be vvashed and dried: but without
doubt it is better to give them such dross before it be vvashed, even such as
it is, and so it will serve them for their wine and meat, and will make them
fair, deliberate, and powerful. Nothing is better to fat them, than to feed
them with the grass which grows in the meadows in Autumn after that they
have been cut.

But though this for necessity sake be the manner of feeding of Oxen in
France, The English manner of ^eeding cattle.
yet to feed them after the English manner is the ^oundest and best way, and
makes them ever more ready either for labor or the market; which is to say,
if you keep your Ox for labor only, then in the time of rest to give him
either Pease straw, Barley straw, or Oat straw, is a food that will hold well
enough, it the beast be lusty and in strength, but if he be poor and weak,
then to take two parts straw, and one part hay, and mix it together, which is
called blend fodder, is meat that will increase strength; and when you work
him sore, then to give him clean hay, or full bit of grass, is all that he
naturally desires.

The Ox is subject to fewer diseases than the horse. And for to keep him from
the most ordinary, To keep Oxen from diseases.
old and ancient men did purge them in the end of every one of the four
quarters of the year, and three days following. Some with Lupines and
Cypres-berries brayed together, as much of the one as of the other, and set
forth to infuse in the open air one night, in a pint or three half pints of
common water: others with other simples, The sickly Ox.
according to the custom and diversity of the place and country. He is known
to be sick and sickly if he eat not when he has good store of fodder or
prouender before him.

To help the Ox to a stomach, To get an Ox a stomach.
when he has no ^ast in his meat, by reason of being ouer-wear^ed, or
ouer-heated: it is used to rub his tongue and roof of his mouth with salt and
vinegar.

If he become faint and unable to do any thing, there must be given to him
every Month beaten Fetches, For ^aintnesse and disabiliti^ to do any thing.
steeped in the water which is to be given him for his drink.

To keep him from tyring and weariness, Wear^somn^sse^
rub his horns with turpentine made thin and liquid with Oil: but beware
and take good heed that you do not touch his muzzle or nosthrils therewith,
for Oil causes them to loose their sight.

Against the rising of the heart* The rising of the heart Colicke.
or desire to vomit, his muzzle must be rubbed with Garlic or Leckes
bruised, as also given him to swallow; or thus, that is, or with a pint of
Wine, especially when he is troubled with the collicke, and with the rumbling
of the belly: the collicke is known by his complaining and stretching of
himself in his neck, in his legs, and in his belly: as also, by his often
lying down and rising up again, by his not abiding in a place, as also by
sweating in such ^ort as if he had been in a Bath of water. Some add thereto
the Oil of Nuts, and others give him boiled Onions in red Wine, and others,
Myrtles, with Bay Berries steep^ in Wine, and they also cause his flesh to be
pricked about his hooues, or his ^aile until it bleed. The collicke comes to
him of weariness, and more in the Spring than at any other time, because as
then he abounds most with blood. In this disease he must be vvalked, and
covered with a covering of Wool.

Oxen become swollen and blown up by having eaten over rank grass, Swelling.
especially if therewithal it were ouerladen with dew: you must take a horn
bored through at both ends, anoint it with common Oil, and put the fore part
of it three or four fingers into the fundament, and to walk and course them
thereupon until they break vvind, and letting still the horn alone in such
manner as is above said, you shall rub their bellies with a bar.

The Stithie happening to the Ox, The Stithie, Ma^let, or Hammer.
being otherwise called a Mallet or Hammer, is known when the beast has his
hair standing upright all over his body, not being so light and lively as he
was vvo^t, having his eyes dead and dull, his neck hanging down, his mouth
driueling, his pace slow, his ridge bone and all along his back sti^^e,
without all desire of meat, and scarce any thing chewing the cud. This disease
may be cured at the beginning, but having once taken deep root, refuses all
manner of cure. Whereunto take of Squilla or Sea-Onion, small shred, three
ounces, the root^ of Melons beaten as much, mix all together with three
handful of gross Salt, and steep them all in a pine and a half of strong
wine, and every day you shall give of this unto the beast the quantity of a
quarter of a pint.

Unto the flux of the belly, The flux of the belly.
which sometimes continues till blood come, and vveakeneth the beast much,
there must be given to drink in red Wine the stones of Raisons, or Galls and
Myrtle-berries with old Cheese delaied with gross and thick Wine, or the
leaves of the vvild Oliue-tree, or of the vvild Rose-tree; keeping the beast
therewithal from eating or drinking any thing for the space of four or five
days. And for the last refuge or extremest remedy, it is used to burn him
is the forehead with a hot burning yrox.

For to loosen the belly of an Ox, To loos^n an Oxes belly.
you must cause him to drink in vvarme vva^^^ two ounces of Olives made into
poulder.

Admit that you would feed and fat him for labor, To keep him sound^^^
then you must vvash his mouth every eighth day with his own urine, and thus
you shall draw from him much ^legme, which takes from him his appetite, The
Ox (...) rheum^.
and does injury him in his meat. And if this ^legme have caused him to have
the rheum (which you shall know, when you see him to have a weeping eye,
and therewithal also without any appetite, and hanging down of his ^are)
then vvash his mouth with Thyme stamped in vvhi^^ Wine, or else rub it with
Garleeke and small Salt, and after vvash it with Wine. Some cleanse away this
phlegm with Bay-leaues stamped with the rindes of Pom^granets: others inject
into his nosthrils Wine and Myrtle-berries.

The Ox pisseth blood either by being ouer-heated, Piss^^^ of blood
or too much cooled, by having eaten ^uill herbs in the Summer time, and
especially at such time as the dew lies upon the grass: the remedy is, not
to suffer him to drink any water or other thing: to cause him to take down a
drink made of three ounces of Mustard-feed, three ounces of Sea mille^, both
stamped together, an ounce of ^reacle, all boiled, i^ two pints of white Wine,
afterward dissolve therein two ounces of Saffron, and make^ the beast to drink
it.

Against the rheum and eyes that are swollen and puffed up, The rheum in Oxen.
it is usual to let the ^east blood under the tongue: or to make him take the
juice of Leekes, Rue, Smal^age, and Sauine well purified.

For the spots in the eyes, there is commonly made an eye-salue of
Sal-armoniacke, S^ot^ in the Eyes.
^oistened and soked in Honey: some again use to anoint the eye all round
about ^vith pitch well rempered with Oil, because there is danger in the
Honey, as which ^ight draw Bees and Wasps about the beasts continually.

If he have the Barbes (which is a fleshie substance growing under the tongue)
^hey must be cut, The Barbes.
and afterward rubbed with Salt and bruised Garleeke together: after this his
mouth must be washed with wine, and with a pair of pincers you must ^inch away
the Worms which breed under the same tongue.

To cleanse the inward parts of the sick beast thoroughly, To pourge Oxen.
there is nothing more ^oueraigne than to take the dross of Olives after the
Oil is pressed out, and to use it ^oft about the beast.

Unto an ague which may befall him by ouer-great travel in hot vveather, A
F^uer.
with ^heauinesse in the head, swollen eyes and extraordinary heat, which is
felt by touch^ing the skin: the remedy used is to let him blood upon the vein
of the forehead, or of the ^are vein, giving him therewithal cooling meat, as
Lettuces and others, and washing his body with white Wine, and then giving
him cold water to drink.

If the palate of the beasts mouth being heaued and swollen, The pallat of the
^outh swollen.
do cause him to ^forsake his meat, and often times to groan: it will be good
to let him blood upon the vein of the said his palate: and then after his
bleeding, you shall give him nothing to eat but Garleeke well soked, bruised,
and ^usked, with the leaves of the same or other green thing, or very soft
Hay, until such time as he find himself well.

The disease of the Lungs is so desperate and unrecoverable both in Oxen and
Kine, The disease of the Lungs.
as that there is no other remedy, but to vvash the stall wherein they have
stood with vvarme water and sweet smelling Herbs, before you fasten any
other therein, which also in the mean time whiles this is in doing must be
bestowed in some other house. This disease happens unto them by reason of
evil herbs, or naughty Hay which they eat, or of the ouer-great abundance
of blood, but most of all through horse piss, and yet more especially by
keeping the beasts houses too close and over much shut. And this is the cause
why Mares not Horses (yet very well Asses) can or ought to be left in
Oxe-houses, because that the breath of Asses does preserve cattle from this
disease.

For the Cough there is ordinarily given to drink the decoction of Hyssope,
The Cough.
and to eat the roots of Le^kes, stamped with pure Wheat: others give to be
drunken seven days together the decoction of Mugwort.

If in drinking he swallow a Horse-leach, Blood suckers swallowed by Oxen.
and that the same do fasten her self by the way in his throat, then he must
be cast down upon his back, and warm Oil poured into his mouth; but and if
she be got into his stomach, there must Vinegar be poured in.

If he happen to to have his horn broken or shiuered, His horn broken and
shiuered.
take six ounces of Turpentine, and one of Gum Arabecke, boil it all
together, and with that ointment rub the horn all about every day, for the
space of ten or twelve days: which being expired, beat Bole-armoniacke with
eight whites of Eggs, spread this composition upon plegets, which you shall lay
upon the horn, leaving them there three whole days: afterward when these
plegets shall begin to be dry, take them away, and in place thereof spread
round about the said horn, Sage made into poulder; the horn will heal.

To fasten a horn which is very loose and ready to fall off: first you shall
se^ close and fast the horn in his place, A loose horn.
afterward you shall anoint all the uppermost part of the head, for the space
of five or six days with an ointment prepared of bruised Cummin-seed,
Turpentine, Honey, and Bole-armoniacke, all of it being boiled and incorporated
together, afterward you shall foment the horn with a decoction of Wine,
wherein have been boiled the leaves of Sage and Lauander in sufficient
quantity.

If the neck be swollen that it causes some suspicion of an Abscesse or
Apostume: The neck swollen
then you must open the Apostume with a hot iron, and put in the hole where it
was opened, the root of Sow-bread, or of Nettle, and this you shall renew
often: it will not be amiss to give him to drink a great pot full of the
decoction of medicke fodder, and in like manner to let him blood.

If the neck be chased, The neck stead or chased.
put upon the same an emplaister made of the marrow of the thigh bones of an
Ox, the seame and grease of a Male-goat, and Swines-grease, all being mix in
like quantity, and molten altogether.

It the hinder part of the neck be pilled and grown bald and bare without
hair, The chine pild and bald.
anoint the place with a liniment prepared of six ounces of Honey, and four
ounces of Masticke, all boiled together.

For the hardness of the hinder parts of the neck, The chine grown brawny
and hard.
let him take his rest certain days, during the which time rub the place
with Butter, Honey, Larde of Porke, and new Wax in equal quantity, all being
molten and mixed together.

For the swollen Chine, The chine swollen or puffed up.
make an ointment of the root of Elecampane well boiled, and stamped with
Hog's Grease, the fat of a Weather or Male-goat, raw Honey, Frankincense, and
new Wax; with which you shall rub the said Chine or hinder part of the neck
thrice a day, Evening, Morning, and at Noone tide.

If he be so lean as that his skin seem to cleave to his ribs, Hide-bound.
foment his skin against the hair with Wine and Honey, being in some warm
place, or in the Sun: after anoint him with the Lees of Wine and Hog's Grease,
all mixed together, and made in form of a liniment.

For the pain of the belly, Pain in the belly.
give him to drink Treacle, or Mithridate mixed with Wine, afterward let him
blood the next Morning under the tongue, and in the nosthrils, or else cause
him to drink the decoction of Rue and Cammomile finely powdered, and let him
rest at the least seven or eight days, giving him but small to eat, and
keeping him well covered in a warm house; four ounces of Turpentine
incorporated with a little Salt finely powdered, is a singular remedy for the
disease, if you make him take it in manner of a bole, pill, or drink.

For the falling out of the Draught-gut, For the falling out of the draught-gut.
take three ounces of Turpentine, cause it to be put up into the draught by
some little boy which has a long arm and lean withal, to anoint it
diligently, and this to be continued for the space of four or five days: in
stead of the Turpentine, the grease of a Hog will serve for an oyn^ment.

For the looseness of the belly, Looseness of the belly.
which comes of having eaten Herbs, or such other like things of hard
digestion: first keep him from eating of any Grass or Herbs for the space
of two or three days, in the which time you shall give unto him the leaves of
the vvild Oliue-tree, Plantaine, Horse-taile, and sometimes of
Nightshade-berries; and again, during this said time, you shall give him but
little to drink, this is to say, just nothing for the most part. Otherwise,
see that he eat no other things for certain days, than the Leaves of Organe,
and garden Southernvvod, and every day you must allow him only the quantity
of two eawers of water to drink.

To loosen his belly, The belly bound.
take two ounces of Hiera, one ounce of Aloes Hepatica, mix them both well in
vvarme water, and cause him to drink them in the Morning.

If he have a broken Leg, A broken leg
for to set it, draw it your self, or cause your servants cunningly to stretch
the Leg with a rope, right ought, not more to the one side than to the other,
that so the broken bones may be joined and placed again in even sort:
Afterward, let loose the two parts, that so they may join close together;
apply above the place pleage^s dipped in a composition made of the whites of eggs,
bol^armenack, and dragons blood, then tie up the member so strong and straight,
as that the two ends of the bones broken may join and grow together again:
above these ^ands apply yet other more pleagets wet in Wine, for the
comforting of the sinews. And to the end that the upper and lower broken bone
may not grow hard or get any other ill disposition or quality either by reason
of the binding, or else by reason of the fracture it self, you shall rub
both the one and the other part, with a liniment made of an ounce of
Turpentine, with as much Butter, and the like quantity of Oil.

For a Leg that is out of joint, For a l^gge out of joint.
or by some means displaced, restore again the bone into his former place,
and bind it up after that you have anointed it with Hog's Grease.

For a sweld Foot, A sweld Foot.
make an emplaster of the leaves of Elder-tree and Hog's Grease well boiled and
mixed together.

For a foundred Foot, For a strait^ed or hardened foot, founder.
take the roots of Mallows, and Hollihocks, boil them in a sufficient
quantity of water, stamp them and strain them through a strayner, to that
which is strayned out put half a pound of Hog's Grease, three small pots of
very strong Wine, boil them altogether, until the grease be melted, then put
there^o of Linseed well bruised and beaten in a mortar, and so boil them
altogether to the con^umption of the Wine. Apply some part of this cataplasme
unto the foot, and let it remain there three whole days; and then taking
away the same, apply the rest for other three days.

For Surb^tting, or Lamenesse, Lamenesse, or Surbutting.
you may boil Honey and Hog's Grease in white Wine; apply unto the Foot this
emplaster, and there let it remain three whole days.

For the Foot pricked with a Nail, Pricking of the Foot.
Glass, Thorn, or any such other thing that is sharp, cut the horn of the
hoof as near unto the pricked place as possibly you can, afterward drop into
the hole of Turpentine and Oil, both hot; and lay a plaster of Honey and
sweet Seame melted together all over the Foot.

For the Claw that is cloven or shiuered, The Claw cloven.
take Honey, new Wax, and Turpentine, of each an ounce, and make an ointment,
which you shall apply round about the Claw for the space of fifteen whole
days, which being past, add unto this ointment Aloes Heparica, Mel rosatum,
and Roche-Allome, of each half an ounce, cover therewith the whole Foot, after
you have bathed it in warm Wine mixed with Honey.

For the Claw hurt with iron or stone, The Claw hurt.
dig and pare away the Claw even to the bottom of the hurt, with a Smiths
paring knife: drop into the sore hot ointment made of old Swines grease, and
sewet of the Male-goat melted together, and put into th^fore, tents of tow
dipped in the said ointment.

When the hoof is like to go off, The going off of the Hoof.
you must first salve it with the ointment spoken of before for the shiuered
Foot or Claw, and that so long as until the horn of the hoof be somewhat
fastened to again: afterward, you must foment it for the space of five or six
days, thrice every day the whole Foot with Wine or Vinegar, wherein have
boiled vnquencht Lime and Honey, of each seven ounces.

For the pissing of blood, cause him to drink the juice of Plantaine, Pissing
of blood
with very good Oil: and afterward, take the poulder of Tartar, and of vvild
Gourds, mingle them with red Wine, and the vvhites of Eggs, and make him to
drink them with a horn: And if this do not stay his pissing of blood within
four and twenty hours, he will die.

If he stale not but with pain, Not to be able to piss.
let him blood of the blad^^er vein, and cause him to take a drink made of
Honey, Oil, and white wine all boiled together, for three Mornings one after
another: afterward, let him rest for eight days.

It he have a stone in his yard, The stone in the yard.
first cast the Ox down upon the ground; after let him take hold upon his
(...) with pincers; somewhat higher than the stone lies; the^ let him make
incision in the side of the O^e his pis^e to draw out the stone, and then
lastly consolidate and heal up the wound with Turpentine washed four times in
the water of Horse-taile.

If he have the stone in his bladder, The stone in the bladder.
take two ounces of Sea Fennel stamped, two drams of Cloves, and a dram and a
half of Pepper: poune them altogether, and make him drink them in red Wine
warm. If after you have continued the (...) some certain days the stone come
not forth, then in the end you must cut the bladder, and so draw it out.

If his pis^e be hardened, For the hardness of the pisle.
anoint it with the ointment made of the stamped (...) of Hollihocks and fresh
Butter twice a day.

For his shoulder out of joint, The shoulder out of joint.
you must first set it in again, and afterward bind and roll it up again with
splenters, very close and fast.

For the strangles or glandules which happen under the Ox his throat,
Strangles.
and spring from the brain ouer-cooled, pluck away their glandules, and after
cover his head with some covering, and chafe and anoint with Butter his
throat oftentimes.

If his palate be swollen, The pallat of his mouth swollen.
open the swelling quickly with an incision knife, or hot iron, that so the
corrupted blood may run forth: after give him for his meat some Grass or soft
Hay.

If he have the Ranula under the tongue much swollen, The swelling under the
tongue called Ranula.
then open it with a hot iron, or a very sharp incision knife, afterward
rub it with Salt and Oil so lo^^ as till all the corrupt matter be run out;
then in the end give him some tender hear^^^ or grass to eat.

When the tongue is cloven or chopped under neath, The tongue cloven.
anoint those clefts with a^ ointment made of Aloes, Roche-Allome, and Honey
of Roses, all being mixed together, then vvash them in Wine wherein Sage has
boiled, or some such other d^ying herb.

If he have lost his appetite, Lost of appetite.
cause him to swallow raw Eggs well beat together with Honey, and mingle Salt
among his meat, or give him in drink some horehou^d fiuely pouldred with Wine
and Oil: or stamp the leaves of Rue, Leekes, S^^llage, and Sage, and give him
them to drink with Wine.

For the eye that is troubled and dark, The troubled eye.
blow within it of the poulder of Cu^^lebone, Sugar candy, and Cinnamon very
finely pouldred.

For the swollen Eye, The eye swollen or puffed up.
apply thereto a Cataplasme made of the the flower of Wheat mixed with Honey
or the water of Honey, after the manner of pappe for children.

For a white upon the eye, A white growing upon the eye.
apply thereto a cataplasme made of Sal gemma, and Masticke finely pouldred
and mixed with Honey, continue and use this oftentimes.

For the Leeke of the Eye, The tumor called porrum.
or tumor called Porrum, growing upon the Eyelid, foment the place with the
Gall of any beast whatsoever it be: or which is better, snip away the tumor
with a pair of Cysers: or make it fall away with ^ thread tied very strait,
afterward anoint the place with Salt, Vinegar, and Alo^^ boiled together.

For the Weeping Eye, The Weeping eye.
you may blow into it Tutia and Vitrioll, made into fine poulder.

For the Cataract, The Cataract.
which is nothing else but an abundance of vvaterishness^ engendered either by
overmuch cold, or by too long stay and respite within the Eye of the Ox, in
that place where the watrie humor is placed, upon which the glassie humor
swimmeth, as the Chrystalline again upon it: For the cure thereof take ground
Iuie, and stamp it long in a Mortar of vvood, of the juice (...) out of it
make a medicine for the eye: instead of this herb, if you cannot recover it,
take the berries of Iuie or the leaves, and draw the juice of them in manner
aforesaid. Continue and use the one medicine or the other for many days both
^^^ning and evening, the Cataract will consume and wast away. It is certain
that who so instead of Water shall use Wine, shall seem to deal more fitly
and better to (...) purpose.



Epiphora, Epiphora.
a disease of the eye, called a dry inflammation of choler, is when the beast
^eeth not but by halfes, whether it be of the one eye, or of both: blood taken
away from under the eye, does correct and amend the sight: And further, you
must continually drop honey into it until it be perfectly cured.

For bleered eyes, The bleered eye.
which come with continual falling down of excrements out of the brain, take
Myrrh, fine Frankincense, and Saffron, of each two ounces, mix them all
together, and dissolve them in cestern water, make thereof a Collirie to drop
into the eyes.

For the agues of Oxen, An ague.
you shall know it by their being exceeding restless, and trembling all over
their body, by their great heat in the midst of their forehead, and toward
the roots of their horns, and in their ears; their mouth is very hot, and
sweat abundantly, and withal, eat almost nothing at all; the hanging o^t and
drawing in of his tongue very dry; heavy in his head; his eyes distilling,
and half sh^^; his muzzle filled and all to be dri^eled with flegmatike water;
and his taking of his breath long: and yet notwithstanding he does not,
without great pain and much distance of time, complain himself, or turn
often. The first day that you shall perceive him thus sick, let him fast all
the day long: the next day let him blood in the morning whiles he is fasting,
and that under the tail in small quantity. Five days after you shall feed
him with the decoction of Clot-burre with honey and brine; at the least you
shall offer him this before all other meat, either green or moist, as shall be
the crops of Lentils, and other young sprours and buds which you shall think
meet and convenient for the beast: wash his mouth thrice a day with a sponge
dipped in vinegar, and after that, you shall make him drink very cold water
(...) like manner three times, and so you shall let him go into some pasture
ground, until his Ague have clean left him.

The Cough The Cough.
of an Ox must likewise be as carefully looked unto as that of the Horse; for
it must not be suffered to grow old and endure long upon him, seeing (...) is
not curable but at the beginning: you shall make him take fasting half a
quarter of a peck of Barley meal, wherein you shall put a whole egg, the shell
excepted, and with a quarter of a pint of cured wine, you shall make him drink
it with a hor^^, or otherwise: Or else take of Dogges-grasse and stamp it,
after mix and steep it in warm water with Bean meal, cold Gruell, and the
meal of Lentils, all this being well mixed, you shall give it to the beast
early in the morning. For an old Cough it is sufficient to take two handfuls of
Hysope, old or new, and make a decoction in common water: after, when you have
strained it, you shall mix therewith of the flower of Starch two parts, and
cause the beast to take them thus. The distilled water of Hysope may be put
amongst, or else the decoction of Mints and Hysope together. The juice of
Leekes is good for the same, being pressed out well and strongly, and given
with oil Olive: for there has not been known so old and long grown a Cough
which the roots of Leekes, washed, made clean, and given in decoction with the
flower of Wheat, has not put down and rebated the strength of. Of the same
effect is the flower of the everlasting Tare, commonly given and used, or
offered with ho^ied water, at such time as the Ox driueleth most at his mouth.

For all manner of pains, Pain.
in what parts of the body soever they be, causing the Ox that he can neither
go nor do any other thing well, make somentations, and apply cataplasmes,
with the decoction of Camomill, Melilot, and Linseed.

For the ach of the head, Headache.
bray Garlic in wine, and make him let it down through his nosthrils: after
bath all his head with the decoction of the leaves of Sage, Marierome,
Lauander, Rue, Bay leaves, and Walnut-tree leaves in wine.

Scabs Scabs.
are healed with Duckes grease mingled with oil Olive: or else take the gall
of an Ox, and powder it, with Sulphur viuum, adding thereto Myrrh, Oil, and
Vinegar, and a little plume Allome well brayed and small powned.

Exulcerated places, V^eer.
caused either without manifest occasion, or else by some accident, are very
much helped with the powder of Galls well brayed in a Mortar: So are they
likewise by the juice of Horehound, wherein has been steept the soot of a
Smithes Forge.

In the diseases of the flanks, The diseases of the flanks.
wherewith Oxen are oftentimes tormented, you must make a Cataplasme of three
handfuls of the seed of Coleworts, with a quarter of a peck of Starch well
powned together and mingled with cold water, applying it afterward unto the
pained places. But the most sovereign that may be found, is, to take of the
leaves of Cypress, without the boughs, three handfuls, and to do as is
abouesaid, adding thereto strong vinegar, to knead and dissolve the same in:
but if this will not, then take three ounces of Perrosin, or Colophoni, which
is more hard, and dissolve and make them liquid at the heat of the fire, and
whiles it is yet good and hot, mix therewith the flower of Barley, and make it
all boil together, and so you shall apply this cataplasme very hot upon the
flanks, and so up to the reins.

It is to be known that the Ox has pains in his reins The pain of the
reins.
when he seems to draw his hinder parts after him, and cannot lift his legs
behind for his best ease; he staggereth and soltreth behind; he breaks not up
his tail, but suffers it to draw all along after him; his stale has an ill
sent, and all his hinder loins show heavy, move not but constrained, and
that in mincing manner. If there be any inflammation about them, he pisseth red
as blood: If this continue, and that he cast forth much such, there is then no
more remedy: but and if it be but a little colored with blood, there is some
hope of recovery. For this disease you shall cause him be let blood upon the
tail veins behind, or else of the vein called the Mother-veine, which is
found along the flank, to draw near unto the reins. For his drink make
him to take the juice of Leeks with vvarme water, or else his own urine.

For the inflammation Inflammation.
of the muscles as well outward as inward of the reins and flanks, which
comes of some fall that the beast has taken in some hard and stony place,
and which happens not without the company of a contusion, appoint that the
Ox which has fallen, so soon as he comes into his house, do not remove
from one place, bath the hurt part with cold water: after that, use and
apply unto it comfortable liniments and seare-clothes which may not be too
hot. The marks of this disease are, the outward parts over against the reins
are hard, the cods hung short, being gathered into the body, and that in such
sort as that there is not much of them left out to be seen; he stirs not
his hinder legs with any ease: and when he is laid, he rises not but with
very great pain.

Of very great cold gotten by having traveled in snowie and frosen places;
Pain in the heel.
or else after some thaw: the fault also may be committed in not having his
pasternes so well bathed with urine, and covered over with dung as they should
at evening after his labor: for upon these causes the heel grows
exuleerated, and makes show as though it would fall off and loose his place;
there begins a bearing out, which afterward turns to an ulcer, and
troubles the gate of the Ox: the place must be very deeply scarified, and a
slight fire applied afterward to the places searified, and again upon the
places so scorched the sweet ointment, otherwise called ointment of Roses,
with a defensatiue of vinegar and water, and so bound up and rolled. The core
once fallen out, the place must be vvashed with urine and vinegar made hot:
after this, there must be an emplaister or cataplasme of Melilot made, either
of the fore appointed, or of old Swines-grease, wrought and plied betwixt your
two hands.

If the cods be swollen upon any occasion whatsoever, The cods swollen
you shall anoint them evening and morning with sweet seame, or else bath
them with strong vinegar, wherein shall be tempered sine fullers earth, and
the dung of Oxen. Some hold it for a natural remedy to have the dung of a
dog to cure the swellings of an Oxes genitories, if so that they be often
rubbed therewithal.

The Ox is enchanted as well as the horse, The enchanted or bewitched Ox.
either by having eaten, or by having passed under the cross of a charmed
straw, or over a marked logge: the signs are, he becomes sad and not
cherefull and quick as he was wont at his work, yea he consumes and pineth
away, if there be not provided for him a very good remedy: cause him to take
down through his nosthrils; Bitumen judaicum, Brimstone, Bayberries, or
Iumper-berries, all mingled with vvarme water.

So soon as you know that the Ox is sick of any disease whatsoever it be,
For all the diseases of the Ox
cause him to take this purgation, the root of the Sea-onion, or Harts-thorne,
and of common Salt, all being boiled in water, and taken in the same water
vvarme, and give him nothing to drink or eat until it have done purging. And
to the end that you may keep him from being sick all the year, at the
beginning of the Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter, cause him to take down a
drink made of the leaves of Capers, Mercury, and Cypres pouned and mixed in
water, and let rest in the vessel one whole night, and so continuing this for
three mornings.

If he have been bitten of any Adder, The biting of Adders, Scorpions, and
Shrews.
Scorpion, or Shrew, or Mad-dogge, it (...) ordinary to anoint the wound with
Oil of Scorpions, or with Soap tempered and softened in Vinegar: also some use
to vvash them with the decoction of B^^^^burre.

And against the stinging of Hornets, The stinging of Hornets.
it is accustomed to rub the place with Ceruse tempered in Water: and some
do sprinkle the place of the Ox his fee^ding with the d^coction of
Bay Berries, thereby to cause the Ox flies to avoid and keep away; or else
they rub the Oxen themselves with the said decoction: and if he be already
stung, some do moisten the place with the Ox his own driuell.

The small beast abiding in the grass, Against the eating of Buprestis, and
the Snaile.
called of the Latins Buprestis, and resembling in so^^e sort the beast which
the French men call Fouillemerde, if it be eaten of Oxen, Kine, or Horse, as
they feed in the meadows, it so swells them as that they burst and die, as
we have observed in many, in the year past 1572. Now if the Nea^heard do
perceive that any of his Oxen or Kine have eaten any of these beasts, he must
make them presently to drink some Cows milk, or the decoction of dry figs,
or Dates in Wine, and withal give them very strong Clysters.

For the scabbe, Scabs and ulcers, Corns, and Apostumes.
some rub them with bruised Garlic, Sauorie, Brimstone, and Vinegar of
Galls stamped in the juice of Carmint, or Hore-hound and Iuie. And as for
ulcers, they are rubbed with Mallows stamped in white Wine: and as for (...)
and apostumes, they must be killed with strong leauens, onions, lillies, or
squils and vinegar, and afterward to dig them out, and wash them with the
beasts own (...) hot, and also put into the hollow places tents of Tar; and
finally, lint dipped in Goata or Ox sewet.

For the pain of the Eyes, Pain of the eyes.
if they beswolne and puffed up, there must be made an Eye-salue of the flower
of Wheat kneaded with Honey and Water.

If there be in them ever a spot or nail, Spots.
you must take Sal-armoniacke, and make an ointment thereof with Honey.

When the Ox has his eye continually trickling down tears, The Weeping Eye.
and berayeth all his cheeks with the humor dropping down from it, take of
the pappe that is made with Wheat flower, and make a cataplasme to be applied
unto the eye. The will Poppie, stalk and root, stamped with Honey, serves to
make a medicine for this purpose.

In the pains of the flanks, Pains of the Flanks.
which oftentimes torment Oxen, you must make a cataplasme of three handfulls
of Colewort seed, with a quarter of a pecke of Starch well stamped together,
and tempered with cold water, and after apply it unto the parts pained. The
best remedy that can be found for them, is to take of the leaves of Cypres
without the boughs three handfulls, and to do as before, adding to them strong
vinegar to work and dissolve them in.

In the pains of the reins, Pains in the Reins.
you must let him blood in the veins under the tail behind, or else the vein
called the Mother-veine, which is found along the flanks drawing near unto
the reins: for his drink give him of the juice of Leekes with warm water, or
else with his own urine.

For the scabbe, Scabs and lcie.
you must rub it with his own stale, and with old salt Butter, or anoint it
with Perrosin melted in white Wine. Unto Lice, you must use the decoction of
the wild Olive tree with Salt, and you must take away the bladders which he
has under his tongue. For the pain of the Lungs, some make him drink the
juice of Leeks with sweet white Wine: and some put into his ear the root of
Hazle tree.

For the difficulty of breathing, Difficult and hard fetching of his breath.
some do pierce his ear, or the great skin of his throat, with the root of
Beare-foot, or Lyons-paw, or Hellebor.

If he have his should pitched and shrunk, you must let him blood upon the foot
behind, Shoulder pitched.
and on the contrary side: and if both his shoulders should be shrunk, then
you must let him blood on both his hinder legs.

If he have his neck broken, The neck bruised.
and the chine bagging and swollen, you must let him blood upon one of his
Ears: and if it be in the midst of the neck, then of both, and lay unto the
disease an emplaister made with an Ox marrow and sewet of a male Goat, molten
in equal portions in Oil and Tar, or melted Pitch: as also to rub the
swelled part with a collop of Bacon, without any fat, and which is of a Hog,
and a little heated, and this to be continued morning and evening the space of
five or six days.

If his feet swell, Swollen feet.
you must apply unto him a Cataplasme made of the leaves of the Elder tree,
stamped with seame made of Hogs grease.

If his hide cleave to his bones, The skin cleaning to the bone
you must bath him with wine, either alone, or mingled with honey.

If he halt by taking cold on his feet, The halting Ox
you must wash them with his own stale, old and warm: If it come through
abundance of blood falling upon his pasterne and foot, it must be dissolved by
rubbing it hard and scarrifying it. If yet it will not away, and be
notwithstanding but newly fallen down, you must cleave the horn of the hoof
at the tip thereof even to the quick, and so cause it come forth, and wrap his
pasterne in a Leather pouch, in such sort, as that the water may not hurt him
till he be whole. If he halt by reason of some sinew, having taken a blow by
some other beasts heel, then you must bath his legs with oil and salt. If
it come with any swelling in the knee, you must bath it with vinegar made hot,
or with the decoction of Millet and Linseed. In all such haps, you must burn
with a hot iron the part diseased, and then put upon it fresh butter washed in
water and vinegar, and after in the end to make an ointment with salt butter
and the grease of a male Goat. If it grow upon any splint, or dash against
any stone or stock, you must bath the place with hot stale, and lay upon it
old Hogs grease melted in Oil and Tar. And there is nothing that will more
keep them from halting, than to wash their feet with cold water so soon as
they be vnyoaked, and after to cha^e them with old Hogs grease.

If the horn cleave or shiuer, The horn (...).
you must first foment it with vinegar, salt, and oil mingled together: after
put upon it old Swines grease melted with new Pitch, or else to grease it there
with Spech-grease for five or six days, for this will stay the cleaving of
the horn, and make it close and fast where it was shiuered or any way
sundered.

If an Ox do put forth new and young claws, The horns of his hoofes fallen
off.
his hoof being fallen off, then make an ointment with an ounce of Turpentine,
an ounce of Honey, and as much of new Wax, and therewith you shall anoint the
claw for the space of fifteen days: after that wash it with warm wine boiled
with honey: or else apply thereto a Cataplasme made of Aloes, honey of Roses,
and half an ounce of Allome made in powder.

Buffles, Buffles, or wild Bulls.
or wild Oxen, called Buffes, are better for drawing of a Load, than in the
turning of the Ground; for they are never so free, not yet so (...) standing to
their work: clean contrary to the Oxen of France, which are fitter for the
tilling of the Ground, than for the Cart, as being more strong, more nimble,
and fitter to toil so great diversity of Grounds as we have in France,
whether they be Mountains, tops of Hills, Valleys, void Fields, or Plains: to
be brief, where Ground is soft, rough, light, hard, white, black, and of
diverse natures. In Italy, about Pisa and along the Marenne (as it is there
called) their Buffles, of which they have great store, are employed in Draught,
being fastened by couples one after another to the number of twenty or thirty
together in one Teame. The Cheese which is made of the milk of the females,
and turned round, is of an unsavory ^ast: but when it is cut in slices, and
fried in a pan, it is sauorie. Oxen called Brans.
Wild Oxen, which are called in Prouence and Languedoc Brans or Branes, are not
fit for any thing, by reason of their great furiousness and wildness, except
only for the shambles. Such Oxen are brought up in the fennie places of
Lamargues, and upon the Seacoast, far from the haunt of other beasts, or
walk of man.

As also the Bull which is brought up in the Pastures of Villages, The labor
of the Bull is not good.
and keeping among the herds of other beasts, and acquainted with men, is not
good or profitable for the plough, for that he is too sturdie, and will not
match himself with gelded Oxen. Neither yet is there any great good reaped of
the labor of a gelded Cow: The time for the Kine to take the Bull.
but you must keep and fat the Bull by himself for the Kine, which shall be
put to take him about the months of May, June, and July: and one Bull is
enough for threescore Kine. One Bull for threescore Kine.


The Oxen intended to be kept to be fatted and sold, To fat Oxen to sell.
shall not draw but some once or twice a week, and that when it is fair
weather, and a good season, and that the earth is easy and gentle: and they
shall meddle but with little burdens, only to exercise them: and they shall
eat nothing but Barley, Hay, and Sheanes, and sometimes the young buds of Vines,
and others, such as they love: and that Ox which has wrought in the morning,
shall rest at afternoon. The ancient Romans did fasten some small quantity
of Hay to the horns of such Oxen as would strike with the horn, to the end
that all that met him should take heed. And hence rises the French Proverb,
He wears Hay on his horn; pointing out a hot and wrathful man: in as much
as Oxen, Horse, Asses, and Men themselves become fierce and outrageous, by
being ouer-fed, and eating their full according to their hearts desire.

When as once the Farmer does perceive that his Draught Ox is unfit for labor,
An old Ox.
he shall feed him sometime, not letting him do any thing: after which, he
shall kill him and salt him in pieces, for the yearly nourishment of his
family, and by the same means shall reserve the marrow and the gall of the
Ox for his service and use when he shall have need: for the marrow of the Ox
does very much good in resolving and softning hard tumors. The gall of the Ox
is yet better than that of the Bull: it does thoroughly heal the ulcers of the
fundament, mixed with the juice of Leekes: being dropped into the ear, it does
take away the buzzing of the ear: being rubbed about childrens nauels, it
kills the worms: being mixed with honey, it is good for the inflammation of
the throat: mixed with the juice of Beets, and drawn into the nose, it puts
away the fit of the falling sickness: it is more profitable than any other
thing to give a yellow die and color unto Skins and Brasle: being scattered
and sprinkled upon seeds, it makes that the reaped corn will not be devoured
or eaten with Mice.

There is sometimes sound in an Oxes gall a stone of the bigness of an egg,
The stone of the Ox gall.
and of a yellow color, which given in drink, is very good against the Stone
and Iaundise* applied unto the nosthrils, it makes the sight more clear, and
hinders the falling down of rheum upon the eyes. In like manner, Husbandmen
may do themselves much good by the use of Neats dung: The dung of Oxen.
for it cures the stingings of Bees, resolves swellings, and all manner of
tumors, mitigateth the pain of the Sciatica, and makes a great deal less
the swelling called the Kings evil: mixed with vinegar, it wastes tumors
coming of a Dropsy: being fried in a pan with the flowers of Camomill,
Melilot, and Brambles, and applied unto the swollen Testicles, it restores them
unto their natural proportion and bigness.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Of the Hogheard.
AMongst all Cattle serving for food, The Hog a greater feeder than any
beast which is for man's food.
the most ravenous, the most filthy, and the most harmefull (that is to say
the Swine) is had in great estimation, and much commended amongst us for the
sweetness of the flesh, whiles yet it sucketh and is young, both for the Sowce
and salted parts thereof, as also for the Lard, the Skin, and the Bristles
thereof. The rauenousnesse and greedy feeding of this Beast, is witnessed by
the Sow which the French King killed in hunting, Six pailes of Grapes found in
the belly of (...) Sow.
within whose belly were found six pailes full of Grapes. Their filthiness
and stench, their wallowing of themselves, their eating of stinking and filthy
things, as also the harm that they do, may be answered and proved by their
rooting up and undermining of Walls by the foot and bottom, the trampling
which they keep about Trees, Meadows, and unsown places. For this cause, in a
Farm of great revenues (such a one as we describe in this place) there
needs a special man only for that purpose, to govern and guide them in the
fields* (...) such a one as knows to dress and order his Heard in good time,
and in clean^ and cleanely sort to put the Pigges that are wained, in one
place, wi^h the Bores and Hogs; and the Sowes, with their young ones, into a
second place by themselves: and yet further, the sick and diseased into a
third particular place by themselves. The commodity of fresh straw.
Fresh straw oftentimes giving them, and renewed, does fat them as much as
their meat: And you must take care, that their Troughes be always clean: And
against variable weather, the Hogheard must have in store much Acornes, Swines
meat.
Beans, Crabs, or wild Pears, or some other rotten Fruit, or some manner of
Pulse, or some Washings of Vessel: and for want hereof, some steept Barley,
together with Bran and Coleworts, or boiled Turnips, or great Nauers, to offer
unto them. And every day when they come from the field, let the Huswife
procure in readiness for them some dainty hot meat; as Whay, the droppings of
the Cheese mingled with Bran and Water, having first had three or four boiles
together: for besides that, this good attendance will cause them to make have
home, and not to forsake their company to run straggling abroad, when the
Hogheard would have them to come home: These hot drinks and meats do also
heat the cold meats which they shall have fed upon in the field all the day
long: and thirdly, they will rest better in the night: and lastly, not become
so subject to diseases. And let there be special care had that their meat be
not cold, not too thin, least is cause them the flux of the belly.

There is also two other Foods, which are very natural and excellent for
Hogs: the first whereof is Ale or Beer Grains, that is to say, after your
Malt has been ground and masht, and that you have drawn both your best and
your smaller drink from it; then with the remains, mixed either with Whay,
Buttermilke, Washings of Vessels, or such like, you shall feed your Swine twice
a day, and be sure to fill their bellies. This food will preserve and keep
them in good plight and liking: and though it will not fatten, or make them
ready for slaughter, yet it will hold them in good flesh, and prepare them so
well for feeding, that with less cost you may make them serviceable. The
second is Chaundlers Grains, which is the dregs, skins, and other substances,
which at the melting of his Tallow will by no means be dissouled; these you
shall mix with the Swines Wash, being a little warmed, and give him a good
meal thereof three times a day, and it will fatten him exceedingly, and in
very short space.

Also if you take raw Malt when it is almost ready to go to the Kilne, To
feed Swine speedily.
and as the Husbandman says, is only well comed, and with it feed your Swine,
there is nothing in the world that will sooner fatten them: for besides that it
is a great feeder, it feeds and makes both the flesh and fat exceeding
white, and pleasant both to the eye and taste: Only this observation you must
ever hold, that when you have fed your Swine to his full proof, with what food
soever it be that you feed them, that then you harden that fatness, by giving
the Swine good store of dry Pease or Beans four or five days before he come
to slaughter: for without it, the fat will consume in the pot, and the flesh
will much lessen. Now during the time that you feed your Swine, it shall be
good that once or twice you give them good store of Veriuice and Radle or red
Oaker mixed together: for this will not only stay the flux of the belly, but
also cleanse and prevent the Meazle, which is very incident, and generally
happens to all Swine in their feeding. Also you shall note, that the
Husbandman is of opinion, that you cannot outer-feed or make your Swine too
fat: for (says he) the fatter your Bacon is, the more is your profit, and
three bits of such Lard shall sooner cloy and fill the belly of a hynde, than
a whole Gommon of such Bacon as it half fed, and has the lean thereof
equally mixed with the fat together. Whence it comes, that the thriftie
Husbandman will seek all means, both by Mast, Corn, Hippes, Hawes, or any
other moat, to raise his Swine to as great proof as he can any way compass.

Let the floor or pauement of their cote be laid with thick pauing stone,
The swine cote.
and every month renewed with gravel or sand to dry up their pis^e, for
this beast though he be sluttish and dirtie, does notwithstanding prosper best
in a clean house that is well kept and maintained. And to the end that the
corruption of the air which this kind of beast makes in close places may not
cause him to have either any ill sent or other diseases to grow upon them in
their cotes, especially when they are in any number together: it behooves that
the door thereof be made with thorough lights of great bars, or cloven
bords, to the end that their evil air may pass^ away, and that which is good
may come in place continually, and it is meet that the door should give down
very near unto the causey, to the end that they may not lift it up with their
snouts, and cast it off the hinges: for this cattle can hardly endure to be
shut up, but gnaw and bite with their teeth, whatsoever it be that hinders
the^ from coming forth where they are enclosed.

The Hogs which you intend to keep in and to fat, The feeding of Hogs.
shall not come forth of their stie, being alone and free from others, neither
shall they have any light but at the door which is made to go in at for to
dress them. The care about them is not so great as of other cattle, excepted
only the keeping of them clean, and knowing how to make them good meat, so
long as until they be fat, for after that they will every day leave some of
their meat, not stirring out of their place, as though they were without
feeling and power for to move, in such manner as that though the great height
of fatness, that they are grown unto, and the thickness therewithal, Mise
may sometimes make their nests upon their backs, and yet they feel them, for
they are sometimes seen to heap such quantity of fat upon the live flesh, as
that there are some Hogs found a foot and a hal^e thick of Lard.

Keep not above ten Bores for a hundred Sowes, Ten bores, for a hundred
Sowes.
and so forth proportionably: the rest as well Males as Females let them be
wained, and gelded after a year old, or six months at the least, howbeit the
most infallible time and opportunity i^, when they begin to grow hot, and go
a brimming. Eight^ene pigs to one Sow.
Suffer not above eighteen Pigges ordinarily to suck one Sow, but sell the
rest at eight or ten days old: and a year after, Signs of a good Hog.
waine and geld the rest, and so put them into the field: keep those
especially which have a short and broad head, the snout set high, and long
without, the breast fat and broad, the chine of the neck large, his feet short,
his thighs great, and in the rest, very short, gross, square, and well packt
together, of color black or white, and full of bristles upon his back, for
to make Bores: and those which are very long, side bellied, great headed,
large buttockt, and sides giving out, likewise all of white color, a small
head, and short legs, for your Sowes: of the rest mak^ provision for the
house.

Let not your Gylt go to bore, The time for the Sow to take Bore.
till she be past a year old, and let the Boore b^ betwixt three and four:
for after he be past five, he must be gelded to be fa^^ed. The time to put your
Sow to the Bore, whether it be to breed, or to put up to feed, is best in the
^i^st quarter of the Moon, and unto the full, for before it is not good, no
more than it is in the old of the Moon: and it shall be from the beginning of
February unto mid March* or a little after, to the end that in June, Iulie,
and August, your Pigges may grow to have some strength, and may be well grown
and thick^ of (...) by September: for Winter Pigges are hard to rear, and not
so kind as the other: because this kind of cattle is more chill than the
others, which is the cause that in many places they have their cote and stie
provided and dressed with li^^e and straw, although they have sufficient store
of stone, lime, sand, and plaster: you must also beware that the Boore keep
not company with the Sows that are with Pigge, for he would but bite them and
cause them to cast their Pigges.

This beast is a great eater, The hog cannot abide ^unger. Sowes eating th^^r
own pigs and children.
and cannot endure hunger, especially the Sows, which in this necessity have
been seen sometimes to eat their own Piggs, and those of others, as also
children in their cradles, which is no small inconvenience: and therefore you
must have care that their troughs be never empty.

For to make Hogs very fat, The time to g^ld Hogs.
you must geld them. It is best to geld them in the old of the Moon, in the
new, or in the wane, and in the Spring, or September, the time being temperate.
If you geld them young, the flesh will be the better, but then they grow not so
much: If you geld them, grown somewhat big, they grow a deal more, but then
the flesh is not so good: And therefore it will be good to do it when they are
betwixt four and six months old, and at the most not to go above a year.
They are subject unto many diseases: And the Hog is known to be ficke, How
to know the diseases of Hogs.
when he hangs the ear very much, and does become more slow and heavy
than he has been accustomed; or that he is found to be without appetite: For
your better certainty, when there do not appear any of these signs, pull
from him, against the hair, a handful of the bristles of his back; if they
be clean and white at the root, he is ^ound and healthful: but and if that
they be bloody, or otherwise spotted, he is sick.

But he is subject especially to be meazled, The meazle in Hogs.
because of his much and filthy feeding: and this is the cause why some do
search the roots of his tongue, and others behind the ears, when he is carried
to the Markets to be sold in Faires or in good Towns. And I think that this
was the cause why our forefathers made it not an ordinary thing to eat, and
that the Jews do abhor to eat it at all. This disease is not cured but with
great difficulty: The way to cure the meazle Hog.
notwithstanding it will in some sort be cured, if his Stie be every day made
clean: if he be suffered to walk and go into the fields in the fresh air:
if he be caused to bath or wallow himself oftentimes in Sea water, or salt
water: if he have Bay Berries beaten and mingled amongst his meat: if there be
given him the dross of the Wine Press, mingled with Branne and Leaven. Signs
of the meazled Hog.
Now there are three infallible signs to know the Swine to be meazled: as if
there be found under his tongue blackish pustules: if he cannot carry himself
upright of his hinder legs: and thirdly, if his bristles, pulled off his back,
show bloody at the roots. Likewise, for that the Hog, by reason of his
filthiness, for the most part has one fault or other betwixt his skin and
flesh, how sound soever he be; it is good, after he be killed, to have his
hair swinged off with straw, rather than to scald them off with hot water: It
is better to burn than to scald hogs.
for the fire does draw out a great deal more easily than warm water that,
whatsoever it is, that may be betwixt the skin and the flesh. Yet the
scalding of Hogs keeps the flesh whitest, plumpest, and fullest, neither is
the Bacon so apt to reast as the other; besides, it will make it somewhat apter
to take salt: howsoever, if it be for Porke, then you must necessarily scald
them, because the fire will else harden the skin too much, and make the flesh
unkindly: besides, the swindging of Hogs leaves the roots of the hairs in
the skin, and the scalding brings them forth, which makes the flesh the
better.

He is also subject unto the pain and swelling of the Spleen, Subject to the
Murraine and swelling of the Spleen.
and to the Murraine, which in contagious times does a great deal the more
easily seize upon foul and filthy bodies, and such as are of a bad feeding.

Against his want of stomach to his meat, Lack of appetite.
it is used to cause him to fast a day and a night close shut up in some dark
place, that so he may wast his superfluous humors, and fall to eat his meat
again.

For the Ague, Physic for Swine.
he is to be let blood in the tail: and for the Rheum and swelling of the
kernels of the neck, or yet when he is but suspected to be meazled, he is to
be let blood under the tongue. Ag^e, Rheum.


For pain and swelling happening unto him in the time of Fruits, Swelling.
when there is great store, and that he feeds his full upon the rotten, he
must be caused to eat old Capers well scoured from salt through branne and
water; as also much Coleworts, as well red as others: and some do make him a
special meat of Tamariske.

For the scabs and kernels of the neck, Scabs.
some use to rub him with beaten salt with the flower of pure wheat.

If he have eaten of Henbane, The eating of Henbane or Hemlocke.
which ancient men have called the Hogs be^ne, or else of Hemlocke, he must
be made to drink the decoction of wild Cucume well warmed, for to cause him to
vomit.

He must above all other things be well kept with drink in the time of the Dog
days, and other such hot times, and to suffer him to moile and tumble in the
dy^^ at his pleasure; for thirst Thirst.
causes him to become poor and lean and in weak estate.

The Egyptians do greatly honor the Swine, Swine honored of the Egyptians.
and give him manifold thanks for having first showed them the manner of
tilling the ground, by clea^ing and cutting of it with the forepart of his
snout, and as one that by little and little has taugh^ them to make the
Ploughs culter. In like manner, they which dwell in low and so^^ places along
by the River Nilus, have no increase of the earth but what they toil and
labor out of the same with the Plough: but the Peasants do nothing (...) put
their Swine into their Fields, and go after them with Seed; and because that
Swine have the gift to dig up the earth with their snouts, and to tread in
the Corn with their feet, they use them to ouer-turne all their Ground (...)
of hand, and so to cover the Seed which the Country people have cast upon the
same.

Furthermore, Hogs grease.
the good Householder (besides the good provision that he shall make for
himself and his family of the Porke cut in pieces, and well salted in (...)
Larder) shall further gather his grease for the axle-trees of his Waines and
(...)* Again, the good Huswife shall make her profit of it in like manner for
the d^ease^ of her family, in as much as it is very good to draw to a head
all sorts of apostemes, being mixed with leaven, as also to heal the moles of
the heels, if the powder of (...) be mixed therewithal, and the ashes of the
flower of Barley.

It is used in a common proverb, Swines dung.
That the Swine has nothing in him but it is good, his ordure and dung
excepted; but experience shows the contrary: for the dung of a Swine fried
with fresh butter and equal quantity of lumpes of cluttered^ blood, spet out
by him that bleedeth abundantly, being given to the party so bleeding to eat,
does stay and stop presently his spetting of blood.

It remains that we declare how we ought to salt Swines flesh. To powder
Swines flesh.
All manner of Cattle (but especially the Swine) which we intend to use for
meat, must be killed (...) the new of the Moon, or in the first quarter: For
if you should kill it in the (...) of the Moon, look how much the longer you
defer to salt it, so much the (...) time and fire must it have to boil it
when you should use it: and for this reason, (...) Sawsidge, or such other like
meat, does become less by a quarter when they are boiled. For this cause also
it is, that the skillful Husbandman will not buy these kin^^ of beasts to make
his provision of, if he be not sure that they were borne in the ^^crease of the
Moon: for otherwise also they do grow but little, and their flesh (...) not
of sufficient weight when as one has killed them. To kill Swine in the
increase of the Moon.
Kill therefore your Swine (...) the increase of the Moon, and let them not
drink the day before you intend to (...) them, that so their flesh may be the
more dry: for and if they drink, the salting time will have the greater
quantity of superflouus moisture to drink up: Also the flesh will be the
better, if they be kept fasting but one half day before they be killed* Now
when you have thus killed them in their thirst, and half famished, it shall b^
for the best to take out as many of the bones as you can, for this will cause
the sal^ing to be of better effect, preserving the flesh the longer from
corruption. After cut the flesh in pieces, and put it into the salting Tub,
making as many beds of salt gross^^y brayed as there is of flesh, the one
above the other: And when the salting Tub shall be in a manner full, you shall
fill up the head with salt, and press all down (...) with very heavy
weights. Some put these pieces and the salt within a table-cloth* (...) within
a sack that has two mouths, and shake it up and down therein, that so (...)
take salt in every place, and afterward lay it orderly in the salting Tub,
strawing (...) upon every bed. In some Countries they use not in such sort to
cut it in piece^ to cause it to take salt; neither do other some put it in salt
brine in a close powdring (...) but after that they have made it into pieces,
they divide all the Lard in two, and salt these two halfes all of them, making
the salt to pierce and enter into them with a rowling-pinne: and this thing is
not done at one time, or in one day, but at two or three times, and in two or
three days space: after they hang them to the ioice of some boorded floor, or
to the crookes set up in some vaulted roof, if so be there be any vault; and
the Lard thus salted, is more fast, and of a better taste: And if it fall out to
be long kept, and to pass a year, it grows to be of a golden color: So it
is better to salt and keep it thus for them which desire to have that which is
excellent good, rather than after any other fashion that has been spoken of
heretofore.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the Shepherd.
IF the greater part of the profit of a Farm depend upon and consist in the
keeping of Cattle; which is performed by that part of increase which the
Farmer spares in his Fodder, Siftings, Ridlings, and such other things, which
cost him nothing but the pain to gather and lay them up: then I dare be bold
to avouch it, that the most profitable and fruitful provision for the Country
House is of such beasts as bring forth Wool. The care of providing Sheep, and
the profit thereof.
It is true, that there must all diligence be used to keep them from Cold,
from the Purples, from the Scab, from two much rankness of blood, from the
Rot, and other such inconveniences as sometimes spread and proceed from one to
another, and that he has likewise care, and do his whole endeavor, in
keeping them both in the Fields and at the Cratch: but it is as true that there
rises as great profit and commodity to the Farmer. For besides the dung which
they make, and which exceeds all other kinds of dung in goodness, for the
great substance, strength, and heartening which it gives unto the ground, they
bring yet infinite other commodities: as by Wool, whereof are made Cloth,
Hats, Caps, and many other stuffes: by their Fells, which serve for Furre or
for Leather: by their Milk, whereof are made Cheeses very excellent, as may
be seen by those which the Town of Betune does afford: and finally, by their
flesh, which is so good and excellent of it self, that no continual use of it
does ever make it the less pleasant in the eating: so that for certain it may
be said of it, that if the flesh of this Beast were as scarce as that of the
Fawn, Hind, and other Venison, it would be the only Venison of request before
all other in the world. And this further is to be seen and observed for a rare
and singular commodity in all the foresaid things proceeding from these
Cattle that bring forth Wool, The profit of Sheep and Muttons.
and not lightly to be passed over of the Husbandman; namely, that there is not
any one of them which is not always ready, and of present employment, and
whereof there are not more buyers than sellers, so that the Husbandman need not
doubt of any long staying for the sale thereof. For first of all, the Dung is
in employment the very first hour; the Wool no sooner shorn, but it is
greedily caught up; and so soon as the Mutton is flead, you have a chapman for
the flesh, and another for the Fell: The Cheese will either serve you at your
Table, or else the Merchant. But and if you be not disposed thus to retaile the
several commodities of this beast, you shall find chapmen to buy them in
gross* Which is yet more, if you be not able to abide until they be full
grown, and in their ripest season, to be made money of, yet then may you find
to content your self, and procure pence by selling away such of the Lambs as
may be culled out of the whole flock. Let it not then seem strange, if we
teach the good Husbandman, that he attend and have a special care over his
Sheepefold, and that in a higher measure than over any other of his Cattle.
The seating of the Sheepe-house.
Wherefore he shall set his Sheepe-house in the highest part of his Court,
right in the face of the South Sun, to the end it may be the less annoyed with
moisture, and more open to a wholesome air: which shall be of such length, as
that his slocke may have room therein without treading one upon another,
setting it round about with Mangers or Sheep-racks of a low pitch for to fodder
them in. There shall be a floor of sawed boords betwixt the Sheep room and
the Roof, to the end that they may be the warmer in the Winter, and that the
Snow, which may beat in at the tile, do not fall down upon their fleeces, and
so melting with their heat, pierce down unto the skin, and make them cold. He
shall have a Shepherd for to guide them, which shall be gentle, loving his
flock, nimble, of a loud voice, and able to whoop well, given to take pains,
able to reckon, and by nature inclined to good and honest things: for there are
but few of this profession now adays (especially near to Towns and Cities)
but that by their slothfulness and great leisure do give themselves to some
evil devises, practices, and malice, rather than to the good and profit of
their masters: so that of them ill disposed, we daily see to ensue and grow
many thefts, filching and pilfering prankes, Shepherds the inuentors of
Astrology, etc.
out-rodes, witchcrafts, and infinite other mischiefs. On the contrary, the
first Shepherds of Egypt and other places were the bringers to light of
Astrology, Physic, Music, and many other liberal Sciences: and I know not
whether I may father the worthy art of Warfare upon them, or no; as also
Policy, Principality, and the Government and welding of Kingdoms: for sure I
am, that they did entrench themselves in the Field, and there lived under
Cotages and Cabines made of bough^ many years, observing at leisure the
courses of the Stars, the dispositions of the Seasons, and by long use and
observation marking the goodness and prosperousnesse, as also the
inconveniences and hard successes, of Times: in such sort, as that of the
Shepherds of those times came and sprung the men of deep knowledge and
understanding: The Hieroglyphics may witness the same. To conclude therefore,
there is great care to be had in the choosing of a good Shepherd.

But I understand and set down with my self, Signs of good Sheep.
that a good Farmer, to the end he may have a fair flock of Sheep, does buy
them unshorn, not having a gray or spotted Wool partie-coloured, because of
the uncertainty of the color. He shall reject as barren all such as have
teeth of more than three years, and he shall make choice of them of two years,
having great bodies, long necks, long deep Wool, silken, small, and bright
shining: great bellies, and covered with Wool: great pap^, great eyes, long
legs, and a long tail. He shall much esteem the Ram which is tall of
body and long, which has a great belly, and covered with Wool, a long
tail, The signs of a good Ram.
and a thick fleece, a broad forehead, and thick set with hair, black eyes,
and beset with strong Wool, gross stones, large loins, great cares, and
covered with Wool of one color, not diversely colored in any part of his
body, well horned, and notwithstanding but small horns, wrythen and turned
back rather than strait and open, his tongue and palate white, to the end that
the Lambs which he shall beget may have their ^leeces all white: for if he
should have it all black, or else bespotted with black under the tongue,
howsoever he may be of a white Wool, notwithstanding, the Lambs which he shall
engender will have mingled and spotted coats, either with black or gray, and
so by this means will become of less account and profit* Although the horned
Ram has this discommoditie, A horned Ram.
that finding himself armed by nature, he seeks to do nothing more than to
fight, and is so much the more earnest with the Sheep, urging them mightily
thereunto: notwithstanding, he is much better than one without horns: for he
knowing himself without horns, is not so ready to fight, The Ram without
horns.
and is also less hot by nature, according to the traditions of France: but
according to the experience of other Countries, the Ram without horns is the
best for breed, The best Ram
being best shaped, best woolled, and best mettalled, having been often seen
to have slain with his bare head him that has been more than extraordinarily
armed, with great, spacious, and round twyned horns. Besides, the Ram
without horns begets his young without any danger to the Ewe in her
yeaning, whereas the Ram which has horns, begets his Lambs with such
horns, that the damme dies often before she be able to yeane it. Now the
Shepherds are wont to bridle and correct the heat and furi^ o^ a Ram that is
too headie and disposed to fight, The rage of a Ram.
by binding to his head a good strong board, stricken full of nail points on
the side toward his forehead: for such a one will keep them from pushing one
at another, seeing they cannot iurre but that they must hurt themselves: or
else they bore their horns through, near unto the ears; for so are some
Shepherds accustomed to do.

The Sheepe-cote, as well as the Swine-cote, shall be paued with pauing stones,
and made to hang over the Court toward the dunghill pit, where must be set
some Ro^emarie of Beaux, in respect of the smell of the sink conueying their
piss. It must be situated (as has been said before) upon the South: for these
Cattle, howsoever they be well covered by Natures work, are notwithstanding
such as cannot endure or away with Cold, and as badly can they abide the heat
of Summer: and therefore they must have made for them a long house, very low,
and sufficient wide. The situation of the Mangers shall be about a foot and a
half from the floor: and there shall be high straight poles, and set thick,
made fast unto the said Mangers, that so the Sheep may be kept from going on
the other side of their racks. The office of a Shepherd.
The Shepherd shall keep his racks and hurdles for void rooms, and making of
separation between room and room, very clean: and he shall also make them
so fast, as that they may not in any case fall, and that so the Rams may not
go unto the Ewes, nor the Lambs unto the diseased Sheep. He shall be
careful to make his Ewes take Ram after the first two years, for the space
of the next five after ensuing; for when the seventh year is once past, they
begin to fail and wither away: and again, the female taking Ram before she
be two year old, brings forth a feeble and a weak brood, without any
strength; but and if she bring forth before that age, you must sell her
Lambs: The Ram that is to blesome Ewes, must not be under three, nor above
eight: One Ram will serve to blesome fifty Ewes: The time most fit to couple
and put them together, is about the Winter Solstice, which is in the month of
November, to the end that the Ewe which goes with Lamb five months, may
Lamb in the Spring, in which time she shall find the grass beginning to
spring, and so shall return home with her Vdder well filled, to suffice for
the feeding o^ her young: which will be grown to good perfection by Easter; at
which time the Butchers will be ready to buy them. Furthermore, for some days
before that the Ram and the Ewe be coupled together, you must give them to
drink salt water; so the Ewe will hold better* and the Ram will be the more
lusty: but after that the Ewe is with Lamb, you must not let her drink any
such water, because it would cause her to Lamb before her time. If the Farmer
desire to have many Weather Lambs, To have many Lambs.
it will be good, according to the counsel of Aristotle. to observe and spy
out a dry time when the Northern wind blows, and then to cause the flock to
feed, drawing directly upon the same wind; and in that very time, and after
that sort, to make the Ewes take Ram: but and if he would have many Ewe
Lambs, he ^ust draw them to feed upon a Southern wind, and so let the Rams
cover them.

When the Ewe is in Lambing, The Lambing of Ewes.
care shall be had to help her if need require, drawing the whole Lamb out of
her body, if it lie overthwart, and cannot come forth: For this poor Beast is
pained in Lambing, as Women be in bearing of their children; and oftentimes
(being void of reason) she trauaileth with much greater pains. The L^mbe
being come forth, it must be lifted up and holden right, and afterward put to
the teats of the Ewe, thereby to use it to suck the damme: and yet not so
forthwith, but that there be some of her foremost milk drawn out first, which
otherwise might hurt the Lamb. The ordering of young Lambs.
Afterward it shall be shut up with the damme for the two first days after
that it is lambed, to the end she may keep it the warmer, and it may the
better learn to know her. In the mean time, care must be had to feed the Ewe
with the best Hay that may be found, and with a little ^^anne and Salt amongst:
to keep her in a house very fast and sure, and not to suffer her to go forth
of three or four days: to carry her water to drink, a little warm; and
wherein is mixed a little of the flower of Millet and of Salt: to draw from her
her first milk, because it is not good. And so soon as her Lamb shall begin
to know her, she may be let loose to go feed in the fields; and to keep the
Lamb fast in a warm and dark house, until such time as it begin to play the
wanton: out of which house it shall be let loose morning and evening to suck
the damme at her coming home and going to the fields. And after that it shall
be grown a little stronger, you shall give it, within house, some Bran, or
very small Hay, and that the best that is to be gotten, to keep it occupied
with all the time that the damme is in field.

The wise Shepherd will not keep, What Lambs are to be kept for the
furnishing of the flock.
for to store his flock, any other Lambs than such as are the grossest, most
corpulent, and strong, and which will well be able to hold out Winter: and as
for the rest, he will learn them the way to the Town to seeks new Master. He
will be always sure to keep a good round number to uphold and renew the
losses that may fall by death or by sickness.

The wise Shepherd will not geld his Lambs till they be betwixt five and six
months old: and for to geld them, To geld Lambs.
he shall use the means set down in the gelding of Calves. In Winter he
shall fodder them with the best sheaues of Corn in the Barn: and he shall
rake together the scatterings which they make from time to time, which after
will serve for L^tter for the Kine and Horse.

For want of Corne-sheaues, Fodder for Sheep.
he may fodder them with the green boughs or leaves of Elmes, or else of the
Ash tree, gathered in their season, or with Autumn Hay, or the after-crop. The
tree called Cytisus is good for them, if it may be found in this cold Country,
and being a thing so much desired and sought after of the Goats, as they who by
the use thereof are made fruitful in milk; so likewise is the Fetch:
notwithstanding, the straw of Pulse will be necessary for them when they
cannot have any other thing, but that all other manner of Fodder is gone, and
not to be come by.

As concerning the time when they are to be led forth to feeding, What time
Sheep should be carried to pasture.
in Winter, Autumn, and Spring time, you shall keep them close in the
morning, and you shall not carry them to the fields, until the day have taken
the frost away from off the ground: for at these times the frozen grass does
beget in them a rhewme and heaviness of the head, and looseneth their bellies.
In Summer he shall carry his flock to the fresh pasture by the point of day,
when as the tender grass is covered with the dew: and toward noone he shall
look out either vaults and hollow places of the earth, or else the covert and
shadow of some thicket, to keep his Cattle from the heat of the Sun: or
else some old Oak, stretching forth his boughs: or the Forests and place^ of
tall Timber trees, which give a shadow. And in as much as this Beast is very
tender above the head, and is greatly offended by the Sun, he shall be
careful in Summer, during the great heat, to observe when the Canicular days
begin, that so before noone-tide he may draw his flock to feed upon the West,
and after noone upon the East. For this is a thing of great moment, that the
head of the Sheep which are feeding, be turned contrary to the Sun, which
oftentimes hutteth that kind of Cattle, at such time as the Canicular days
come in.

In cold and moist weather, To water Sheep.
as in Winter and Spring time, he shall water them only once a day, but in
Summer twice, that is to say, four hours after Sun rise, and at night,
after the heat is rebated and well ouer-past.

The Shepherd shall order and govern them with great gentleness, A gentle
Shepherd.
as it is most requisite for all Herds of whatsoever Cattle that it be, who
must rather be and show themselves leaders and guides of their beasts, than
lords. Guiding them to the field, he must always go before them, to hinder
and keep them back from running into fields where they might feed upon evil
and hurtful grass: and especially such grounds as wherein the water uses to
stand, or where the ground has been ouer-washt with some Flood, and breaking
forth of some River, because the by pasturing in such places, they could not
choose but in less than^ forty days be teinted, and die, except they were
relieved and succored by some good means. He shall rather keep a white dog
than one of any other color to follow his Sheep, and he himself also must
be apparelled in white, because that Sheep re naturally so inclined to fear,
as that and if they see but a beast of any other co^our, they doubt presently
that it is the Wolf which comes to devour them. This dog must have a
collar of iron about his neck, beset with good sharp points ^f nails, to the
end that he may the more cheerfully fight with the Wolf, percei^^ing himself
thereby to have the advantage, as also that the Wolf may not take oc^asion to
hang him in his own collar: If it happen that his Sheep be scattered, to ^all
them in and bring them together again, whether it be for keeping them out of
^arme, or to cause them to know his call, he must whoope and whistle^after
them, ^hreatning them with his Sheepe-crooke, or else setting his dog after
them, which ^he shall have trained to do them that service: but he may not
cast any thing at them, neither may he go far from them, neither yet take
himself leave to lie or sit ^owne: he must accustom them to two sorts of
cries, the one pleasant and shrill, to ^ake them go forward: but to call them
back, to another and diverse cry, to the and, that the Sheep hearing these
two different cries, may learn and apply them^^^ues to do that, which is
thereby commanded them. If he walk not, yet he must ^tand, to the end he may
be as a vigilant watch unto his Cattle: and he must not suf^er the Slower, or
those which are with Lamb to straggle from the rest, or come far ^ehind
them, by hanging back, when the light-footed, and such as have already
Lambed, do run before, least by that means some th^efe or devouring beast
de^eiue them, and come upon them busy at their meat. He must sometime make
them ^errie, cheering them up with songs, or else by his whistle and Pipe: for
the Sheep ^t the hearing thereof will feed the more hungerly, they will not
straggle so far abroad, but they will love him the better.

He shall not draw them into any grounds, but such as are tilled and turned,
or to the grassie tops of Hills, to the high Woods, or else such Meadow grounds
as are not moist and wet; but never into Marish grounds, nor into Forests, or
other places, whereas there are Thorns, Burres, and Thistles: for such does
nothing but make them itchie and scuruie, and to lose their Wool. Also it is
not so good fodder, nor so good feeding, which for long time has been in
continual use: for so the Cattle will grow weary of it, and offended
therewith, except the prudent Shepherd use some remedy against it, by
mingling some salt amongst it, or sprinkle it with brine or dregs of oil upon
some flower, and so with their meat he should give them both sauce and appetite.

In the high time of Summer, The Shepherds life in Summer.
the Shepherd shall come with his flock to their lodging, and shall fold them
amongst the fallowes, and there make his fold with hurdles, after the manner of
the Sheepe-cote, the covering excepted: And at the four corners of his fold he
shall tie his dog for a sentinel and standing watch, lodging himself in the
said fold, within his Cabin of Wood, which he shall drive upon wheels to and
fro, as he shall have occasion to change his field and fold. He shall cleanse
his Sheepe-cote but once a year, The clea^^ng of the Sheepe-cote.
and that shall be presently after August, or else in July, being the time when
his Heard is folded: but never in Autumn, nor in Winter, for then their dung
will serve to keep them warm. And then forthwith the Farmer shall cause the
same dung to be carried unto the leanest parts of his land, and shall leave it
there on hillocks to dry in the heat of the Summer until October, and then to
cause it to be spread upon the ground* or else to mingle it with Marle, to dung
and manure the earth: howbeit, Marle must not be reiterated so often as dung, for
which cause he must use such discretion, as that he must not lay any Marle but
from five years to five years in any place. It will be good after that the
Sheepe-cote is made clean, to perfume it with Women's hair, or Hearts horn, or
the horns of Goats claws, thereby to drive away Adders and Snakes, and other
beasts, which oftentimes annoy this kind of Cattle.

He shall procure his Sheep to be shorn the first hot season falling out in
the Spring, Shearing time.
if it be in a hot and Southerly Country; but in the Country that is cold,
and not so warm, about the end of July: but never in Summer, or in Winter, and
but from eight a clock in the morning until noone, and that in fair weather,
without wind, and the Moon growing old. Afterward you shall struck the shorn
Sheep all over their skins with your dry hand, moistened in oil and wine
mingled together, to comfort them withal: and if there be any snips in their
skins, you shall apply unto them melted Wax or Tar with sweet Seame, for this
does heal them and keep them from the scab, and causes also a finer and
longer Wool to grow up an^ come in place. To keep your Sheep in good plight,
you shall give them Bay berries dry with salt, beginning presently after they
have Lambed, and continuing until they go again to Ram: by this means
they will be fat, sound, and full of milk* After they be once with Lamb, you
must give over that course, least you cause then to cast their Lambs: they
must not at any time drink soon after this meat.

Sheep are subject to the Scab, The diseases of Sheep.
Cough, and Blood, which is an extreme pains (...) the head, and to the
Murraine. The three last diseases are incurable, and also infecting for one of
them having any one of these diseases, kills the other of the same. And at
such times you must change their Air and Cote, and withal, look to them
the^^, and refresh them with straw, giving them that which is long and small,
and perfuming their Cote with Time, Rosemarie, Juniper, Pennyryall, Marierome,
Balm, (...) Basil, and other sweet herbs, many days together: and
presently you must (...) unto the other Salt, with a quarter of a pound of
Brimstone mingled together, which will purge them and heal them of the
infection. These diseases happen them through eating of evil herbs, or
drinking of standing water, or for that the place where they feed, has been
ouer-washed with some flood or great streams of water, in which case they
never fail to fall sick in less than forty days: wherefore to meet with
such inconveniences, the good Shepherd must go every day before his flock,
and ^eepe them from going into the fields, where he knows that there is any
occasion for them to incur any such inconvenience.

For the Scab in Sheep, The scabs of Sheep.
you must make an ointment: of the powder of Brimstone, of the root of Cypress
as much of the one as of the other, mix them with Rhasis (...) white Ointment,
Camphire and Wax to make an Ointment of: after you have (...) three euenings
rubbed the said Sheep, Scabs in Sheep
you must wash them with Lee, with Sea water, or Brine, and lastly, with common
water. The very same remedy serves forth (...) rott^^ Sheep.

For the Cough, The rotten Sheep.
if it continue, you must make them drink in the morning with horn the oil
of sweet Almonds, and a little white Wine, being warned together, and give them
fresh straw, and cause them to feed upon Folefoot; for it is commonly in the
Spring time that they are troubled with this disease: but and if it should
happen at any other time, there may a little Fenigreeke be given them, beaten
with C^min, and of the powder for Horses. The hear be called Knot-grasse is
very bad for Sheep: for and if they eat any of it, all their belly is
swollen and blown up, frothing out a thin and very stinking humor. You must
presently let such blood under the tail, in that place which is near unto the
buttockes: In like manner, it will be (...) less good to let them blood upon
the vein which is in the nether and upper lipp* But to make sure to prevent
the dangerous and common disease of the rot, To preserve Sheep from the rot.
which being once caught, is after impossible to be cured; you shall in the
morning, as soon as you drive them from the Fold, or bring them from your
Sheepe-house to the plac^ where you would have them feed, with a little dog
chase them up and down the space of an hour and more, till you have (as it
were) almost tired them, and then (...) them rest and fall to their food at
their own pleasure: And thus you shall do in the evening also; the reason
whereof is this: In the morning your Sheep coming hungry from the Fold, and
finding the thick Dew, Cobwebs, Meldewes, and suc^ like filthiness upon the
grass, they will with all greediness devour and eat it, that which, nothing
in the world sooner procures rotting: Now being thus chased weary, they will
not only with their feet beat that corruption from the ground, but also,
through their weariness, forbear to eat, till such time as the strength of
the Sunn^ beams have exhaled and drawn away those fogges, and made the grass
both pure and wholesome: by which experiment it has been approved, that where
ten thousand have died for want of this exercise, not one has quelled which
has been used in this manner.

For a short breath, Shorinesse of breath.
you must slit their nosthrils, as is usually to be done unto horses; or else
cut their ears one after another.

Unto the sheep which have the ague, The Sheep ague.
it is good to be let blood in the heel, or betwixt the two claws of his
feet, or upon his ears, afterward keeping him from drinking, were it never so
little. The most sovereign remedy to cure them of the ague, as also of many
other diseases, is to cause to be boiled in Water and Wine a Rams stomach,
and give it them to drink with broth.

The sniuell, of sheep, The sniuell or shot.
as that also of horses, does keep it self so close within the lungs, as that
neither by blood letting, nor by drinks it can be expelled. The best remedy
is to strangle the beast if the disease continue but two days: for the other,
as well males as females, do greatly desire and delight in that which these
driuelers do leave upon the edges of the rackes, and lick it away, thereby
themselves shortly after falling into the same disease. Certain marrers of
Mules rather than ke^pers of Mules, say, that there must be hung about their
neck a Toad of the vine whiles she is living, made up in a bag of new cloth,
and so leave her there for the space of nine days: others, that he must be put
to grass, if it be a horse; and one sheep by it self in a several pasture:
others say, that Garleeke and fresh Sage must be stamped together, and a drink
made thereof with strong Vinegar, whether it be for Horse, or Sheep, or any
other beast: others give them to drink a spoonefull of Aqua vitae, with
Mithridate. There will no other success come thereof, but the corrupting of
the Lungs, and the Cough, which such have as are rotten. And as for help for
this disease, there is not any other, but even the anoyding of them out of the
way.

The Corns which use to vex and torment sheep, Corns troubling Sheep.
are healed with Allome, Brimstone, and Vinegar mingled together, or with a
Pomegranet whiles it is young and tender, and no kernels grown in it, being
stamped with Allome, and a very little Vinegar: or with gals burnt, and the
same shaued and put in gross, or red wine, and so laid upon the corns.

S. Anthonies fire, S. Anthonies fire in Sheep!
which the Shepherds call the flying fire, is hard to cure, because that
neither salve nor burning, not yet any other medicine can help the same. There
is nothing else to be done unto them but to foment them with the milk of
Goats, and it is good to shed and remove out of the flock the first sheep
that shall be taken with this disease.

The blood is a turning about, For the blood in Sheep.
called the sturdie, and it takes them in the times of the greatest heat; so
as that thereupon they turn about, stumble, and leap without any cause, and
if you touch their head or feet, you shall find them in a very great heat. For
this you must speedily take a sharp horn and make incision in the vein which
is above the nosthrils, and that just in the midst thereof, and as high as
possibly you can: hereupon, the beast will presently faint, but come unto
himself again within a short time after, and that sometime to his good, but
sometimes (and that does oftener fall out) unto his evil. Some Shepherds have
tried the letting of them blood in some small quantity in the Temples, and
have found it to ease them sometimes; as otherwise, for such as have had the
cough or cold, they have given a spoonefull of Aqua vitae with Mithridate.

For the Plague, For the murraine or plague amongst Sheep
there is the like remedies for beasts, as there is for men: and I think, that
this sort of cattle is the more subject unto it than any other, as is also the
Swine in respect of the filthiness thereof, and stinking of the dung. But for
the better preventing thereof, it has been devised and thought good
oftentimes to perfume their cratches with such sweet herbs as has been
spoken of before, as Penniroyall, wild Balm, Rue, and Iuniper-berries, and
oftentimes to make them eat amongst their meat, common Melilot in steed of free
and mountain Melilot, commonly called Cytisus, and of wild Penniroyall:
moreover, Organie, as also wild Balm is good as well for this disease as for
the cough.

If the sheep become lame through tenderness of his claws too much softened,
(...) in sheep.
by having stood over long upon his own dung, and that in such sort as that
heca^ not go, your must cut off the tip of his so decayed claw or claws, and
put thereupon quick lime, tying it on with some linen cloth, and this is to
be continued only (...) the space of a day: and then upon the day following,
to apply unto it some ve^^igrease, and thus to use these two things in the
like courses, so long as until the hoo^e be whole and sound.

If the sheep have swallowed a Horse-leach, Horse-leaches swallowed.
then you must put down into his throat strong Vinegar which is vvarme, or
else Oil.

If the sheep have any Impostume in the upper part of her flesh, An Impostume.
then it must be opened, and Salt pouned small and burned, and mixed with
melted pitch, must be put into the wound.

When the Ewe is with Lamb, Ewes with Lambs.
if she have a black tongue, it is a sign that she will have a black Lamb,
and contrariwise; and so a Lamb party colored, if her tongue have spots of
diverse colors.

The Wolf will do no hurt unto the sheep, The Wolf.
if you tie wild Garleeke unto the neck of him that goes foremost.

It is good also to succor Lambs if they need, The diseases of Lambs.
as whether they have an ague, or some other disease: if they be sick, they
must be taken from their dammes, but give them notwithstanding their milk to
drink, mixed with as much rain water, if they have an ague. Oftentimes they
have the scabbe and itch upon their chin after they have eaten grass covered
over with deaw. The itch of the chin.
The remedy is to take Hyssope, and as much bruised Salt together, and
therewith to rub the palate of the mouth, the tongue, and all the muzzle,
and afterward to wash the ulcers with Vinegar, and so to anoint them with
tar and swines-grease.

Beware of eating any sheep feet, Sheepes-feet.
whereout you have not taken a worm that lies betwixt their claws, for this
worm swallowed down, does provoke vomit, loathing, The ^unning of Lambs.
and great pain of the stomach. As for the rest, the runnet of a Lamb drunken
is good against all sorts of poisons. The bowels or lungs of a Weather newly
killed, applied unto the head, is sovereign against frensies, and for such as
are deadly grieved with headache. The bowls of a weathes. His langs. His
skin.
The lungs of a sheep dried and made into powder, does heal the kibes of the
heels. The fell of a sheep newly killed, applied to the broken, beaten, or blew
parts of the body so made by rodds of twiggs, by treading upon, or such like,
is a speedy and singular remedy for the same; provided, that they have not
been caused by the biting of a Wolf. The wool of a Weather.
The wool of a sheep does appeal the aches and swellings of such places as
it is applied unto, so that they have not been caused of the touch of any
Wolves tooth, for so in steed of taking away the pain, it would aggrauate and
increase it. The biting of the Wi^fe.
And which is more, as Plutarch makes mention in his small works, the wool
of a Weather or Ewe touched with the teeth of a Wolf, does make it apt to
engender rottenness, but contrariwise in the flesh, as making it more tender
and delicate by the biting of it, for as much as the breath of the Wolf is so
hot and burning, as that it melts and digesteth the very bones in his
stomach: Candles made of the sewet of a Weather or Ram of it self and
without any thing mixed with it, candles of weathe sewet.
put in a chest among clothes or linen, does keep them from the Mise. The
dung of Ewes with vinegar does cure all hanging warts, as hard swellings,
whether they be called cat-haires or corns.

Now having spoken thus generally of Sheep, their profits, natures, qualities,
keepings, and preseruations, we will a little (according to the opinion of
Serres) made further into their use and properties, you shall then understand
that sheep are two ways two fold, first they are either pasture sheep, (...)
of Sheep.
or field sheep; sheep bred either of a fruitful ground, and rich leare, or
upon barren ground, and poor leare, your pasture Sheep are those which are
kept in several and enclosed grounds, being either fertile or hard, and have
their preservation either for breed or the shambles, and the field sheep are
those which are kept on the tylth or sallow fields, or else upon open and wast
commons, and are preserved either for breed or the manuring of arable ground,
and those sheep which are to walk upon the fallow fields, you shall put to
the Ram rather before than after Michaelmas, that their Lambs may have
strength before May day to follow their dammes over the clots and rough
grounds, and your pasture sheep you shall put to the Rams not before S.
Lukes day that the dammes may have full bit and strength of grass to feed up
and fatten their Lambs quickly, for the choice of your sheep for any of these
soiles, you shall take such as agree with the leare and color of your earth,
rather bringing them from a worse soil to a better, than from a good soil to
a bad; knowing withal that your fat earth though it bear a great sheep, and
much burden of wool, yet it is but course, and your barren earths, though it
bear but a small sheep, and smaller burden of wool, yet if the leare be
right, the wool will be finest and dearest, except the soil be very much
cold, or very much moist, and then the staple will be but hairie, as may be
seen in the Northern and less fruitful Countries. Now for the leares of
sheep, you shall understand that the brown hazell leare is of all other the
best, the redd leare next to it, the yellow leare next to the redd, and the
dunne dyrtie leare of all other the worst, and least profitable, all manner of
sand grounds yield good leares, so do most of your mixed earths, your clays, if
not too wet, are reasonable, but your flyntie, grauelly, peeble soiles, yield
never any goodness at all, your doded white fast sheep that is rough and
well woolled about the eyes, is ever profitable both to the sheares and the
shambles, being commonly of good bone, are good burden, but the bare or black
fast sheep, though he may have a good coat, yet it is so light that he cannot
be held much commodious to either.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of the Goat-heard.
Sundry countries in Europe, and particularly some places of France are to be
found, where they have not the commodity and benefit of any greater cattle
than the Goat, and of this they can make milk meats, much Butter, and more
wholesome than that of the sheep, as other things also accompanying the same,
the wool and skin only excepted, of which notwithstanding they make Chamlet
in Turkey, Chamlet made of Goats hair.
and as for their young ones, they are sold in their season, and make as good
meat as any that can be found. And this time is when as birds do couple and
match together, and other beasts go to rut, for the young ones of this kind
being indeed very young, Young Kiddes well esteemed. The ^oosening trick of
cooks.
are apt to be compared with the Lambs of the same age. Witness to the
Cooks and Vittailers, which craftily set the tail of a Kid upon the quarter
of a lamb, which is found to have but a skinnie and unsavory flesh, without
any daintiness or taste at all save of the milk.

The Goat is fed as it were with nothing: he brouseth and feeds of all manner
of grass, of pricking things be they never so sharp: upon the hedges, bushes,
The goats usual meat and fodder.
brambles, yea upon venomous and infectious things, he loves to brouse the
wood of fruit trees: he delights to lick the moist walls, and rocks tasting
of Saltpetur, in such sort as that you shall never see a Goat dye of hunger: he
feeds for the most part of a more solid meat than the Weather, and climeth
into higher places, and where the Sun has greater power: besides, he is of
greater stirring, and more given to exercise, and therewithal framed of a more
strong and lusty body. These have been the causes why men in times past have
esteemed them, Goats are of great request in hilly countries.
as they do yet also in hilly countries: and we for the few that we have, do
provide Herds and Houses for them amongst the Sheep, and we separate the
male Goats in such sort as we do the Rams. Their house must be paued with
stone, either by workmen or naturally: for these cattle are not allowed any
kind of litter at all, and that because they like it better to lie upon the
bare and hard ground, than to lie upon litter: yea and oftentimes they will lie
asleep upon the ^^rie points of rocks, or upon the steep corners of high
hills toward the heat o^ (...) Sun, rather than under any shadow; or else
upon the fresh and soft grass: but (...) be of variable complexions; and
therefore it is no shame for a man to call anoth^^ goatie, if he be found
mutable and full of changes in his manners and carriage. An^ for as much as we
are far off from Languedoc, Auuergne, and the hilly places (...) Sauoy, in
which this kind of provision being a special commodity of those countries, is
had in great estimation, we will make a shorter description and discourse both
of the manner of ordring them, than we do in the like case of such as bear
woall as also for that these two sorts of cattle are placed together under one
roof, and (...) one cratch, feeding upon the like fodder, and are as it were
handled after the (...) manner, and kept in the same flock.

The painful Goat-heard shall make clean their house every day, The office
of the Goat-heard.
and shall not suffer any dung or moisture therein, or that with trampling they
make any dirt, for all these are very contrary unto goats. He himself must
be of the nature of goa^* that is to say, nimble, courageous, rough, hard,
diligent, patient, cheerful, and bold, and aduenturing to go amongst the
rocks, through deserts and bushes, no^ that he should follow his flock into
every place as other herds do their cattle, b^^ that he be every day
before them. He must not be charged with more than fifty, because this cattle
is foolish and dissolute, easy to stray abroad hither and thither, contrary
unto sheep, which keep together, and trouble not their heard with gathering
of them together. He shall beware and not suffer them to feed in cold places,
far cold is more hurtful unto them than any other thing. He shall draw them
forth to the fields by break of day so long as the dew falls; that so having
filled themselves of the grass thus bedewed, they may return home about nine
of the clock their vdders of milk: and then again, about three, they are to
be sent to the fields, that they may feed and continue there until the
evening. In Winter time he may lead them to fields from nine a clock until
night, without any hurt done unto them, either by the open air, or cold, be it
never so sharp, they are of so strong (...) It is true, that if the weather be
tedious, or Rainie, or full of Snow, as in Winter, he shall keep them in their
cote, and give them to eat the tender sprouts and stalks of herbs gathered in
September, and dried in the Sun, and afterward kept in the hay loft, or some
such other place out of the rain. He shall use the means to cause them to
engender in Autumn before the month of December, The goats bucking time.
as he does the sheep, to the end, that in the Spring, when the trees bud, and
the woods begin to put forth new leaves, they may bring forth their young ones.
When he would have his goats to have good store of milk, To make the goats to
have much milk.
he shall give them to eat enough fiue-leaued grass, or shall tie about their
bellies the herb Dittanie, or else carry them to feed in some place where
there grows great store of it.

The goodness of a goat must be esteemed and gathered by these signs. If she
be one year old, The (...) a good goat.
and not past five; if she have a great body, firm and swift, thick hair,
great and gross teats, large beneath the tail, and about her thighs, rather
of a reddish or black color than of a white; for although that some say, that
the white do yield more milk, yet the reddish colored and black are more
pleasant, frolic, and merrily disposed: without horns, rather than horned;
for those which have no horns, do not cast their young so soon, and they do
keep more conveniently amongst sheep, than those which have horns.

The male goat is much to be esteemed if he be not above five year old (for in
respect of his heat, The male goat.
which is exceeding great, he does easily grow old:) which has a great body,
gross legs, a thick and short neck, hanging and great ears, a small head,
black hair, thick, neat, and long, without horns; for such as have horns,
by reason of their pushing and eagerness, are dangerous: which has likewise
under his chaps two bearded knobs or kernels.

The profit that the farmer may make of his goats, (...)
is their dung, whether it be by folding them upon their fallowes in the Summer
time, or that it be such as is made (...) gathered in their coats: the Kids,
the flesh whereof is held so dainty: the Goat-^word, whereof gloves are made;
as also counterfeit Shamois, dry leather, or Spanish ^^ather, and all the
baggs wherein Oils are wont to be carried in to and fro: the (...) of the male
goat, whereof are made the best dry and Spanish leather, so much (...) request
for pumpes and pantofles: the sewet of the male Bucke, whereof the phy^^tions
do make such use, and find so singular in the curing of bloody fluxes: the
^kins of Kids, whereof are made handsome, dainty, and soft gloves, good
girdles, ^^urses, and needle-cases: and Cheese which shall be made after the
fashion of Cow-milke-cheese. It is most true that some do make them after the
fashion of little thin Angelots, and those are the excellent cheeses, which
have been wont to be made at Nismes heretofore, as Pliny records, howsoever
now at this present, Baus does carry away the name.

And now somewhat as concerning the baggs made of Goats-skins for to carry
Oil in, Baggs made of goats-skins.
as we have daily experience out of the countries of Prouence and Langue^oc:
you must first cut from the dead Goat the head only close by the neck, and
^he feet at the second joint of the legs: afterward, fleying the rest of the
legs unto the privy parts of the beast, to turn the rest over all the body,
and keeping the hai^ie side outward to salt it three or four times, and to
rub over all the skin every where with salt very well; afterward, to sew it
and make it into a bag for Oil, as it may best serve: you must
notwithstanding keep it always full, blown up, and tied somewhere up on high,
that it may not touch the earth, for otherwise it would be gnawed in pieces of
vermin. Butter of goats milk.
She shall not make account to make Butter of their milk in any great
quantity, for the milk of goats has no such store of fat or oilie substance
in it, seeing there is always much ado to get forth even some small portion;
and yet, which is more, when it is out, it looks whitish, hard, and tastes
like tallow: and thirdly, because in Languedoe and Prouence, they gather not
any Butter at all, being given to make Cheese, namely those Cheeses which are
called small Cheeses.

As concerning the diseases of a Goat, The goat is never without an ague.
she is never without an ague in this Country, and that in such sort, as that
if they be free from it but a little, they die: besides the diseases of sheep,
whereunto Goats are subject, there are three other, whereunto the Goat is
subject, that is to say, the dropsy, swelling after she has brought forth her
young, The diseases of goats.
and the dry disease. The dropsy happens unto her by drinking too much
water, and then you must make incision under the shoulder, and draw forth all
the gathered superfluous moisture, and after heal the wound with tar. The
matrix swollen.
After she has brought forth her young, if her matrix be swollen, or if she be
not well purged of her afterbirth, you must cause her to drink a great
glass full of very good wine. The dry disease
The dry disease comes upon her in the time of hot seasons, as wherein her
teats are so dried up, as that they are like unto wood for dryness, and in
such case you must rub her teats with cream: and as for other her diseases,
you must cure them with those remedies which are set down for the diseases of
ewes.

The good huswife that sets by the health of her folk, The flesh of goats.
shall not give any goats flesh unto her people to eat, except it be in time of
great dearth and scarcity, because the eating of this flesh does breed the
falling sickness. Likewise our predecessors had the flesh in such a loathed
detestation, as that they would not deine to touch it, no not name it:
notwithstanding if necessity do force us to feed upon it, as many poor
peasants dwelling in villages do (having good store of goats, and which only
are the store of their powdring tubs, as also being persuaded thereto through
covetousness) then they must boil them in a pot not covered, and in great
quantity of water, with good store of spices and cloves, and yet after all
this, not to eat it before it be cold, she may gather some profitable thing
both of the male and female goat for the health of her family: Goats milk.
For the milk of the female is very singular for the hardness of the
spleen, if so be that she have been fed any space of time with Iuie. The
reddish and bloudlike liquor which distilleth from her liver when it is
roasted, Goats blood.
is good for the vveake eyes. The blood of the male or (...) Goat fried, The
blood of the malegoat.
stays the flux of the belly. The blood of the male hardene^^ (...) dried up
in lumps, is ^ingular against the stone. The poulder of the Goats (...) burned,
The goats horn
cleanses and makes white the teeth: drunk with Rose or (...) water, it
stays the bloody flux: The fume or smoke coming of the burning of Goats
horn does drive away Serpents in what place soever that they be. The dung of
Goats applied in form of a cataplasme does resolve swellings under the ears,
Goats dung.
in the flanks, the Sciatica, and other Apostumes, especially if it be (...)
with the flower of Barley, and water and vinegar, or with fresh Butter or the
(...) of the Oil of Nuts; which is more, if you give but five trottles of
Goats dung wit^ a small draught of white Wine, the space of eight days every
morning, it (...) heal the Iaundise.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of the Dogs Kenell.
Unto the Shepherd, serving also in steed of the Goatheard, does belong the
charge of the Dog-house, in the ordering of this our Country government, as
well because necessity commands that he should (...) Bloud-hounds to fight
and chase away the Wolves; Hounds and water Spaniels for the purpose of such
things as now and then he may meet, withal i^ the fields, or which escapes
unawares out of the rivers or standing waters: as also* Mastiues, which are
given him in charge by the farmer, as being for the guard and keeping of his
house, and of these there shall be one or two which shall be kept fa^^ all the
day, chained to some post reared in the Court on the left hand as you go i^,
for to give advertisement of the coming in or going out of strangers, and to
make such afraid as might come to do mischief: but on the night such dogs
shall be let loose, and put amongst the rest which come from the field, to
bolden them (...) their charge, as in ranging and keeping the Court, as well to
defend it from thieves, as to free it from the raven of vvild beasts, which
give themselves wholly to the purchase in the night time. This then is his
charge, to feed them, to make the^ clean, to brush them and wipe off the dust
from them, to correct them, reclaim^ them, teach and fit them for that which it
is needful that they should do, and to this end the farmer must not withhold
from him the great of the siftings, which may be prepared for them at every
baking, besides what may come unto them for their fees upon every purchase
either of tame or wild thing. He shall likewise have (...) to see to the
collars that are requisite about the said dogs, To meet with the madness of
dogs.
he shall see them washed in the heat of the weather for fear they should go
mad: as also that they may lie upon fresh and ^oft straw after that they have
traveled: they must also be sparingly fed, thereby to make them the more
fierce upon the pray, and the readier to course, and he shall watch with his
Cros-bow or Pistol, to meet with some wild flesh, if any come in those
quarters, which his business does draw him unto.

I mean therefore that the Husbandman should have care to provide three sorts
of dogs in his house. Three sorts of dogs needful about a country (...).
The one called the watch dog, to discover the secret and covert conueyances
of things stolen by men: the second, called the Shepherds dog, to resist the
injuries and outrages offered by men or wild beasts, and to drive them away:
the third, called Hounds, or Hunting-dogges, and these do^ not bring any profit
to the Husbandman, but rather may be said to hinder hi^ work, and keep him
from his business. But I will only speak of those which are for the keeping
of the house and cattle, and reserve the hunting dog for to entreat of in
our seventh Book, where I intend to speak a word or two of hunting.

The dog appointed for the keeping of the Farm, The qualities of a
watch-dogge.
must be of gross and great corpulencie, having his body well and square
compact, and rather short than long. Let his head be so great and thick, as
that it may show to be the greatest part of his body, his countenance somewhat
resembling a man's, his throat great and wide, thick and great lips hollowed
after the manner of valleys, his neck thick and short, his ears great and
hanging, his eyes black or Azure, fiery, and sparkling, his breast broad, and
full of hair, his tail short and thick, which is a mark of strength, for
the long and small tail is only a sign of swiftness, his foot and nails
great, his bark base, loud, and fearful, he must be reasonably fierce, for
the gentle dogs do faune upon thieves, and the ouer-fierce would not let to
leap in the bosom of your familiar friends, and servants: especially let him
be watchful, and keeping good guard, not a rouer, running hither and thither,
but soon satisfied and stayed, rather than active and busily gadding, The best
colors of Mastiues.
he must also be black, to the end he may be more terrible unto the thief by
day, and not so well perceived of him by night; or if he be blew, brended, or a
dark fallow, not any of these colors are amiss, but show much strength,
valor, and fierceness, and are commonly the best breeds of all others, as is
to be seen in England, from whence France has been only enriched with all
her chiefest Mastiues.

The Shepherds dog needs not, The quality of the Shepherds dog.
nor must not, be so great and heavy as that of the Farm, and yet
notwithstanding he must be strong and lusty, and somewhat ready and light:
for he is used both for fighting and running; intended, that he must watch and
hunt away the Wolves, and if they should carry any thing away, then to pursue
them, and take it from them: Wherefore in this respect it were better that he
should be long made rather than short and square, seeing every beast of a long
body is more fit for the race, than that which has a short and square body.
He must be of a white color, that so the Shepherd may more easily discern
him from amongst the Wolves, and know him as well in the twylight, as also in
the very darkest time of the same. If he be in the rest of his limbs like unto
the house dog, he cannot choose but be a good one. The meat fit for dogs.
Both these sorts of dogs are fed with like meat, as with Wheaten bread, the
flower of Barley with Whay, warm broth, and sodden Beans. The time for dogs
and bitches to engender.
The Shepherd which has this charge, shall not let either Dog or Bitch
engender before they be a year old, and not after that they be ten years old.
He shall take from the Bitch her first litter, for being young and newly
acquainted with such matters, she should not feed and nourish them well; and
again, such her feeding of them would hinder her in her grouth every manner
of way: as also, the dog of the first litter is of a feeble and weak
condition, and for the most part subject to run madd. Six months after the
Bitch has whelped, he shall not suffer the Whelps to go forth, until such
time as they become strong, except it be only to play and sport themselves
with their damme, for fear that in attempting to leap hedge or ditch, The
ordering of Whelps.
they do not burst and beat out their guts. He shall not let them suck any
other milk but that of their own Bitch, and if it happen that she want and
have not enough, they shall have Goats milk given them until they be four
months old: he shall not call them by very long name, The names of dogs.
that so as soon as they be called they may know that they are called. And
again, it is not good that their name should be of less than two syllables. A
sinew in the tails of dogs.
When these Whelps are forty days old, he shall break the tip of their
tail, and shall draw out a sinew that runs along the joints of the back,
even unto the end of the tail, this will keep them from growing too much in
length, To make himself followed of dogs.
and will also be a means to keep them from running madd. He shall make his
dogs come after him, and the means to do it (as some say) is to give them
now and then some boiled froggs to eat; or to make it more sure to give them
bruised Salt, The way to keep dogs from running at you.
or else to cast them a piece of bread, which he has kept a good while under
his arme-pits, in such sort as that it be a little moystened with the sweat of
them, or else to let them smell the afterbirth of another Bitch, which he
shall have wrapped up in a cloth. Likewise he shall learn some piece of
cunning to make that he may not be barked at, nor set upon by other dogs how
raging soever they be.

And to effect this, he shall hold in his hand the eye of a black dog pulled
from him alive, or for the more certainty, the eye or the heart of a Wolf, or
the tongue of a she Wolf. To make dogs fight.
He shall incense them to fight the one with the other, by clapping his hands,
and yet he shall beware that neither of them be overcome* for making of him
timorous and dastardly. Dogs may not (...) Sheep flesh.
He shall not in any case suffer them to eat the flesh (...) dead Sheep, least
thereby they fall to set upon and snatch up such as are alive: for very hardly
and with much ado will they be made to forsake this fault, if once they have
begun to eat raw flesh. He shall frame them in their youth to bring, and the
better to teach them so to do, he shall first cast a pretty way from him a
piece of bread. He shall be careful to heal them when they be sick. They are
subject (...) specially unto three diseases, Dogs diseases.
madness, the squinancie, and the pain of the thigh^* Madness takes them in
the extreme Summer heat, and in the excessive cold of Winter: and for the
better keeping of them from this disease, it will be good (...) during the time
of excessive heat and cold, they have often given them cold water (...) cool
them withal, and to temper the heat of their blood: or for the more
certainty, whiles they be yet young, you may pluck from them at their tails
end, a sinew, which goes along through the joints of the back bone: Or else
to take from under their tongue a little sinew which is like unto a small broad
and round worm. To (...) them of this disease, so soon as the matter is
perceived, he shall cause him to drink the juice of Beets, with the pith of
Elder tree: or else burn him in the brow with (...) hot iron: or else to souse
him every day for the space of fifteen or twenty days ^^gether in
Seawater, three or four times a day: or else in warm water made (...) for
salted or Seawater has a singular virtue against the madness of a dog. And
these are the signs of a madd dog: he is more dry and lean than ordinarily
he was wont to be, he eats nothing, neither drinks, although he seem to be
much altered and starued with want of them; he hates water more than any thing
else, (...) the sight whereof he falls into trembling and staring of his
hair all over his body* his eyes are red and fiery, his look is aside,
stern, and fixed upon him whom he beholds: he does nothing but run hither
and thither without reason, his head and ears cast down, his mouth very much
gaping, hanging out a great black and wa^ tongue; foming and driueling at his
mouth, and sniuell at his nose; his tail hangin^ betwixt his legs; barking
with a hoarse voice, and hanging his head upon the (...) side or the other: he
sets upon without barking, and biteth whatsoever a he (...) with, whether it
be his master, men known unto him, or unknown, beast, (...), stone, yea his
own shadow: sometimes he stands still, sometimes he runs, no^ on the
right hand, now on the left hand: other dogs run from him, which no^
withstanding he fauneth upon if he meet them, and makes them afraid.

The Squinancie, The squinancie.
and pain of the thighs, is healed and cured after the fame (...) that it is
in Sheep: The pain of the thighs.
notwithstanding the common remedy is to cause them to taken great glass full
of warm Oil, and after to open the vein of the thigh. For their ^^ulcetate
ears coming through fleas, Ulcers of the ears.
he must rub them with bitter Almonds bruised: For to kill the fleas of dogs,
you must rub them with Seawater, or with (...) with water, or with the old
lees of oil of Olives.

The other diseases may be cured by the same remedies, which we have already
set down for Sheep.

Shut up a dog close in some place for three days, in such sort as that he
^ay gnaw nothing but bones, then gather his dung, and dry it: the powder of
this (...) is good against all bloody fluxes, if it be taken twice a day with
milk, and so (...) for the space of three days, remembering moreover before
you mix the (...) milk, to quench diverse small pebble stones made red hot in
the fire in it. This powder likewise is very singular in malign ulcers, and
those that are given to be r^bellious: likewise such an emplaister of dogs dung
is excellent for the squinancie.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of the Carter, on Horse-keeper.
WE have heretofore spoken of such living creatures as are for the profit and
use of men inhabiting Country villages: in that which follows we will speak
of those which serve not only for men inhabiting the said villages, but also
for them which inhabit and dwell in Cities and great Towns, as are the Horse,
the Mule, and the Ass. I set the Horse before the rest, as being serviceable
for the Peasant and Countrie-drudge, and also affording great services to
Nobles, Princes, Prelates, and to be short, to all sorts of men, as being the
beast which is peerless, for his comeliness, beauty, courage, furniture,
profit, and commodity.

Therefore (I say) let the Carter or Horse-keeper, to whom appertains the
charge of Country horse, be a sober and patient man, loving his beasts well,
and never beating them: but well may he acquaint them with the lash, the
whisking noise of his rod, with his speech, and with his call: let them not at
any time labor more than they well may, either in draught or travel, let him
currie them cherefully and merrily every morning, and in Summer sometimes
after noone: he must not give them to drink but at ordinary hours, and after
their rest, let him oftentimes use to wash their feet in Summer with cold
water, and sometime with wine, or the lees of wine for to strengthen them
withal, and with urine if they be dulled or blunted, in the night time putting
of their own dung in the hollow or sole of their hoof: and if they be chafed
or heated, or put out of the love and desire of their meat, he must wash their
throat with Vinegar and Salt: let him not give them Hay, Prouender, Chafe,
Oats, A farmer must know the work and trade of a fadler and farrier.
or Litter, before they be very well dusted: he must not let them go without
shoes or nails: and let him be careful that their traise, cart-saddles,
collars, bridles, or other parts of their geares, and harness, be not torn,
or rent, or rotten. He must also know to sow with small thread, packthreed, and
shoothreed, to stuff and make fast his saddles: to be short, he must be
acquainted with the Sadlers trade, as also with the Farriers, and therefore he
must never be unprovided of his budget and pouch furnished with tools and
necessaries about harness and saddles, nor yet of his iron stuff for his
beasts feet: as namely needle thread and silk, ^^eame to let blood with, knife
to lance and cut with, corner, buttrys, pincers, hammer, paring-yron, and
rape, he must also have barnacles, pasternes, trauerses, and colling-sheares,
with whatsoever else is needful to be used in any time of occasion or
necessity. He must be very careful to find out the cause when he sees any
one of his Horses halt, of what foot it is, and in what place of the foot
being handled or tried, he most complayneth himself, and to put about his
pasternes sometimes Spech-grase, and sometimes dung.

He must also take great heed when his beast do cast the old hoof, The
casting of hooues.
and have a new growing, and cause some thing to be given him for the help of
the growth of the new hoof, and when he has his throat heated to cause him
to be covered, if therewith he have the cough: and if in travail he have taken
cold by rain or tedious vveather, to give him then to eat some Fenugreeke or
Anise-seed amongst his prouender: to change him when he is past age: and also
to take acknowledgement of the love that one Horse bears toward another, and
accordingly to set them one by another in the Stable appointed for them, To
make clean^ehis horse stable.
which he must every morning may clean in Summer, carrying out the dung and
filth, and letting none remain, and at night give them fresh Litter. He must
also cast an eye about, and see whether his horses do grow lean or no, and
then to fat them with Fetches boiled in water, and mixed amongst their Oats, as
also with millet, pannicke, rice, sodden and mingled with meal of Beans, and
a little Salt; or where these are missing, to take good sweet Barley chafe, or
Pease pulse well mixed with some dry Beans, and to give him thereof good store
after every watering, or when he newly comes from his labor; as for sodden
Barley, or other boiled corn, they are only good to loosen the skin, but
the fat which they gather is never of any indurance. He must be content to take
up his lodging in the stable, for fear of their falling sick, intangling
themselves in their halters, and growing of his beasts, and let him be careful
and wise in ordering and placing his light in such sort, as that it may be out
of danger, and to lock up and keep his harness well, and made ready over
night (...) morning, that so when he is to return to his labor into the
field, he be (...) of any thing. If he have any Mules or young Colts, he must
put them by (...), and reserve them for some other labor: and if any of his
Horses fall sick, if it be not of weariness, dullness, or chafing, he must
put him out from among the rest. If he have any Horse that has ill property
or fault, The faults of Horses.
he shall be careful how to amend it, as if he be fearful or timorous, or if
he will not abide while one gets upon his back, or if he will not go by or
into any place, he shall hang within his (...) some pretty little stone: and
if this do him no good, he shall hoodwinke him, or (...) behind him at his
tail some flame of fire, or some sharp pricking thing; if he w^^nie much, he
shall tie to his head a stone with a hole through it: if when a man is upon his
back, he rise and come aloft, he shall hit him with his rod upon the
forelegges: if he lie down, he must be raised up again with rough words and
strokes: if he go backward, you shall tie a cord to his codds, which shall be
so long, as th^^ reaching betwixt his forelegges, he which rides him may hold
it in his hand, and when as the Horse shall go backward, A Horse going
backward.
he shall pull it hard with his hand to make him go forward, for so without
all doubt he will go forthright, and amend his fault: if the Horse be gelded,
he must beat his thighs with a long staff taken out of the fire very hot,
and burnt at the end: or he shall give him feel of his whisking rodd betwixt
his ears: if the Horse be hard to shoe, and troublesome to handle and dress
in the stable, he shall put in one or both of his ears a little round pebble,
and there make it sure with one or both his hands, and keep them in his ears,
and thus he shall make him as gentle and meek as a Lamb.

It is also the Carters part to govern his heard of Mares and Colts carefully,
th^^ no inconvenience may befall them: he shall put them to feed, and shall
send the^ to grass when it shall be due time, and that in large and marish
grounds. Notwithstanding marish ground does soften their hoof very much, and
makes them tender sighted, and begets water in their feet: and for this
cause I could like the high and hilly grounds better, being such as from time
to time have rain or (...) dropping down upon them, and not dry at any time,
and such as are rather voi^ and free, than incombred with vvood or other bodies
of trees or legs: and yet further, having a soft and sweet grass, rather
than a high, great, and strong grass. And notwithstanding that Mares be not so
frolic nor courageous as Horses be, yet they go beyond them far in the
race, and stand it out a great deal longer; and again, they are not so
chargeable to keep as Horses are, for they are not fed with the best hay, they
content themselves to run in pastures all the year long: true it is, that in
Winter, and when the ground is all covered with snow, as also in the time of
continual rain, they must be put in some one house or other, and give them
such Hay as is good to eat, and in Summer to keep them in some good cool
shadow^^ place, and well grown with good Grass, and serves with clear
waters: but n^uer upon the rough and ragged mountains, as well for that they
do hardly feed there, as also because that such as are with foale can hardly
clime without great pain, not come down without endangering themselves to
cast their Colts. The co^^ring of Mares.
You shall not suffer the Mare to take Horse ofter than every two year,
according to the opinion of the curious Horsemen; but yet the better
experienced allow the conueying of Mar^s every year, for it keeps the womb
open, and gives the Foale a large bed to lie in, to keep and breed of the
best kind, and race, and not to bring in a base and degenerate kind: again, to
see that it be d^ne about mid March* to the end, that at the same time that the
Mares were covered and horsed, they may easily feed their Colts, having tender
and soft grass after Harvest: for about the end of the eleventh or twelfth
month they foale, and so their milk is the faster, better conditioned,
begets also and nourishes fairer Colts, and such as thrive even as we our
selves would wish. The Stalions also thus attended are the stronger, and do
more abound with a well concocted and slimie nature, and not with a thin and
waterie, and withal, they cover them with more courage, and beget greater
Colts, and such as are more hardy and strong. The signs of the Mares being
ready to take Horse.
He shall know that the Mares are ready to take Horse, when they yield a
whitish humor at the place of generation, and that their privy parts are more
swollen than they were wont to be, as also more hot than ordinary, and eat not
so much as they were wont. He shall let her take Horse twice a day, evening and
morning, before he let her drink; and this shall be continued but ten days:
which past, if she refuse him, he shall put her aside as with foale, and shall
take away the Horse, least with his furious rage he make her that she do not
conceive.

The Horse that is less than three years old, A Horse to cover Mares.
is not fit to cover Mares, but he may continue good till he be twenty year
old. The Mare is fit to take Horse when she is two years old, that so being
three by her foaling time, she may be able to feed it well: but she is nothing
worth for this purpose after she is once ten years old: for Horses begotten
of an old Mare are loose and heavy. One good Horse is enough for twenty
Mares: which, at such time as he is to cover them, must be well fed, and when
the time approaches, must be fatted with Barley, Fetches, and Ciches, to the end
he may the better serve for the purpose: for the stronger and more disposed he
shall be to cover them, the stronger will the Colts be which he begets. If
he have no courage, but be feeble and out of heart, you must rub the secret
parts of the Mare with a new and clean sponge, and after rub the muzzle of the
stalion with the same: If the Mare will not admit the Horse, you must bruise a
Sea-Onion, and rub her secret part therewith, for this will warm her: And to
have a Horse of the color that you would desire, cover the Mare with a
covering of the same color, at such time as the Horse shall cover her.

The Mare whereof we desire to have a good race, A Mare for breed.
must not be under two years old, as has been said, nor above ten or
twelve; and understand withal, that being of a colder complexion than Horses,
so she fails before them in that work: she must be well made of body, broad
spread toward one, having a comely and pleasant look, her flank and rumpe
large, well fed, but a little lean, to the end that she may hold her horsing
the better: that she have not traveled of a long time: that she bear not but
every two years, to the end she may the better feed her Colt. When she is
with Colt, you must feed her well, you must not travel or run her, nor leave
her to the extremity of the Cold, but keep her in house when it raineth and
snoweth, and as long as any great cold weather is, that so she may the better
bring forth a perfect Colt. The Marereadie to foale
If the Mare be in foaling, or that she has cast her Colt, you must bruise
Polipodie, and mingling it with warm water, cause her to drink it with a
horn. The Mare that does foale.
If she have foaled well, you may not touch her Colt with your hand, for and if
you touch it never so little, you hurt it. So soon as she has foaled in the
house, you must succor her with drinks of warm water, mingling salt therewith
and meal also both evening and morning, for the space of three days at the
least: after this, you must give her good Hay and sufficient Corn, keep her
clean with good Litter, that so she may rest at ease; for this her good
feeding does cause her Colt to prosper, and strengthens it.

After that the Colt is foaled, To order a (...) new (...).
it must be left with the Mare in a warm and wide place, to the end that cold
may not hurt it, neither yet the Mare, by reason of the straitness of the
place: and when it shall be stronger, it shall be accustomed to eat Hay, to the
end that the dams milk failing, it may have learned to feed upon a firmer
nourishment: but it shall be let run with the Mare in the pasture, that so she
may not mourn for lack of the sight of her Colt: for commonly Mares are sick
for the love of their colts, if they cannot see them. When it shall be
eighteen months old, you shall begin to waine it, and put it in the house
built for col^s, afterward you shall ^ame it, putting a halter about the neck,
and that rather of wool than of coard, that so it may not feel any hard thing
to annoy it: and if it will not abide to be tied, you must make it fast with
two thongs of leather or of hemp, or with a bridle (...) the manger, that so
it may be acquainted with touching and handling, and that so also it may learn
not to be afraid of any noise that shall be made: it will be good also to set
it amongst others that are already tamed, for seeing them so haltred, it will
at length accustom it self to subjection: as yet you must speak it fair,
and touch it with your hand, sometimes rubbing the back, head, or belly, and
sometimes the numpe, legs, and feet, sometimes raising it up, making it
clean, and rubbing it very mildly and gently; to be short, making so much of
it, as until it become so tame that it know the boy or horseman that currieth
it, and the rider that must back it, and vvithall understand their words and
voices, and smelling him, to know him before he get upon him: sometimes you
shall set a child upon the back, to the end he may learn to endure to bear
one; give it good hay and good grass: lead it to water with one already
managed and fitted to the hand: after it has drunk, give it Oats, at evening
straw it with litter up to the knees, and in the morning rub the legs and
the whole body with the same litter, and after lead it to drink. When it is
three years old, you must break and acquaint and fit it for such work as you
shall think meet. As for example, if you would appoint it and make it serve
you sometimes to take a journey upon, I could wish you to give it a burning
with fire upon the legs: To burn the colt with a hot iron.
and this you shall commit to the doing of some skillful Farrier, especially in
the Spring, Autumn, and decrease of the Moon, and at such time as these young
horse are full two years old: and this must be done as well in the legs before
as behind: such course of burning does harden and strengthen their loose flesh,
being soft and not close set together, it does bring down that which is puffed
up: it dries that which has much moisture in it: it dissolueth that which is
gathered together, it burns away and wastes rottenness if there be any, and
heals old aches, curing and restoring the declined parts of the body,
lessening that which is grown too great, and not suffering it to grow any
further. Add hereunto, that the scabbe, farcie, and other malanders accustomed
to seize upon their legs, cannot have the power to breed upon them. After you
have thus burnt them with a knobd hot iron, carry them to pasture, and that at
such an hour, as when the deaw is upon the grass: for so it will do them a
great deal more good than any thing that a man can give unto them in the
stable, for so also you shall cause that (...) of the burnings shall appear
less, and that if they show at all, that yet it shall be with good setting out
of the leg.

As for that retained opinion amongst our Frenchmen, that the slitting of a
horses nosthrils when they are full grown, will make them fit for the course
or race, as being an occasion of more liberty to his wind, or that it will
help a broken winded horse, it is a me^re fallacy and deception, and has no
such virtue at all, but rather works the contrary, and by dismembring the
organ or instrument whereby he draws up the air, does breed in him a greater
difficulty of breathing, the painfulness whereof may be perceived when he
stands still without any trouble or molestation, therefore I would have all
horse-groomes to forbear the practice, and to hold it rather a disgrace than
any benefit, for it is to be understood, that nature has made every thing
perfect without want or super^luitie, and to alter any thing in her maine
workmanship, is rather to overthrow than help the building.

If you will geld them and make them Geldings, that so they may live the more
quietly amongst Mares and other Horses, as also for the ^itting of them which
desire peaceable Horses, you may do it, but not before they be a full year
old, because that then their secret parts do openly show themselves, and for
the better performance thereof, it were better to vvrith about and mortify
their codds altogether with pincers, than to geld them all at once,
notwithstanding they be of full and sufficient age* (...) in gelding of them,
maine do die of extreme pain, because you take all away (...) them; but if
they die not, yet they remain weakened and (...) both in (...) and strength:
whereas if you pinch them only with Pincers, they are not one^^ free from all
peril of loosing their life, but also continue the more bold, there re^ining
unto them some small parts of the cords and sinews of the generati^e (...) Yet
other of the best French horsemen do affirm, That to geld a Colt clean,
(...) way of incision and calterizing, is the best course that can be taken,
and makes them tendder sinest shaped and best mettalled Gelding: for (say
they) when any of the cords (...) strings of generation are left behind, then
the Gelding proves rammish, Mare^^^od, foul headed, thick neckt, and grossly
crested. And of this opinion are all (...) English Horsemen: to whom we must
yield, because they are known to be Ma^^^s of the only Geldings of the world;
and those of whom we most boast, we have (...) from them, either by gift or
purchase. Therefore I leave to the skillful Groom (...) consideration of this
action, to choose that to which he stands most affected.

Furthermore, cause him to be curried by a servant pertaining and belonging to
(...) businesses: and being wise, gentle, and loving, that so by such his
gentleness it (...) be prevented and fore^eene, that the young Colt do not
learn ill manners, (...) it is so difficult a thing to take from them but one
ill quality, after that they be (...) therein. And in this respect it behooves
all the servants about the Stable handle them kindly, and speak gently unto
their Horses, thereby to make them (...) and love them the better. And by such
means and carriage it is wrought, (...) they suffer themselves to be governed:
that they suffer meat to be given them, (...) any man to lead them to drink:
that they suffer themselves to be handled, tou^^ed, curried: to have their
clothes put upon their backs, either the Linen one to (...) the Flies away,
or else the Woollen one to keep them warm: and that they (...) him to make
the same fast with a Sur^ingle, for the better keeping of them on (...) the
morning, when they are to be new curried again. There must all Litter be (...)
from under them, the clean and whole thrust under the Manger, the foul and
(...), together with the dung, being carried out to the appointed dunghill,
never ^^^getting to keep the Stable very clean, nor yet to have it furnished
with all man^^^ of necessaries, and every thing in his place. Yet this ever by
the way is to be vn^^rstood, that as soon as you have cleansed your Stable
clean; dressed your Horse, (...) him, and given him such prouender as you think
meet for him, that then, (...) you leave him to his rest, you forget not to put
down his Litter about him, (...) at his pleasure he may lie down and take his
ease, which is to any Horse as ^^olesome a relief as any whatsoever; giving
much comfort to his limbs and ^ewes, making swi^t digestion, and adding such
strength and courage to his heart (...) vital spirits, that he is thereby a
great deal the better enabled to endure his la^^ur, and less apt to take
surfets, and other mischiefs, much incident to Horses: ^here on the contrary,
when Horses are compelled to stand all day on the bare (...) anchers, out of a
foolish received opinion, to make them hard and of more endu^^nce, the Horse
taking no delight to lie down, humors descends into his legs, (...)
swellings do breed, Spauens, Curbs, Ringbones, and gourding of Sinews,
^^crease abundantly: and maine a good beast, for lucre to save one or two
bottles of ^^ggage Straw, is spoiled and made utterly unfit for any service.
And as I would (...) you careful thus to keep Litter under your Horse; so
also I would have you (...) obseruant, to see that your planchers lie even and
level, and not higher be^^re than behind, as is the common custom of most
men, especially Horse-coursers, (...) such as keep Horses more for the sale
than use: for albeit the uneven laying of (...) planchers g^ueth to the Horse
some more beauty than otherwise he would have, ^ecting up his fore-parts
higher than his hinder, and so making him show with a ^^^odly and well-raised
forehead, yet it brings lamenesse, and is therefore evermore (...) be
eschewed. When as the Horses are in currying, it is meet that they should be
^^ed and made fast unto some high bar set upright, that so they might have
their ^^ads holden on high, and then after that to currie all their body, to
rub them with a cloth, to bath with spunges well, in very cool water, their
head, eyes, lips, (...), jaws, nosthrils, m^^e, and tail, and afterward to
comb them very diligently: (...) when this is done, to rub all their bodies
over, but especially their legs and (...), with wispes of straw, well bound
and trussed together: for otherwise (...) will grow full of the Farcie through
the slothfulness of the servants and the (...) himself. Above all things,
they must be looked unto whether they lack any (...) about their feet, or no:
seeing that oftentimes the want but of one nail is the (...) that a Horse
casts his shoe in the mid way, to the great prejudice of the (...) beast,
which sometimes thereby is in danger of losing his whole foot, especially (...)
he trauelleth in any rough and stony ground: for a Horse that has lost his
(...) and goes unshod, hurts himself in a minute of an hour, and so
spoileth his (...) as that it is oftentimes seen to be quite lost, or at least
to become unfit for (...)* And when your Horse is thus curried, spunged,
rubbed, and well smoothed, (...) ^uerie offense about him picked, trimmed, and
taken away, you shall then cloth (...) with such clothes as are necessary for
his health, and answerable to the time and (...) of the year, as either with
double Clothes, single Clothes, lined Clothes, (...), Linen, or both together;
using most in the Winter, fewer in the Spring, (...) fewest of all in the
Summer. Yet for a better satisfaction, and that you may (...) know what number
or quantity of clothes you shall use, you shall view well (...) of your Horses
body, and look carefully how his hair lies, especially upon (...) neck,
and other outward parts which are unclothed, and if you perceive that (...) of
those places the hair stands upright, s^areth, or looks rugged, then you
(...) be assured that the Horse wants clothes, and is inwardly cold at the
heart: the (...) you shall then increase his clothes, and not cease so to do,
till you have (...) his hair to lie straight and smooth; which once perceived,
then you may be (...) that he is sufficiently clad: and you shall by no means
exceed any (...)* Now when you begin thus to increase your Clothes, if you
shall find when (...) come to your Horse early in the morning, that he ^weateth
much, especially in (...) flanks, at his ^are-roots, and in such like usual
places, yet notwithstanding his (...) still stareth; you shall then know, that
such sweating is but a faint naughty (...) gendred by corruption of food, or
else want of moderate and wholesome (...) and therefore by no means shall you
abate any of his clothes, but rather (...) them, till that naughty faint
sweat leave him. But if you perceive that his hair (...) smooth and clean,
and yet notwithstanding he sweateth, then you shall know (...) his clothes are
somewhat too many, and you shall abate them till such sweating (...) him. This
is a most infallible rule, and such a secret as is worthy to be (...) in the
mind of every good Horseman and Groom that intends to keep their (...) sound
and well prepared for all manner of labor. The Horses dressed and (...) as
they should be, and having eaten a little Hay, must be led to water, other
ridden forth a mile or more to their water; which would ever be some (...)
Spring or running River: where, after your Horse has taken one good draugh^
two, ^xercise after water.
you shall bring him forth into some plain ground, and there gallop him (...)
up and down (to warm the water in his belly) a little space, and then bring
(...) to the water again, and let him take another draught, then gallop him
again, (...) thus do till he will drink no more, and then with all
gentleness walk him (...) and softly home to the Stable, and there cloth him
up. This manner of (...) your Horse is of all other the most wholesome, giving
unto him by this (...) great strength both of wind and body, and also
dissoluing all those (...) cold, and tough humors, which are engendered by the
corruption of water when taken without exercise, and lies cold and troublesome
in his body, making (...) Horse to quake and tremble; as any man may
perceive, when at any time he (...) to approve the same, and having given his
Horse water, will but lay his hand (...) on his body or buttocke: But this I
have already spoken is at full sufficient (...) a Horses watering. From whence
when they are returned, they shall (...) Oats given them well sifted and
fanned, and they shall be marked whether (...) (...) or not, that, if need be,
they may be looked in the month, to see whether there be (...) thing to keep
them from eating, or no, and accordingly to take them in cure, or (...): for
the common proverb is, A Proverb.
That Horses go upon their feet, but it is their meat (...) does uphold them,
and cause them to endure travel. It is meet also to give them ^^metimes some
rare and dainty thing which may please them, and may be more than ^rdinarie;
for it is all one as when one does make them so gentle, tractable, and ^ame,
(...) that afterward they will suffer themselves to be governed easily: to use
them kindly (...), and not to beat them, to torment them, or cast them into
fear with high speeches (...) threatening words, or else by any other means,
so long as they be in the Stable: (...) rather to handle them with all
meekness, as well in word as in touching or hand^^g, in what manner soever it
be.

To fit the Colt for the Saddle, To break, or first back the Colt.
the good Rider must first put upon his head a (...), with a Rouler of Wood,
not attempting to do any other thing at that time, and (...) to leave him for
two or three hours upon the reins, being of cords, and after such (...) to
take all away for that day: the next day, somewhat late, to put it on again,
(...) so to leave it for some certain time: afterward taking him by his
reins, he must (...) him a little out of his place, drawing him along some
twenty or thirty paces (...) thence, sometime walking him, and othersome time
staying him, still upon the ^^ddaine, according as he shall see it good, that
is, according to the stubbornenesse (...) frowardness, or the easiness and
gentleness of the Colt. So soon as he is come (...) the Stable, he shall have
this halter taken from off him, putting him in his accu^omed Head-stall, and
give him his rather some Hay to eat, than to lead him to water, (...) after
that to give him his ordinary of Oats. The third day he shall not only (...)
on his foresaid halter at the accustomed hour, but also a saddle, without
stirrups, (...), or crupper, girding him gently, and in all kind manner
fastening and buck^ing the same very lightly: he shall yet do nothing but
lead him out of the Stable by (...) halter, handling him always lovingly, and
leading him with all gentleness whi^^er he will willingly go: and after that
he is come into the fallowes and plowed ^^rounds, he shall get into them: where
having taken with him some long small ^hisking wand, he shall first make him to
stand still: then afterward he shall make (...) Colt go a little pace, and
from that little, somewhat faster and faster, now and (...) giving him a gentle
touch or remembrance with his said small rod, which he (...) then show unto
him: after making him stand still again, he shall hold him up ^ith courteous
and friendly words, and rubbing him with his hand, shall carry him ^acke
again unto his Stable, and there presently take off his said furniture, and
put ^im in his ordinary Tiall or Head-stall. The fourth day he shall make him
ready (...) he did the day before, and having spoken him fair, he shall set a
little boy upon ^im: and if he (...) that he begin not to smite and short, and
to take on any whit at (...), he shall lead him by the reins out of the
Stable, and lead him a pretty way off, ^aking much of him with his hand, and
touching his head, neck, and breast: and shall lead him to some block made to
get up by (and this so long as he is ridden without stirrups:) and there
causing the boy to come off, he himself shall get upon him very lightly, and
holding the reins even in his hand, shall cause one to give him some small
whisking rod, and with it he shall touch or stroke his neck, and ^lacking the
reins a little, shall cause him to go forward softly: if he play any lea^ing
tricks, he shall stay him with the bridle, still speaking lovingly unto him:
and (...) that he grows quiet, he shall make him go softly, and set him on
by a little ^aster and faster, until he make him pace and (...). Having done
this in good sort for (...) pre^^e while, he shall bring him again to his
Stable: where, having fastened (...) to the Manger, he shall cover him that he
take no cold* and about an hour after (...) shall take off his saddle and
bridle at once, rubbing him with fresh straw, but es^^ecially the places wet
with sweat: and then covering him with his Cloth, and after (...) rubbed his
legs and feet, he shall let him drink, and give him to eat, and shake up his
litter about him. This is the accustomable use of some of our French Riders for
the first breaking of Colts: but it is by others, more expert and induistrious
in the Art, held to be a little too tedious; and they find a nearer way to the
end of their purpose, The best handling of Colts.
as thus: Having made the Colt gentle and loving in the Stable and abroad,
obedient and willing to be handled, led forth, and ordered as a (...) pleases,
without affright, dislike, or rebellion; they then at first set a good
sufficient Saddle on his back, with ^^yrrop and styrrop-leathers, which after
they (...) up and down his sides, a strong crupper, and a good breast-place,
which being well gyrt on, they in the morning cause him to be led forth in the
Grooms hand, that he may be acquainted and familiar with those ornaments that
are about him* then, in the afternoon of the same day, they put into his
mouth, with strong head-stall and reins, either a good watering trench, or a
watering snaffle, (...) then over it a strong soft chasse halter, and so lead
him forth with all gentleness into some new-plowed field, or else some other
ground of the like (...), and there make the Colt trot a ring of both hands
four or five times about the Rider: then the Rider goes to the Colt and
cherishes him, and the Groom holding him fast by the chasse halter, near to
the Colts head, with one hand, and staying the styrrop with the other, the
Rider offers to put his foot in the styrrop, and with many leisurable heaues
and lifts to take the Saddle, at any of which if the Colt (...), or seem to
be displeased, the Rider shall descend again, and make the Colt, as before, to
trot a ring four or five times about him, and then offer to mount his back^
again, not ceasing thus to do, till the Colt with all gentleness dot receive
him: (...) shall the Rider and the Groom both cherish him very much, and then
the Groom shall offer to lead the Colt forward; at which if he find fault
either in action or co^^tenance, or but in the gathering together of his rumpe,
legs, and body, as though he would leap and plunge, immediately the Groom
shall stay him, the Rider shall alight, and, as before, shall compel him to
trot his rings about him, and then take his back again, not ceasing thus to
do, till the Colt with all willingness press forw^^^ and be content to be
led with the Rider on his back whither and which way soever the Groom
pleases: in all which motion, the Rider shall with his voice, and the
thrusting forward of his feet hard upon the styrrop-leathers, encourage and as
it (...) enforce the Colt to go forward, now and then shaking his rod over the
Colts head, to make him hear the noise thereof, and ever and anon as the Colt
is thus led up and down, the Rider shall with his bridle hand stop him, make
him stand still, and cherish him, then cause him to be led forward again, and
as the Colt grows more and more willing to go forward, so the Groom shall
withdraw his hand more and more from the Colts head, and loosen the chasse
halter, insomuch, that the Colt may (...) no feeling of the Grooms leading
him, but may go forward by the help and ^^couragement of the Rider only:
then shall the Groom give the reine of the (...) halter into the Riders hands,
and he shall make the Colt go forward, ever and (...) cherishing him when he
does according to his desire, and giving him threatening words when he does the
contrary. Thus shall he labor and apply the Colt, till (...) will go forward
willingly, gently, and with courage, according to his desire, the Rider ever
observing, as near as he can, to make the Colt go straight forth-right, and
by no means to turn or twynd him about any way, contrary to his own will,
but for this first day to give him leave to go which way he will, not
expecting (...) him any other obedience, than to go forward in either pace or
trot when the (...) pleases, and also to stand still and firm when at any
time he shall be restrain^^. This work being brought to pass the first day,
the Rider shall in the field (...) from the Colts back, and having cherisht
him much, and given him a little Gr^^^ or Bread to eat, he shall deliver him to
the Groom, who with all gentleness sha^^ lead him home, and there dress him,
cloth him, and feed him well. The next day the Colt being ^adled and bridled as
aforesaid, the Groom shall lead him forth (...) the former place, and there
the Rider shall take his back as he did the day before, and in all points
shall make the Colt perfectly repeat over his first days lesson: which when he
has done very willingly and obediently, without compulsion or resistance, then
the Groom shall mount the back of some old staunch Horse or Gelding, and
leading the way before the Colt, shall trot fair and softly round about the
field, stopping his Gelding as often as the Rider stops the Colt, then go
forward again, sometimes leading the way before the Colt, and sometimes riding
cheek by ioll by the Colt, till he be brought to such perfectness, that he
will take his way forward how or which way the Rider pleases: then they shall
ride gently home, and there light near unto the Stable door, and so set up the
Colt, cloth him, dress, and feed him. Then the third day the Rider shall take
the Colts back at the Stable door, and the Groom his Geldings back, and so
ride forth into some plain High way* the smoother the better, the Gelding
leading the way to the Colt, and let them so ride straight forth-right at least
two miles or more, stopping sundry times, and cherishing the Colt, and then
gently return home, the Colt sometimes leading the way, and ^ometimes the
Gelding, and alighting at the Stable door as before, set up the Colt, dress
him, and feed him: And thus if you do twice or thrice in this third day, it
shall be so much the better. The fourth day the Rider shall take out the Colt,
and the Groom the Gelding, but the Colt shall then lead the way, and the
Gelding shall follow, only now and then, to give the Colt encouragement, the
Gelding shall come and ride up to the face of the Colt, and then eftsoons fall
back behind him again. This day you shall, in a large spacious compass, trot
the Colt round, first on the one hand, then on the other, making him bend and
come about, according to the bowing of your body, or the turning in of your
hand, and in every motion make your self master of whatsoever he does, giving
him a true understanding, that what he does, is your will, and not his
pleasure: and withal, by no means forgetting to cherish him when he does
well; not after, but even in the instant and presentnesse of time, when he
performs your pleasure, that he may thereby know why he is rewarded with
kindness: and in like manner, when he does any thing contrary to your will,
you shall chastise him with the threatening of your voice, and sometimes with
the noise and shake of your rod, or when extremity urges, with a good lash or
two with your rod under his belly, in the very selfsame instant that he
offends. And when the Colt has performed all things answerable to your
liking, you shall return home, not the same way that you came forth, but, if
conveniently you can, some other way, thereby to breed in the Colt an ignorance
of his own ease: which is the only means to preserve and keep him from
restyuenesse, and other wicked qualities. And being come to the Stable door,
you shall there alight, and cherish him, and then set him up, dress him, and
feed him. And this you shall do at least thrice in this fourth day. The fifth
day having sadled, bridled, and girded him as he had been accustomed, he shall
lead him to the place of getting up* and there shall get upon him, lead him
through all manner of Ways, sometimes trotting, sometimes softly, until he
begin to wax hot: And this order shall be observed every day, yet still
increasing his exercise, making him go and trot so long as until he be
weary; this being the best way to make him lift his legs, and to carry
himself handsomely in the rest of his parts: not failing thereupon to bring
him back very softly unto the Stable, where he shall walk him until such
time as he leave sweating, and then he shall set him up in his place. Yet of
the later and more experiencest Horsemen it is thought good not to walk him at
all, but presently to set him up, Walking Horses not good.
cloth him well, and give him litter enough, with found and dry rubbing: for
it is an infallible experiment, that the walking of Horses in the hand is the
readiest way to give Colds, and breed Fevers, because then the humors cool too
suddenly; and the vital parts leaving (as it were) their motions in an
instant, the heart and other inward parts receive the cold air so unprovided
and unarmed, that wanting the assistance of their other servants, which is
action and spirit, they are overcome, and yield to the arrest of dullness and
numbnesse: Therefore it is held best not to walk at all, but rather to house
the Horse, and with rubbing, fretting, clawing, and picking, to keep the
ouer-heated parts warm, till they may cool by a moderate temper: and this
questionless is the safest course for a Horse that is extremely heated, as the
English hunting and running Horses are. But our French Horses, which are heated
by a more deliberate and slower way, as it were only but warming the blood,
not melting the grease; I hold it the (...) and safest way, when you come from
riding, and have made your Horse (...) soundly, then presently to carry him
into the Stable, and taking the Saddle (...), whilst one Groom is rubbing and
cha^ing his legs (which is action enough (...) keep him from cold; for it is
a perfect rule, That whilst the Groom rubs well, the Horse never takes cold)
another Groom shall take a piece of a Sword (...), two foot and more in
length, and with the same he shall with the edge strype (...) wype down the
Horse, even from the tip of his ears to the pitch of his should^^ and
cambrell, leaving, so near as he can, not any moisture amongst his hairs:
(...) clapping on his Clothes, he shall upon them set the Saddle, and then
girding it (...) gently, take the Horse forth again, and in his hand walk him
up and down in the air till he be thoroughly cooled and dry: then he shall
take him into the Stable, set him up, after a little pause feed him, and at a
convenient watering hour (...) and dress him, as has been before spoken.
But to return to our former d^^course: He shall hold on this course with the
Horse, until he see him thoroughly won, and then he shall cause him to be
shooed on his hindermost feet only, (...) the end he may carry him through
rough and stony ways, without hurting of (...) hoof: and he shall not use
any thing else to ride him with, save only his whippe and trench, for to make
him go, trot, gallop, run, fly, turn, leap, to rise (...) and before:
also he shall train him to scour over small Hills, the tops of Hills, (...)
great high Hills, and again, to come down the same very softly: and (...)
riding him to the places where Mills, Forges, and such other Hammer-workes
(...), as also where there is beating of Linnens, to the end that afterward he
may (...) afraid at any such noise. He shall bring him also to the place
where are (...), Waines, Tumbrels, Carres, Coaches, Charets, Wagons, flocks of
Sheep, (...) of Swine, Kine, and Goats; making him likewise to see Lambs and
Calves, or other Beasts and Cattle, having their throats cut. He shall mark
all these things day by day, till he perceive him ready, and see him
certainly with his own eyes, that (...) does not use to snuff and take on at
the smells of the foresaid things, and then (...) shall furnish him with all
manner of things, and getting upon him, shall guide (...) into many places,
making him to go by steps, to trot, to leap Ditches, to (...) Rivers, and
other Waters. And notwithstanding this, he shall not fail to give (...) such a
kind of pace and going as shall seem most agreeable unto him: for a (...)
would be trained unto one manner of pace, and a Courser to another; and so a
(...) for the War, a Curtall, or any other such Horse, most near unto his
natural disposition. To make a Horse trot well.
Of which paces to give you a little taste and experience, you shall understand,
that to bring a Horse to a comely, clean, and a lofty trot, you shall use to
(...) him upon new-plowed Lands, or in Ways that are deep and heavy, for
that (...) make him twitch up his legs, and strike them clean and high: but
if you find (...) toylesome to your Colt, and that by reason of his young
years you are afraid to (...) him to so extreme labor, because many
sorances grow thereby, then you (...) ride him forth into some plain piece of
ground that is much ouer-growne (...) long Thistles, short Gorsse, Whynnes, or
such like sharp Weeds, among the which you shall ride your Horse a good space
twice or thrice a day, and the Thistles (...) Gorsse pricking his shinnes, will
make him take up his legs roundly and (...), and in very short space bring
him to a clean, easy, and brave trot, although (...) Horse had never trotted
before in all his life: But if you find that the (...) and uncomeliness of his
trot comes out of a natural carelessness, or in (...) of his way, and that
by reason of a dull and heavy disposition wherewith he is ^^fected, he is not
by any of the former ways to be reclaimed, then you shall (...) when the
nights are most dark and clouded, even so thick, that you can (...) see your
hand (for ever the darker the better:) then you shall take out your (...) and
ride him into some new-plowed field, where the lands lie most high and ^^^euen,
or into the like uncertain and much worn ways, and there trot him (...)
roundly and swiftly, rushing him now ouer-thwart, then end-wise, sometimes
(...) (...), sometimes another, not suffering him to take leisure, or regard to
his way, ^ow dangerous or false of foot-hold soever it be: And although at
first (as it is most ^ikely) he will stumble, or be ready to fall, yet do not
you make any care thereof, but bearing a good stiff hand upon him, strike
your spurs hard into his ^^des, and the more he stumbles, the more increase
you the swiftness of his pace, ^^nely by no means whatsoever suffer him to
gallop. And thus exercising him ^undrie nights together, you shall not only
bring him to a brave and most gal^ant trot, but also breed in him a great
height of spirit and metal, as also it will make him very hardy and
valiant. To help stumbling.
And if he were subject to that intolerable ^^ice of stumbling, yet this
manner of riding and correction would amend and ^^ure the same: for you shall
understand, that a Horse is, as a man, fearful and vigilant of his way, and
when the sight thereof is taken from him, all his pores and vital spirits are
awakened and stirred up to prevent the dangers that may happen unto him: so
that when all courses else shall fail, yet this is most assured. But if you
would have your Horse, To make a Horse (...).
by reason of your many occasions to journey, ^or because your body is unapt
and unable to endure the hard pace of trotting, (...) amble, which is of all
paces whatsoever the easiest, you shall understand, that to bring him
thereunto, there are but only two ways, that is to say, either the Tra^ell,
or the Hand; the betterhood of which* I leave to your consideration, when your
experience has made trial of them both, and done to neither injury, but used
them carefully, artificially, and according to the truth of the rules
prescribed. To give you then a little light what the Tramell is, you shall
understand, that it is called a Tramell when a Horses near fore-legge and his
near hinder-legge, two handful above the pasterne joints, are so fastened
together with leathers and cords, that he cannot put forward his fore-legge,
but he must perforce hale his hinder-legge after it, and so likewise his far
fore-legge to his far hinderlegge, and then another flat and soft leather
going over the fillets of the Horses back, and fastened to both the lines on
both sides the Horse; which piece of leather shall hold up the lines, that they
fall not nor tangle under the Horses feet as he goes. This is called the
tramelling of a Horse: and with these you shall first in your hand make him go
softly or swiftly at your pleasure; and when you find that he will take his way
perfectly in them, without danger of falling, then you shall take his back,
and ride him thus in the tramels the space of a week in some fair, plain,
and smooth Way or Road: then the next week following you shall ride him in
uneven ways, over lays, up hill and down hill, and in such like uncertain
places: then the next week you shall take off the tramels of one side, and
fasten the back band to the saddle, and to ride him for a day or two: then put
on that tramell again, and take off the other which was on before* and so ride
him another day or two: then take both clean away, and so ride him and keep
him to his pace; which he will hardly or never forsake, if you have any care
at all. Now for the special respects which are to be observed in the
tramelling of Horses, you shall first observe, that the leathers which go
about the Horses legs be soft, smooth, and well lyned, neither so strait,
that they may offend the maine sinews of the legs, nor so slack, that they
may fall off: the buckles with which you make them longer or shorter, must be
very strong also, that they may abide the twitches and strains of the Horse,
when at any time he strikes a false stroke: the lines which pass between
these leathers, must be a good round rope made of strong Hemp^ well twound,
with a loope at either end whereto to fix the leathers; and these lines must
be both of a just and even length, not one exceeding another a strawes breadth,
they must be so fixed to the Horses legs, that they must by no means either
draw them inward, or give them liberty to stradle outward, but so, as they may
keep the Horse in his true, just, and natural proportion. Now if your Horse
strike too short, then you shall straiten your lines half an inch at least,
for that will make him ouerstrike half a foot, and a whole inch a whole foot:
and so of the contrary part if he ouerstrike, you shall let forth your tramell
in the same manner that you ^ooke it in. There be some that will put on these
tramels, and make the Horse run an (...) with them a month or two, and when
they take them up, they will amble as (...) and perfectly, as if they had been
natural bred amblers: and sure there is (...) likelihood thereof; for a pace
that is so given without compulsion, is ever the ^^^rest and most unchangeable.
Now for the making of a Horse to amble with (...) hand, it may be done either
in some fair descending ground, or upon the (...) lands, and either out of his
trot or gallop, as thus: Having taken your (...) back, and put him either into
a swift trot or a swift gallop, you shall on the (...) chocke him in the weeks
of the mouth, and iert his head up aloft, (...) him to shuffle his feet
together, and to strike them confusedly; and thus you (...) do so often, till
you make him strike an amble: then you shall cherish him, (...) bring him to
the smooth ground, and there with the help of your hand, (...) firmly aloft,
make him continue his amble: which when at any time he (...) to forsake, you
shall forthwith toil him as you did before, and then bring him (...) the
plain ground chiefly up the hill, and there hold him to his pace: which (...)
he has gotten in any reasonable sort, he will naturally, and for his own
(...), seek to increase it, and then you shall apply him at least three or
four times (...) day, and in one month there is no doubt but you shall bring
him to that pe^fection your own heart can wish. There is also a third pace,
which is neither (...) nor amble, To make a Horse rack.
but is called a racking pace, that is to say, between an amble and (...)
trot: and though it and the amble have both one manner of motion, that is to
(...), taking up of both legs of one side together, yet this racking moves
much (...) and shorter, striking thick, yet seldom beyond the step of the
forefoot. This pace is of some reputed the easiest of all paces: but I leave
that to every (...) man's feeling. Certain it is, that many men take much
delight therein, (...) there is no racking Horse but can trot, and so in deep
and filthy ways are able to make much better riddance of the way: whereas
diverse ambling Horses can by no means trot, and so less able to drive through
the mire: or if they do, it (...) with much toil, and foul dashing and
myring of their Masters. To bring (...) Horse then to this racking pace, the
only best way is held to be sore and (...) travel, as much Hunting, Running,
and such like, and then when you feel yo^^ Horse begin to be a little weary,
to hold up your bridle hand, and chocking (...) Horse in the weeks of the
mouth, to make him break his pace, and to strike a (...), which his
weariness, and the ease that the pace brings him, will quickly (...) him
do, then to cherish and nourish him in the same, and by no means to (...) him
past his strength, or to make him go faster than of his own inclination (...)
is willing to do, for too much have in this work is the only spoil thereof*
And thus in less than a months hunting or riding of your Horse, you shall
bring him to a very swift and most ready rack; in which the Horse will (...)
so much delight, that you shall not at any time need to fear his forsaking
(...) the same. To make a Horse gallop.
Lastly, for the bringing of your Horse to a clean and good gallop* you shall
understand, that there be two sorts of gallopings: the first, stately (...)
aloft, the Horse winding up his legs high, and gathering them round and close
together in lofty manner: and this is fit for great Horses which are (...) up
for service in the Wars, or for the pleasure of Princes and other (...)
Personages, which take delight in stirring Horses, which can leap, bound,
(...) behind, coruet, and other salts of like nature. The other is a swift,
smooth, (...), and long gallop, wherein the Horse stretches out his body to
the uttermost length, and carrying his feet near unto the ground, swoopeth
away swiftly, nimbly, and easily: and this kind of gallop is meet for hunting
Horses, running Horses, or Horses preferred only for labor and travel. Now
to bring a Horse to gallop aloft, which is the first kind of galloping spoken
of, you shall daily use to gallop him as his first riding on new-plowed lands,
which are deep, yet lie flat: and withal, you shall ever observe to keep a
strait hand upon his head, (...) the comeliness of his reyne, and by no means
suffering him to gallop (...), but the flower the better; ever and anon with
your hand, rod* and spur raising up his body, and making him gather his feet
up roundly together: for it is the pride of his reine, and the flownesse of the
gallop, which brings him to the gallantrie and loftiness of the motion. Now,
for the other kind of galloping you shall use a clean contrary course, that
is to say, you shall train your Horse upon the plainest and smoothest ground
you can find, you shall give him liberty of reine, that he may stretch forth
his body and legs, and lay himself close to the ground like a Har^ or a
Greyhound: and this exercise you shall give your Horse morning and evening
after his water, for then it is most wholesome, and he the aptest to learn and
do as you would have him. Also it shall be good for you now and then to put
him to the height of his speed: for the more you strain him, the more he
coucheth his body, and the less distance ever he takes his feet from the
ground: to follow the Hounds all the day twice or thrice a week: or to give
him a course once a week of four or five miles end-wayes, are both very good
ways of training a Horse to this swift gallop: because that length of exercise
takes the fire edge from a Horse, and makes him more temperate and sober in
his doings; whereas the heat and excess of his courage makes him praunce and
do things rashly and loftily. Many other observations there be, but these few
before rehearsed are fully sufficient to bring a Horse to any pace the Rider
pleases.

That Colt, Signs of a good Colt, as also of a good Horse.
Horse, or Stalion may be judged to be good, that is great, thick boned, of a
good shape, having a small head, and so dry, as that there is nothing of it
but skin and bones: small ears, sharp and straight: but great eyes,
standing out, black and clean: very wide nosthrils, puffscompassed up and
great: small jaws, thin and dry: his throat equally divided on both sides:
a neck somewhat long, and made compasse-wi^e, being thin near unto the
head: a short back, broad and somewhat shrinking down like a valley: his mane
curled, thick, and long, and hanging down upon the right side: a broad
breast, open, bosled out, and very fleshie: his shoulders great and straight,
his ribs round, his chine double, his belly round trusted, his cods alike
great and small, his reins large, and somewhat giving down: his taile-long,
and tufted with hair, thick^ and curled: his legs matches, thick of bone,
but thin, dry, and bare of flesh, high and straight: his knee round and
small, and not wrested inward: a round buttocke: thick thighs, long, fleshie,
finewie, and strong: a black hoof, hard, high, hollowed, round, good, and
open, and rising up as it should toward the pasternes, and the crown or top of
it very small above: which is cheerful, quick, gentle, having no ill
quality nor diseases: for they which are of such a nature, a^e very easy and
tractable, and patiently endure any labor: also he must not be mad or
frantic, fearful, running backward: having the Sciatica, a slack eater,
not scowring much, not used to lie down in Waters or Rivers: And yet though
he have lost an eye, or have been hurt in any part of his body in any
combat or fight, he is not to be accounted the worse for that, provided that
in the rest of his body he be found. Again, the Horse is to be esteemed for a
good Stalion which has followed the Wars, because he will beget noble and
courageous Colts, and such as shall be fierce in all adventures and difficult
and long enterprises: besides, that he be of color bay, brown, red, dapple
gray, watchet, or Mouse color, which is a certain note of an active and
courageous Horse. And to speak in a word of the goodness and fairness of a
Horse: ^ee must have the eyes and ioints of an Ox, the strength of a Mule, the
foot of the same, the hoofes and thighs of an Ass, the throat and neck of a
Wolf, the ^are and tail of a Fox, the breast and hair of a Woman, the
boldness of a Lion, the sharp and quick fight of a Serpent, the pace of a
Cat, lightness and nimblenesse of a Hare; a high Pace, a deliberate Trot, a
pleasant Gallop, a swift Running, and bounding Leap and present, and be quick
in (...).

Again, you shall take it for the best and principallest note of a good Horse,
(...) he have an Ostridge feather on each side his crest: The best mark in a
Horse.
for they are of excellent en^^rance, and will seldom or never tire: Again,
to have the near foot white behind, the far foot white before, to have both
feet white behind, or both (...) while on either side, are all approved marks
of a very good Horse, provided that all such whites be under the pasterne: for
to have them higher, is a sign of an arrand lade. Also to have a white star
in the forehead, a while rache down^ the face, or a white snip on the nose, are
marks of a good Horse; provided, (...) the star be not artificial, the
rache too broad, enclining to baldness, nor the (...) raw: all which are evil
signs. Also a little foot is a sign of swiftness, a (...) hair a sign of
metal, a loose throppell a sign of much wind, and a short, well-knit, and
upright pasterne a sign of strength and great endurance. There be (...) other
signs of a good Horse, but none more material than these, nor none (...)
common or easy to be perceived.

The Carter likewise must have knowledge of the age of his Horses, To know the
age of Horses.
to the end he may so set them on work, as their strength will best bear. The
age of Horses is known by their feet, hoofes, and specially by their teeth.
The Horse for the most part has eight and twenty teeth. It is true that
Aristotle would have the Horse to have forty. He begins to have teeth the
first three months, and by the end of the first year he has six above and as
many below: At thirty months (...) changes two above and two below: and at
forty two months he has (...) new ones on both sides, which touch those
which he had last coming. Wh^^ he is four years old, then the teeth called
Dogges-teeth do fall out, and others come in their place. Before the sixth
year, the great iaw-bone-teeth that are on the upper side do fall out: and in
the sixth year, those that were first fallen do grow again. In the seventh
year all the whole number is fulfilled, and they (...) all hollow: and after
this time, no man can certainly know how old a Horse (...) but that about the
twelfth year there is to be seen in them an extraordinar^^ blackness: Add
further, that by how much the Horse grows older, so his teeth grow longer,
except some certain ones, which are shorter by reason of (...) eating of his
meat; and these show themselves the more, as they draw nearer and nearer the
forepart of the iaw. The tenth year the temples begin to fall and grow
hollow, and sometimes the eyebrows do wax gray haired; the (...) does make
show of sadness and a mine of melancholy in his forehead; he sto^peth in his
neck; he is heavy of body; he has eyes of a deadly color; his (...) gray,
that especially of Bay, Black, and Roane colored; as that also of the
Chest^nut color, and other colors standing upon dark: the gray flea-bitten
grows white, and the white flea-bitten becomes dapple-gray and somewhat
dark^^* There are many wrinkles and plaits in the upper part of his broom or
brushing tail, and they are commonly counted to be as many years old as
there is wrinkles found in that place. Furthermore, an old Horse skin drawn
^p with our fingers abides so a long time, but a young Horses falls down
against by and by* Also the uppermost joint, at the setting on of a Horses
tail close to his body, (...) the age of a Horse: for if when you shall
handle it, you find the (...) stands out and is easy to be felt, then you
shall be assured that the Horse is young: but if the bone be not to be felt,
but that the stern seems plain and smooth, then you shall be assured that
the Horse is old; as above ten at the least. Again, (...) you put your
finger into the Horses mouth, and feel his upper ^ush, if you (...) the inside
a little hole sharp and shellie, then you shall be assured, (...) young, but
if it be worn out and smooth, not to be felt, the Horse then is old; (...)
^^boue eleven at the least: If the nether ^ush have a ring (as it were) of new
flesh about it, which may be discerned from the other flesh, then is the Horse
young* but if the flesh be all smooth and plain without difference, and the
^ush a (...) blunted, then is the Horse enclining to old age; as above nine at
the (...) many other observations are held, but ^^one truly certain but these
already rehearsed.

It is likewise the charge of a Carter, To order sick^ Horses.
to have especial care of the health of his Horses; whose continuance and
term of life (as says Aristotle) must be betwixt sixteen and twenty at the
least: wherefore, when he sees them in health, and yet notwithstanding lean,
he shall give them parched Wheat, or of powned Barley the double measure. He
shall rub them very well every day all over their bodies: assuring himself,
that it does more profit them, being often handed and rubbed, than to give them
a great deal of meat. Difficulty of urine.
Likewise some say, that the hand feeds a Horse more than his meat. If they
cannot stale, which is known by the swelling of the bladder, and about the
yard, he shall make them drink pottage made of a pint of Wine, stamped
Garlic, and ten whites of eggs: or else the juice of red Coleworts, mixed
with white Wine. In the mean time he must take away from them their Oats and
Barley altogether, and to feed them with nothing but their own and accustomed
Fodder and Grass meat, to see and if they will recover through the time of the
year. It will be good also to put within the sheath of their yard a Collirie
of Honey boiled with Salt, or else a Gnat or line Fly, or quick Fleas, or a
pretty little piece of Frankincense: as also to lay unto the Reins and
Flanks Oil mixed with Wine: or else to annoint his yard with Wormwood
stamped and boiled with Vinegar; and moreover, to squirt a Syring full of cool
water against his cods. The scalding of the urine.
These Medicines are good when the Urine has scalded the privy parts, or when
they have great heat in their Urine.

The cruel pain of the Head, Pain of the head.
and rage of the Horse, is cured by the often use of Smallage and much Branne,
in which you shall have chopped the leaves of Lettuce and Barley straw newly
gathered: let him blood upon the place where the brain lies, or upon the
temples, or upon both places, and let him stand in a very dark Stabl^, and
such a one as stands low. You shall know if he have pain in his head, by
the distilling and dropping down of water from it, in that his eares-will be
withered and hanging, his neck and head heavy and hanging down.

The ouer-cooled Horse is cured by giving him to drink Swines blood all hot
with Wine, The Horse (...) with cold.
or Masticke and Rue boiled with Honey, or a little common Oil with Pepper.
This disease comes unto him, when as sweating and being hot, he is set in a
cold place, and thereupon it draws up his sinews, and hardens his hide:
you must set him in a very hot place, covering him very warm with couerings
down to the ground, and putting under his belly seven or eight great thick
stones red hot, you shall quench them there, by casting warm water upon them
by a little and little, and often, that so by this means the heat may make him
sweat.

The nail in the eye shall be lifted up with a little small needle of Iuorie,
The nail in the eye.
and then cut quite away with Sc^^ars: or else make a powder of a green
Lizard, and Arsenicke, put it into the eye, for to fret away the nail.

Against the suffusion there is a singular remedy: Against the blood-(...),
pearl^, and spots in the (...)*
an Eye-salue made of the juice of ground Iuie stamped in a Wooden Mortar: or
else the juice of the berries of Iu^e running along upon the ground: or the
leaves of great Clarie beaten and stamped in a Mortar in Wine, after that you
have let the Horse blood upon the vein of the eye that has the suffusion, and
to continue this remedy many days evening and morning: Or else blow into the
eye through some Pipe or Quill the bone of Cuttle powned small, or the seed of
Rocket whole: or else the seed of the herb called Tota bona, and there let it
alone, till by his virtue it have cleansed and taken away the spots: or the
powder of the yolke of an egg and salt burnt together, and put into the eye:
or the powder of Sal-Armoniake, Myrrh, Saffron, and the shauings of the Cuttle
bone.



The stricken eye is cured by applying unto it a cataplasme made of bread (...)
steept in cool water, The (...).
or bread tosted and steept in white wine: if this do no good, you must open
the head vein.

The bleared eye is cured by an eye-salue made with frankineense, The bleared
eye.
myrrh, starch, and fine honey: as also by a frontlet made of frankincense and
mastick finely powdered ^^nd brayed with the vvhites of eggs, applied to the
brows, and suffered there to lie ^ntill the eyes cease to shed tears, and
after to raise the frontale with anointing the ^^dges thereof with Oil and
warm water beaten together.

The scarres of the eyes are healed with rubbing them with your own fasting
^pittle and Salt, The skarre of the eyes.
or with the powder of the Cuttle-bone mingled with burnt Salt, or the seed
of vvild Parsnep pouned, and pressed out of a linen cloth upon your eye
scarres.

All pains of the eyes are cured by anointing them with the juice of
Plantaine with Honey. Pain of the eye.


The Enceur does bring present death unto horses: The ^ar^fore or swelling of
the kernels of the heart.
wherefore you must so soon as ever you see the breast kernel to be swollen,
pluck it away immediately without (...) staying: and if in thus pulling of it
away, any vein should burst, you must tie it (...) both ends with a silk
thread: look how much the kernel shall grow greater, so much greater an
impostumation it would make, and not so only, but therewithal ^^^ause death.

The horse having drunk much, The auiues.
or watered very quickly after his heat and travail, and upon it growing
cold, and not being vvalked, does beget the Auiues, which do but little differ
from the disease called the Kings-euill, because as well in beasts as in man
the Kings-euill comes of too much cooling of water, the throat having been
heated, vvhereupon the horse loses his appetite to eat, and his rest
likewise, and his ears become cold: you must presently provide to help him,
in taking away the Auiues after this manner: Bend down the ear betwixt his
neck and his chyne, make incision with a knife for the purpose along upon the
hard fleshinesse, which one would say to be nothing but a very whitesinew:
pluck away the white carnositie or fleshie substance: lay to the place as well
within as without, a linen cloth dipped in the white of an egg, cover the horse
by and by with a good covering, and walk him so long as until that his
ears become warm, giving him a drink made with water, salt, and meal, but
first causing him to eat a little good Hay: let him rest three days in the
stable, and eat and drink there: or else make him hot fomentations, and those
of such things as are proper in that case, to be applied unto the part, for to
remove the humor, afterward apply a cataplasme made of Barley meal, and
three ounces of Rosin, all boiled in due sort in good strong red wine; and when
the matter shall be gathered and ready for suppuration, give it a gash with a
knife, to let the suppurated and ripe matter out, afterward put in the hollow
place tents wet in water, oil, and salt, with bolsters laid upon them and dipped
in the same. This disease craves a speedy remedy, for and if you stay till
the Auiues be gotten up higher, it is past hope of curing.

The Squinanci^, The squinancie or inflammation of the throat.
otherwise called the disease of the throat, and swelling of the tongue,
requires first of all that the horse should be let blood upon the vein under
the tongue, or of the palate of the mouth: after that, a fomentation for the
whole mouth, and for the tongue with warm water: then after that, a liniment
of the gall of an Ox, or of (...) and tartar beaten together with strong
vinegar. And as concerning a drink, you must take of Oil two pound, of old
wine a pottle, amongst all this you shall mix nine fat figs, with nine leekes
heads: temper them all well together, and afterward make a decoction; in the
end whereof, but before it be strained, you shall add of Salt and Nitre well
pouned, so much as you shall see necessary: of all well strained, you shall
make a drink, which you shall cause him to take with a horn twice a day, that
is morning and evening a quarter of a pint at a time. For his meat cause him to
eat green Barley, or Fetchets, or the meal of Barley, amongst which you shall
mingle Nitre.

The Strangles of a Horse, or Glandules, The Strangles.
which happen under his throat, and fall down from the brain much cooled,
are oftentimes cured by pricking him under the throat in the morning, afterward
cover his head with some kind of Linen cloth, and rub his throat oftentimes
with fresh Butter, but especially the place of his disease.

The Barbes hindering the Horse from eating, The Barbes.
by reason of (...) swollen, are healed by making him eat Pease, Beans, or the
stalks of Pease or (...) because that the bruising and breaking of them
causes this swelling to go (...) if the Barbes do grow there again, you must
cut them out with a very (...) being likewise very hot, for thus are they
taken out of the hollow of the (...) mouth, and for the rest taken away by
burning, you must cut them away (...) of sheares even to the quick.

For the excrescence of flesh growing under the Horses body, The soupe, or
excrescenc^ under the belly.
you must (...) place, and make incision with some knife fit for the purpose,
and then afterward ^^noint it morning and evening with the ointment called
Dialthoea.

Flies are kept away from Horses ^ores with pitch and oil, To chase away files.
or grease mingled (...) powered upon them, and then by strawing Fetch flowers
upon them again.

The disease of the gums and teeth happens oftentimes unto colts when they
(...) growing their teeth, The pains of the gums and teeth.
temper of fullers earth (the best you can come by (...) Remes) in very strong
vinegar, and therewith rub their jaws on the outside, (...) more a great
deal in the place where the pain or swelled gums be.

The short winded Horse, The short winded horse.
or he which cannot easily draw his breath, and (...) has his flanks beating
incessantly, and which notwithstanding that he be (...), haled, and whipped,
will not stir, but pant very much, and blow exceedingly* (...) and which
eating of his meat cannot abstain coughing: this same Horse will (...) ever be
cured. It is true that this disease being new, and caused of dust, (...)
winds, fo^stie hay, or of having eaten some kind of dung in his prouender,
(...) ^^medie for it may be, to draw blood upon him with a green withie, and
to (...) hot upon his breast and back the said blood mingled with wine and
Oil (...) and having done this for the space of five days, then the next five
days following (...) make him take down Lee at his nosthrils, wherein there
is mixed a portion of Oil, to give him this drink after: Mustard Seed well
fried, quick Brimstone, grains (...) Paradise, of each alike much, make them
in powder, and make thereof a decocti^^ in honey and water, or else in some
composition that is good and thick, whereof you shall give him every morning
the bigness of a big Wall-nut, with sage, and with thick red wine, but such
as is good and noble: or else make him a drink (...) cloves, ginger, cummine,
fennell-seed, and the roots Galanga, as much of the one (...) the other; all
these being powdered, mingle therewith some eggs, and a little (...), make the
Horse to take it down with Wine, holding his head high, to the end (...) may
swallow the more easily, and not suffering him to hold it down, at the (...) a
good half hour, to the end that the drink may pass through his bowels;
(...) this drink, you shall give him fresh grass, or the leaves of Roses or
willow (...) temper the heat of the said drink: but the horse must not have
eaten any thing (...) the space of one half day before the taking of this,
neither yet must he eat any thing for the like space after the taking of it.
Let him walk and lead him gently by the head-stall, or else getting upon him,
let him pace him very softly, that so he may not cast it up again: and thus
much for the cure of the (...) ^vinded horse, if the disease be not grown too
old. Which notwithstanding that it should be, yet (...) may relieve it for some
time, if you fear him a little upon both the sides of the (...), to the end
that this heat may cause to cease this great panting, which does pain (...)
in his flanks: and if vvithall you slit his nosthrils, that so he may attract
and (...) in the air and his breath, and as easily let it go: besides these
ways, I would (...) you also to give him to eat, some grapes oftentimes, and
to drink some sweet (...). Another singular remedy there is, which consists
in giving him a drink (...) with Agaricke and Fenugreeke tempered with red
Wine: or else to cause him (...) swallow the blood of a little dog, which
yet is not above ten days old: or to take the roots of Gentian, of vvild
cucumers, and bitter Almonds, and to poune the^^vvith Honey and Water, and to
make a drink thereof; or else to give oftentimes (...) eat of silver grass.

The Cough has many causes, The cough in a (...).
notwithstanding that which comes from the (...), as from the lungs and
parts adjoining, or else from some other of the inward (...), which are noble
and principal, and have accordingly some notable office in (...) body; has
not a more sovereign remedy, than the slitting of the beasts no^^hrils, and
if after this the beast do not amend, then to cause him to take down a ^ood
pint of the drink following with a horn. Take Fenugreeke and Linseed, of
^^ch a quarter of a pecke, Gum-tragacanth, Olibanum, and Myrrh, of each an
ounce, ^ugar, the oatmeale of great vvild Tare, of each an ounce, all these
being well pou^ed and let run through a bag, you shall cause it to be
infused all a whole night in hot water, and the day following you shall give
it to the beast, as has been said; and this shall be continued, adding
thereto a bowl of oil of Roses, even to the end of the cure. Some cause five
eggs to be laid to steep one whole night in strong Vinegar, and the next
morning when they see that the shell is become very ten^er and soft, they give
them to the horse to take down. Furthermore you must never draw blood from the
horse in what palce soever that it be, but it shall be good to ^iue it unto
him, and to continue the Gum-tragacanth with sweet Oil.

The ague of a horse is cured by being let blood upon the vein, The horse
(...) Ague.
which is found in (...) midst of the thigh, to the quantity of six
ounces, or about the place which is somewhat about the fundament: but if in
neither of those two places, or where they cannot be found, you must take the
neck vein toward the vvind-pipe: if you per^eiue that there is need of a
drink, you shall strain a handful of Purslane, and ^^ingle the juice with
Gum^tragacanth, fine Frankincense, and a few Prouence Ro^^s, you shall make him
take it all with honied water, in some pretty small quanti^ie. It is known
amongst other marks that he has an ague, if he have the stopping of his
urine, and his ears become cold, withering and hanging down.

In the faintness of the heart. The faintness of the heart
it is good to keep the horse very hot, and to give him this drink; Myrrh
two ounces, Gum-tragacanth four ounces, Safron four drams, Mehlot in powder
an ounce, Mercury a pound, and fine Frankincense so much as shall be
sufficient and proportionable: all these mixed together and made in^o powder,
shall be reserved for your use, and that shall be in giving two good spoonfulls
thereof with one pint of water, two spoonefulls of Home, and two bowls of
Oil of Roses. This drink will serve for many days, even till the horse do
find himself better. The broken back.
And further, know that this drink is good for those that have their ^acke or
loins broken, and members very stiff.

For the horse that is ouer-heated, The horse ouer-heated.
you shall cause him to swallow with the horn (...) Winter three ounces of
Oil, with one pint of red wine, and in Summer two ounces of Oil only,
with the like quantity of Wine that is above named.

In the pain of the belly, Pain in the belli.
which some call the Birth, you shall take the seeds of vvild Rue, or of the
garden Rue, you shall poune it well, and with hot wine you shall make him a
drink: unto this drink you may add Cummine and Fennel-seed in like
quantity, and after keep him hot in some close and well covered place:
before you give him this drink, you must get upon his back, and walk him a
long time, and that rather in high places, than in low and plain fields: when
you are coming homeward, if the season be cold, you shall cloth him with a
good vvoollen cloth, rubbing his flanks with Oil, until such time as he be
become cold, and do break wind. It would be good also to convey into his
fundament some hollow joint of a Reed or Rose tree sufficient thick, and half
a foot long, anointed with common Oil, and let this same hollow Reed be in
such sort fastened unto his tail, as that it may not by any means come forth,
and this done then to get upon the horse, and to walk him. But howsoever
things go, you must let him have meat of hot quality, and to drink water
boiled with Cummine and Fennell-seed in equal quantity, mingling with it
Wheat meal, and keeping it very vvarme in a very clos^ place.

For the difficulty (...) vr^ne, Difficulty of urine.
it is an approved thing to take five or nine of the flies called Cantharides,
to lap them in a linen cloth, and apply them to the thigh, and howsoever it
fares with him, yet to keep them there for some time: this will procure
urine: but in any case give him them not in powder, clister, or drink^. (...)
good also to rub his cods with the decoction of Cresses, Pellitorie, and (...)
Leekes.

For the sniuell, For the sniuell.
take Orpin and Brimstone, cast them upon burning coals, and (...) the fume
go up into the Horses nosthrils, that so the humors congealed above in (...)
brain may be resolved and cast forth.

For the Flying worm, The Flying worm.
take from him some blood upon the veins of the (...) apply a hot ^earing
iron very deep under the throat, and in the hole put (...) plegets upon them,
moystened in the white of an egg, and after let him stand (...) days in the
stable.

For the Iauar, take Pepper, The Iauar.
as also the leaves of Coleworts, old Swines (...) make an emplaister to be
laid upon the place.

For the Fig, The Fig.
you must pare the hoof so far forward, as that you may (...) reasonable
room and space, betwixt the sole of the foot and the fig, then (...) Sponge
there, and tie it very hard, that so the rest of the fig may be (...) even
to the cleft.

For the Wenne, The Wenne.
open it when you shall perceive it to be full of matter, (...) make a plaster
of Goole-turdes, wine, salt, and vinegar, and lay unto the (...): beware in any
case that there be not in the bottom of it some strange and (...) thing.

For the galling of the back that is new done, For a galled back.
take two great Onions and (...) decoction thereof in boiling water, afterward
you shall apply it to the sore place (...) hot as the horse can abide it, all
the swelling will be gone away in one night. Otherwise take salt in powder, and
wet it in strong vinegar, putting thereto the yolke of (...) egg, with all
this together you shall rub the place, and you shall see the proof* (...) else
wash the place with wine or very strong vinegar, lay aloft upon it Lime made
(...) powder, and mixed with Honey, continue this remedy so long as till the
flesh be (...) again, and the bone covered with it, then to cause the hair to
grow upon it, yo^ must poune the shells of small nuts burned, and being mingled
with oil, annoin^ (...) places wanting hair, and it will be ouergrowne in a
short time.

For a Horse ^wayed in the back, A horse swayed in the back.
or complaining of having been ouerladen, ^^^plie unto the reins of his back
an emplaister made of stone-pitch, with the (...) of Bole-Armoniake,
Dragons-bloud, Olibanum, Masticke, Galls, of each ^quall weight: let the
plaster be laid somewhat hot upon the offended part, which you shall not take
away until it easily forsake the place when you touch it: for (...) the Horse
is healed.

For the swellings caused on the Horse back by the Saddle, The back (...).
open it first with (...) Knife, afterward lay plegets upon it w^t in the
whites of eggs three days together: and the place if it be swollen and hard,
it will be healed with Coleworts, (...), Wormwood, and Beares-breech, bruised
together and stamped and bo^^led together with sweet Seame: apply it unto the
place offended and hurt.

For the disease called Graps, The (...) of the (...).
which are moules and scabbes on the heels, (...) way the scabbes, and them
wash the place with the decoction of Mallows, (...), and Mutton Sewer: put the
dross or thick substance of this upon the (...) and bind it fast and close
thereto, afterward take it away and anoint the place (...) an ointment made of
vinegar, Mutton Sewet, the gum of the Fur tree, and new (...) of all alike,
and boil them altogether.

It is a singular good remedy for the Iaundise which follows: take of
^^nicke Corn, The iaundise.
and Smallage, of ea^h a pound, boil them all with L^pines (...) good Honey,
and of the whole strayned, make him take a Pine, eight (...) ^^gether.

If he be costiuene, Costiues.
he may be helped by drink or clyster; the drink shall be (...) give him
ordinarily of the powder of vvild Rue, with the seed thereof (...) good red
wine: or else take the root of yellow Flower-de-luce, with Annisseed^, (...)
Opopa^ax: and of all these beaten together very small, you shall make (...) or
draughts, with three ounces of good Red wine, and as much Oil olive, and
those on three several days. In the clyster you shall put the juice of pale
colored Flower-de-luce in three pound of the decoction of Mallows and Perrie,
and into the whole you shall put of Sall-nitrum, and the dung of Pigeons, of
each an ounce, of Oyle-de-bayes, and Rue, of each three ounces. After the
clyster given, he must be vvalked a great while, and very softly. Some
Farriers or Horse-leaches have in this disease made trial of Hares dung, with
nine spoonefulls of Honey, and five grains of Pepper, to make a drink to take
with the broth of Cich Pease, or Red Coleworts.

The Horse oftentimes having eaten too much Barley or other prouender that is
hurtful, The (...).
is troubled with the swelling of his flanks, and the rest of his body: to
take the same away, you must make a decoction of Mallows, Pellitorie,
Bears-(...), Mercury, and other soluble herbs, putting thereto, Bran, Salt,
Honey, and Oil: and having vvarmed this decoction, he shall have a clyster
given him with a clysterpipe, having the shanke thereof proportionably great
and long: this being well accomplished, anoint his belly with Oil, and after
cause it to be rubbed with a round staff by two men, beginning before, and so
going backward, stopping up his fundament: after this, get upon him, and walk
him very softly, and a long time, until that he have voided, not only this
clyster, but vvithall some part of the dung, which he had in his body, and he
will be well by and by after.

For bursting, or rupture, For a horse that is bursten.
some are of opinion that there is nothing so sovereign as to take seven
ounces of the ashes of the vvood of vine branches, or of Elm, with three
ounces of Oil olive, Scallions brayed, seven in number, Honey three ounces,
fresh Butter and Goats Sewe^, of each an ounce, the juice of Plantaine three
ounces, with old white wine, or the broth of Cych Pease: this will serve for
thrice, to be taken three several days together.

To keep your great Horses that they may not be molested and troubled in great
heat, The ^^inging of Flies.
with the stinging of Flies: you must rub their hair with the juice of
leaves of gourdes.

For the farcie of the legs, The farcie.
you must shau^^ the place, and after anoint it with the Oil of Juniper for
the space of four days evening and morning, and let not the horse go forth
to water all the whiles that his hair is not grown again: or else let him
have a struck with an iron, long-waies, and ouerthwhart: otherwise, for the
farcie of a horse how hard to cure so ever it be, you must take the roots of
common cotton thistle (which is the broad and white leaued thistle) and make
him eat them in shiues with his oats, it will heal him without all fail, in
less than fifteen days, or three weeks, if it be continually given him to
eat: and the remedy is very easy, seeing the horse will willingly eat it.

For clefts which happen betwixt the joint of the leg and the hoof, Clefts.
shave away the hair, wash the place with wine, anoint it with an ointment
made of Soot, V^^degrease, and Honey pouned and boiled together, mingling
therewith in the end some Lime: if the chaps be very deep in, ^^are them.

For the scabbe you must let him blood in convenient places, For the scabbe.
according to that place where the disease is: for a convenient purge, it
will be good to use of the powder of the root of vvild Cucumber mingled with
Sal-nitrum, and given in a ^o^ne with white wine: the medicine oftentimes
given does purge him of evil humors: for an ourward remedy, take quick
Brimstone, fat Pitch, Clay of Judea, called Asphaltu^* mingle all together, and
dissolve it in new Butter salted, and with this ointment you shall rub him all
over his body in the greatest heat of the Sun, and by many persons, and a
long time. If you love not rather to take of vinegar a quarter of a pin^e, of
Perrosin four ounces, Pitch or Gum of the Cedar-tree four ounces, and mix
them all well together in an oyn^ment, with man's urine and vvarme water,
putting thereto of sweet Seame, and old Oil, of each three oun^^^, make a
liniment or cerote, if it like you not, better to vvash him all over, (...)
else to foment him with urine and warm water, and after to appl^e your
lin^ment upon the places so washed. The herb called Rose-baie, or Oleander,
boiled in Oil (I mean the leaves only) is an exquisite remedy for this
disease, (...) thereto fat pitch, vinegar, and wax: and remember always in
rubbing and annointings to rub the beast against the hair. It is also a
sovereign remedy to (...) him first in the s^abbed place until it bleed, and
after to wash it with Lee made with one part of Lyme, two of Beane-meale, and
three of the ashes of Ash-tree, all these not boiled but steeped only in the
Lee. After the washing, you must anoint the place with an ointment made of
quicksilver, hellebor, brimstone, alum, coltsfoot, (...) Swines-grease.

When the horse complains himself, The Horse swelled.
and his flanks be swollen, as also the re^^ of his body, by having eaten some
bad Hay or Prouender, you shall make him this drink: take the thin skins
that are in the stomach of three Hens, and dry the^ well in an oven,
afterward powder them with half an ounce of pepper, and fou^^ spoonefulls of
Honey, and an ounce of the powder of fine Frankencense, make him take this
medicine with a pint of vvarme wine, and to the end that it may loosen his
belly, give him at the fundament by a clyster sufficient great and long, a
clyster of the decoction of Mallows, Mercury, Pellitorie, and other loosening
herbs, putting thereto Bran, Salt, Honey, and Oil.

Against the colicke: The colicke in a Horse.
take Asarum bacchar, the leaves and roots of Parsley and Fennel, of each one
ounce, black Pepper two ounces, Horehound an ounce, Soothernwood half an
ounce, fine Honey a pottle, boil it well, and scum it altogether, and thereof
make trochiskes of the bigness of Filberts, and with a quarter of a pint of
good wine, you shall make the horse to take it in manner of a drink: and the
day that the colicke does pain him, you shall bruise three or four
spoonefulls of Fennel-seed, and cause him to drink it down roundly with wine,
and then count him well to cause him to sweat.

For the swelling of the cods or stones, make as it were a pap of strong
vinegar, fullers day and salt, The swellings of the coddes.
to anoint the cods withal twice or thrice a day.

For a Fistula: For a Fistula.
make the hole wider, sear it, cast into it a salve made of vnquenche Lime, so
long as till the core or dead flesh within do fall out.

For the canker: For a Canker.
wash it with strong vinegar, afterward sprinkle upon it the (...) powder of
the root Daffodils, Rats-bane, and Vnquencht-lime, put together into ^ pot, and
burnt to ashes.

For the Iauar in the houghs or hams: The Iauar or scab in the (...).
sear the places along and overthwart with a hot iron, afterward apply
thereto a cataplasme made of very new Ox dung (...) upon the fire with Oil.

If the horse be cloyed, The Horse cloyed.
you must take out the nail, and pare him to the quick and till blood come,
then making very clean the pared place to drop into it (...) Brimstone, or to
fill it up with an ointment made of Turpentine, Wax, Oil, H^nie and Salt, all
being made very hot, and a little Cotton also dipped in the same ointment. Or
else (which is an approved thing) to put upon the hurt place on the inside of
the hoose of the horse, the leaves of white female Mullein bruised betw^^^ two
stones. And in case the malady be a day or two old, then you must hold the
horse foc^ in warm water well salted, and lay and bind aloft upon the foot a
(...) of Bran, Swines-grease, and Salt Water: or with small Salt and strong
Vinegar, or the powder of gals, or mittles, or of the masticke tree, and then
to sear him above, (...) to fill up all the hollow of the foot with
Porkes-grease: and having thus dressed it so much, and so often as it shall be
needful: let it be made up, filling notwithstanding the hoof on the inside
with pitch, and anointing it oftentimes with swines-grease as i^ abouesaid.
And to preserve the hoof in his soundness and strength, apply unto (...) lost
a cataplasme made of boiled mallows stamped and mixed with honey and bran: put in
the hollow of the hoof the sewet of a sheep, and above the hoof his own
dung (...)

For the horse which halteth because of some stroke given him by some other
horse upon his sinews: Alene Horse.
take of the sewet of a Male-goat a pound, Molibden^ halfes pound, Resin a
pound, and Copperas half a pound, make an ointment. The (...) ^^roken or
wounded, or having received any other kind of wrench in the Knee or ^oynt, by
the horse his setting of his foot in some bad and inconvenient place, is hea^ed
by taking an ounce of Fenugreeke, as much of Linseed, four ounces of
Swinesgrease, all this being boiled together so long as till it be thick, and
much dimi^shed.

If the horse interfering do wound himself upon his hinder feet, The
enterfering of a horse.
you must cut away the hair very short and bare from the place that is hurt,
and rub it with common salt, tying upon it some pretty plate of thin Lead,
afterward taking that away ^o wash it with Wine.

For the spauin in the hammes: you must, The spauine.
raising the thigh up on high, tie the vein called Fontanella, and give it a
wound with a flemme to let it bleed, and after to apply the actual cauterie,
or hot iron upon the spauin, and to burn it long wise and overthwart, and to
heal up the seared place, as in the Iauar.

The chaps are healed, Chaps and Cli^ts.
if you burn them at either end with a round hot iron: for his burn will
keep the chaps from going further, and then afterward rub them with washed
Lard in diverse waters, or with oil of Bays mixed with Masticke, Fran^incense,
Vinegar, and the yolke of an Egg.

The grapes would (when the hair is once taken away) be washed with the
decoction of Mallows, The grapes or scabber.
of Brimstone, and Mutton-sewet, afterward applying the drossie parts unto the
places, which being taken away, there shall an ointment be made of new Wax,
Turpentine, and Gum-arabecke equally mingled.

For the hornie swelling in the circle of the houghs or hams: For the (...)
swelling.
you must shave the disease and put upon it the drossie parts of the decoction
of hollihocke roots stamped: and after that a plaster of Mustard Seed, the
roots of Mallows, and Ox dung, all boiled together with Vinegar.

Cut the head and the tail from a snake, For the disease called Paumon, or
(...) galle.
and divide the rest of the body into gobbets, roast them on a spit, gather
the fat which droppeth, and apply it to the sore or wound.

The disease of the hoof or the corn: stamp Coleworts that are green with
old Swines-grease, The disease of the hoof, or the corn of the f^oat.
lay it unto the disease, and get upon the horse, and ride him indifferently to
the end that the medicine may pearce into it.

For the garrot: The garrot.
pluck away the flesh that is dead with a sharp instrument, and wash the
place with warm Wine, afterward apply plegets thereto moistened in the white
of an Egg.

The disease of the neck: The disease of the neck.
pearce the flesh in five places on both sides the neck, with an iron sharp
like a Naule, put a Seton through e^erie hole, and let them abide there
fifteen days.

For the palamie: The Palamie or bloody chops in the palate.
take away the flesh from the palate of his mouth with a very fine instrument,
and that in such quantity as that the humor may easily come forth, afterward
cleanse and rub his pala^e, with honey of Roses, juice of Chibol^s, Scallions,
and burned Wheat.

The courbe: cut the skin along the hair, The courbe, or a long swelling
beneath the elbow of the hough.
acording to the bigness of the courbe, apply thereto a linen cloth, wet in
warm Wine, straw upon it the powder of Verdegrease, and thus continue unto the
end of the cure.

For the Knee swollen: The swelling of the Knee.
take a pint of strong vinegar, wherein you shall temper a little Salt, of
burnt Copper half a pound, and of Sinople so much as shall be needful and
necessary.

For the Knees that are broken and chapt: Broken and chapt Knees.
take common Oil, Linseed, ashes of Rie-straw, and all being put together make
an ointment thereof, to anoint the sore place evening and morning until it be
wh^le.

For the chafings which most commonly happen unto the neck or back of a horse
carrying Saddle-packs, Chafings.
or Saddle: lay upon the place the leaves of wild black ^ine.

In old and hard tumors make this cerote: Old tumors.
Galbanum two ounces, Rosin, and Wax, of each a pound, Gum-ammoniacke, and
black Pitch, of each half a pound, and of oil so much as shall be needful
to incorporate and make up all the rest (...) good form. But if the tumor be
broake and hollow, and has been an old (...) very long continuance, then you
shall dissolve a quarter of a pound of Allome (...) pint of running water, and
with it first wash the sore very well, and the take V^guentum Aegyptiacum,
and lay it upon the sore with flax hurds; do thus once (...) twice a day, and
the cure will soon be made perfect.

Against the bots or worms, Worms and bots.
make him drink water wherein Rye has boiled, or mingle amongst his bran
some Brimstone: or make ashes of the wood of (...) Oliue-tree, or powder of
dried Wormwood, together with the corns of raw ^^pines, and Centaurie alike
much of all, two ounces of the seed of turnips, hearts-(...) one ounce, and
with white wine it will serve to take at three times: the day after the
three above named, you shall make him a clyster of the decoction of Wormwood
and Rue, putting thereto in the strayned liquor two Oxe-galls, and an (...) of
Aloes.

Against the flux of the belly, The current.
which some use to call the current, there is made a drink of great service
and use of the powder of gals, with red wine, and the flower of starch
tempered together: or else i^ the flux come of taking cold, give him (...) dipped
in sweet Red wine and Rose Water; and rub his reins and belly with (...)
wine, Oil of Roses, and a little Salt.

For the flux of blood passing by urine, Flux of blood.
you must let him blood of the vein of (...) breast: afterward make a
decoction of Wheat with sweet Seame, and the powder of the rinds of dry
Pomegranats, strain them all to make a drink for to give him every morning,
not putting him to any travel at all. Likewise you shall apply a (...) plasme
unto his back and reins, made with Kno^grasse, Bole^armoniacke, and the
blood of the beast, mingled together with strong vinegar or thick red wine,
which may also serve for them that have their reins relaxed, or have been
pricked with (...) Lancet.

A restie horse for to make him go forward, The restie horse.
must have a coarde tied unto (...) cods, and it must be so long, as that
reaching betwixt his forelegs it do come up (...) high, as that the rider may
hold it in his hands, and so may pull it hard whe^as the horse should offer to
go backward: but if it be in a Gelding, you must bumbast (...) buttocks with a
good long stick taken hot out of the fire, and burnt at the end, for (...)
will make him go: and likewise if you use the same course in his rearings, it
will ^^^rect him, and make him leave them.

If the horse at any time with eating of his hay do eat any venomous beast,
Poison eaten.
as Sc^^pion, Spider, or the venomous fly called Buprestis: he must be covered
till he (...), and then in all have let him blood in the roof of his mouth,
which so soon as it is (...) forth, shall be given him again to drink warm,
and in such quantity as it (...) forth; for his meat, give him leekes and
wheat boiled together. Look more abo^^ in the Chapter of the Neat-heard or
Oxe-keeper.

For the stinging of Vipers, The stinging of Vipers.
a live Cock slit through the midst, and applied warm unto the vvound is
much worth: and presently after this, a powder of the (...) of yellow
Daffodill, with strong wine and Salt made all in a drink for him: or (...)
the root, leaves, and fruit of vvild vine made in ashes, and drunk with good
(...) or else take presently that kind of buglosse, called Echium, and draw out
of it a good pint of juice, having first watered it with white wine or
water of Card^us (...). It you perceive that the leaf will not yield you
juice enough of it self, (...) the horse first to drink that which you have,
and after apply the substance of (...) herb upon and about the stung place,
and cover it.

The Shrew by her biting of the Horse, The biting of the Shrew.
makes him oftentimes to dye, as (...) have oftentimes seen both in Horse and
Oxen: this is a beast as big as a (...), of the color of a We^ill, with a
long snout and a short tail: she fasteneth upon (...) infecteth most chiefly
the cods, and makes four small vvounds: for to heal^ (...) venomous biting,
you must cause him presently to take down through the ^^ose ^^^^leaues stamped
or powdered with water: and to apply unto the place that is (...) ^ummin and
Garleeke stamped together: and in case there be any ulcer, you must ^ment the
place with Brine, or with the decoction of the Mirtle-tree, and to scatter and
sprinkle thereupon the powder of burned Barley, or of a Pomegranat rind. ^ooke
more in the chapter of the Ox-keeper.

The biting of a mad dog has for a singular remedy, The biting of a mad
dog.
if it be used before it be (...) days, the flowers of Medicke fodder burned
and mixed with old Swines^rease, and applied unto the wound, or else to stamp
it with old white Wine, and ^^use him to drink it. Also the root of the
Eglantine-tree made in powder, and put upon the wound, or given him to drink
with good old Wine. Likewise the Ber^ies of Elder-tree, or the juice of the
leaves thereof, or of Ashe-tree.

Hens dung swallowed by hap, Hens dung swallowed by the horse.
brings frets and wrings in the belly: for which, ^^ke of old Smallage and
dry two ounces, and cause him to drink them with Wine and Honey: afterward
walk him until his belly rumble, and that he begin to dung.

The lean horse may be made fat, The lean horse.
if you give him to eat Fasels or long Pease boy^ed in water, and mixed amongst
his prouender: but and if he should be so weak as that he could not swallow
them down, you must strengthen and get him into cou^age again, making him sup
egge-yolkes with sugar in very good quantity: warm water, mixed with Salt
and meal of Millet, and given to the horse, does greatly fat him. Also
Panicke, Rice, and Millet boiled, and mixed with Beane-meale and Salt, ^are
excellent good, and it would be given him four times a day, but not much at a
time, least the horse should cast it up again.

It comes to pass sometimes that Mares are troubled with a kind of rage, The
raging love of Mares.
that is to say, when they see their own pictures in the water they are
taken with love: and hereupon they forget to eat and drink, and dry up their
heat or sign of desiring the horse. The signs of this madness are manifested
by their running thr^^gh the pastures, as if they were spurred, oftentimes
looking round about them, as if they sought and desired something. They are
cured of this madness by being brought unto the water; for when they see by
their shadows how ill favored they be, they will forget the first shape which
they had beheld before.

For a Horse that is troubled with the Yellowes, Yellowes.
you shall first let him blood in the neck vein and in the roof of the
mouth: then take a quart of Ale, a handful of Celandine, fine spoonefuls of
Honey, three ounces of Cummin seed beaten to powder, a little Saffron, and a
handful of Time, boil these together, then strain it, and give it the Horse
to drink luke warm.

If your Horse be troubled with the Staggers, Stagger.
you shall first let him blood in the neck vein, and take from him great
store of blood: then take Veri^ice and Bay salt beaten together, with a good
pretty quantity of Assafetida, and dip in Flax hurds therein, stop it hard
into the Horses ears, and then bind them up so as the medicine may by no
means fall out; and do thus diverse days together: and if need require, let
him blood again the second day on the other side of the neck: let him stand
warm, lie soft, and by no means drink any cold water.

For the Gargyll or Pestilence amongst Horses, Pestilence.
take Hens dung, and mix it very well with old urine, and then boil them
together, and being luke warm, give the Horse a pint, or a little more, to
drink two or three mornings together: then, as was before said, let him stand
warm, lie soft, and by no means drink any cold water.

If your Horse be troubled with the Cords, Cords.
take a corued made of the brow-antler of an old Stagges horn, and thrust it
under the Cord, and twynd it ten or twelve times about, till the Horse be
constrained to lift up his foot, then cut the Cord asunder, and put a little
salt into the wound, and wash him after with Beefe-broth, and the cure will be
effected.

If your Horse be troubled with a Rhewme descending down into his eyes, Rheum
in the Eye.
you shall take Bole-armoniake, Terra sigillata, Sanguis Draconis, of each a
like quantity, scrape them, then add the white of an egg and vinegar, so
much as will serve to moist them, then spread it upon a piece of leather
plaster-wise, and lay it to the temples of the Horses head, three or four
days together, and it will both (...) and dry up the rheum.

If a vvarte, A Warte.
or any other naughty substance shall grow within the (...) of your horse,
you shall take burnt Allome, and white Copperas, and grind (...) to a very
fine powder, and then with a Goose or Swans quill blow some of the po^der into
the horses eye, and it will soon eat away the excression and cleanse the eye,
and make it fair and perfect.

For any strain whatsoever, A Strain.
whether it be in sinew or in bone, you shall (...) Bole-armoniack, Vinegar,
vvhites of Eggs, and Beane-flower, and mix them (...) together till it come to
be a good thick salve, then spread it upon a cloth, and lay (...) exceeding
hot to the strain, renewing it once in five and twenty hours, and it (...)
cure it.

If your horse be troubled with spauens, Spauen.
you shall take a good quantity of Linseed, and bruise it well in a Mortar,
then mix it very well with Cow dung, and put in into a Drying Pan, and
boil it well therein upon a quick fire, then (...) hot apply it to the
Spauen, not forgetting to renew it once every day till it (...) brought the
Spauen to a head, and break it like an ordinary impostumation; (...) having
run two or three days, you shall lay a plaster of Pitch upon it, and so heal
up the sore as in case of other ulcers.

Now for as much as to know medicines for diseases is to little or no purpose,
To know diseases by their signs.
except a man know the disease, I will here in a brief manner show you the
signs of all the most general and hidden infirmities that are in horses,
therefore first to begin with the outward parts: that you may know where the
grief is when at any time a horse halteth, you shall note these few
observations following, first if he (...) before, and (...) but his Toe to the
ground, it is most certain that the greiefe is in his hoof; but if when he
halteth, he bend not his pasterne, then be you well assured the grief lies
in the joint: If he halt more when you turn him than when he goes right
forward, or forbeareth his foot more in the turning than in going, then the
grief questionless is in the shoulder or the thigh; or if when he stands
still he sets one foot a good deal more forward than the other, the grief
is then in the shoulder or upper parts also, as, in the Knee or Knuckle of the
Elbow: If he go bowing to the ground, and tread his steps very thick, the
grief is in the breast: (...) he halt behind and in his gate set but his Toe to
the ground, the grief is in the foot, or in the sti^le; but if he refuse of
touch the ground at all, then the grief is in the Buttocke. Now to know
whereof these griefs do proceed, you shall understand that if the grief
proceed of a hot cause, then he most halteth when he trauelleth, or is chafed,
and the further he goes, the worse and worse he goes: but if it proceed of a
cold cause, then he halteth most when he rests or stands still, and at his
first going out out of a journey, but after a little chafing he goes upright
again. Now if the horses halt be secret, and as it were half vnperce^^able,
insomuch that you are incertaine whether he halteth yea or no, you shall
suffer him to run at the uttermost length of his halter, without any stay or
ease of your hand, and then without doubt if he have any hidden malady or
grief whatsoever, he will easily discover it: and thus much for the signs of
griefs in the outward parts. Signs of inward griefs.
Now for the signs of griefs in the inward parts, you shall observe, that if
your horse be slower in labor, or duller of the spur, or shorter breathed,
or if his ears hang down more than they were wont, of his hair stare, if his
flank be more hollow, if he burn or glow betwixt the ears, if he refuse his
meat, or if his mouth be dry and clammie in his travel, all these are
general signs of inward sickness: If a horse hold his head down in the
Manger, be heavy and dim sighted, it is a sign of a Fever, headache,
hear^ach, foundring in the body, or the Staggers.

If a Horse turn his head back, and look to his body as to the place
grieved, it is sign of obstructions in the Liver, especially when he looks
to the right side, but if he look further, as to his belly, then it is a
sign of Worms or Colicke; when thin water runs from his mouth, it is a
sign of Staggers, or a wet Cough* ^ ^tinking breath, and foul mattar at his
nose, is a sign of an Ulcer in the nose: but ^he mattar be white, then the
Glaunders; if black, then the mourning of the ^yne; if yellow, then the
consumption of the Liver: but if he cast little lumpes (...) of his mouth, then
it shows rotten Lungs. If the Horses body and breath be (...), and withal
he loath his meat, it is a sign of a Fever, surfeit in the Stomach, or (...)
dry or moist Yellowes. A palpable swelling on both sides the forehead, shew^^
the Staggers; between the ears, the Poll-euill; under the ears, the V^^es;
in (...) mouth, the Flapps, or Lampas; under the throat, the Glaunders; in the
tongue, (...) Strangles; on the left side, the Spleen; in the belly and
legs, the Dropsy; (...) in the flank, the Collicke. To cough, or to offer
to cough, shows a Cold, or (...) feather or such like thing in his wezand. To
stagger, or go reeling, shows (...) Staggers: yet if such staggering be
behind only, then it shows Foundring in (...) body, or pain in the
Kidneyes: Trembling or shaking shows a Fever, or the ^^undring in the body:
Hollownesse of the back, shows the dry Malady, or the ^ropsie: staling with
pain, shows the Stone: leanenesse and gauntnesse shows ^ide-bound, Worms,
or a Consumption: looseness of body shows an unflamed ^^uer; and
costiuenesse, the Yellowes and sickness of the Spleen: A Horses dung ^uch
stinking, shows a hot Liver; not smelling, a cold Liver; hardly disg^sted,
then Consumption, or the dry Malady: A desire to lie down on the right side,
shows ^at in the Liver; on the left, disease in the Spleen: to be often up and
down, Bots, or ^ormes: If he spread himself when he lies down, shows the
Dropsy if he groan ^hen he is down, shows a sick Spleen: and not able to
rise when he is down, ^ewes Feebleness, Foundring in the body or legs, or
else Death: To be troubled ^ith Wind, shows the Collicke; desire to eat, and
not to be thirsty, shows a cold ^iuer; desire to drink, and not to ^at, a
Fever, or ouer-trauelling; and greedy eating and drinking, The Horse-leacherie
of P. Vegetius translated by the Author.
shows rotten Lungs. A further Discourse and more ample Treatise of ^he
diseases and curing of Horses, is to be looked for in the Works of P.
Vegetius, ^oncerning the curing of the diseases of Horses; and which I have
translated, or rather paraphrastically runned over in French out of Latin.
Look also into the Chapter of the Oxe-keeper above handled.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of the Ass.
NOtwithstanding that the Ass is but a base and contemptible thing, yet he is
very necessary in every Country House, because he trauelleth and does his
necessary work better than if he were greater and more corpulent: as to turn
the Mill, to grind the Corn, to bear the Corn to the Mill, and diverse other
implements and commodities, as Butter, Cheese, and Cream, to be sold at the
Market, and to bring the same or any other thing back ^gaine home upon his
back: to toil the earth that is light, and not strong and stiff: ^o draw
Carts that are not too heavy laden: The milk of an Ass good for them in
consumptions: and for to make fair the countenances of women.
besides the commodity of the milk of ^he she Ass, which is a sovereign
remedy as well for them that be in a consumption, that be weak, impoisoned,
rheumatike, and such other like diseases; as also for to make nea^, to white*
make tender and smooth the faces of women: as we read that Poppea the wife of
Nero did, using bathes to keep her hew and color most fair, and her flesh
most smooth and white. To let pas^e and to say nothing of the flesh of the
Ass, which whiles it is young is very delicate, and full of pleasant ta^t and
savor (...) eating, and for that cause has sometimes been of great request
in Rome, as also ^n our time in great estimation by a great noble and worthy
man in France, who caused a flock of Asses to be kept and most carefully
looked unto: and in like manner to say nothing of the Hide, whereof there are
made very good sieues to riddle the corn, as also tabers to dance by, and
drums for the wars. Wherefore the good householder must appoint him also one
to order and govern him, who notwithstanding shall not be much busied in
taking charge of an^ looking to him, seeing he (...) very easy and light to
keep: he is contented with a little meat, and that of any sort even such as
one will give him: for some feed him only with leaves, thorns, and thistles:
some do fat him with chafe and straw, which are commonly found almost in all
countries: it is true that he must not be let feed upon or have given to eat
any Hemlocke; for it casts him into such a sound sleep, as that he seems
to be not so much like a block, but rather stark dead. If you give him now
and then some (...) bread, or millet, it pleases him as well as a great
banquet: he looks not worse, when he is ill handled and curried of him, who
has the charge of him: he does easily endure strokes and hunger, and is not
easily tainted of any disease: notwithstanding the Asse-keeper shall have care
that the She-asse may be covered in (...) time, that is to say, from mid March
until June, to the end that foaling about the end of the year, it may happen
to be in the spring of new Grass, and the age of the Ass to be covered must
be from three years to ten: at which time you must give leave to the She-asse
to run, in regard of the good store of fruit she has brought forth: Rest
makes an Ass always after unfit for labor.
but on the contrary, not to suffer the male to continue out of labor, see^ng
that much respeit will bring him to an habit of slothfulness. He shall
suffer the young Ass to suck it damme until it be two years old: or else
you shall let it such^ a Mare, because it is somewhat better: he shall not set
the young Ass to labor before it be three years old, which is the time
wherein you must accustom it to bear burdens, The mark^s of a good Ass.
to draw in the plough, and to serve to ride upon. The Ass that is not above
ten years old, nor younger than three, which is great, well squared in his
parts, having sufficient gross eyes, vvide nosthrills, long neck, broad
breast, high shoulders, great back, a large chyne or crest, great cods, a flat
crupper, a short tail, hi^ hair drawing toward the color of black, sleeke,
and listed, having a black mark in the forehead, or all along the body,
shall be well accounted of. But on the contrary, there is no account to be
made of such as have an ashie colored hair, or somewhat gray, as the most in
this country are, and least of all of such as are of a small ^^ature, The
diseases of the Ass.
To be short, he shall be careful to heal them when they be sick (although
as has been said, this beast is not very subject to diseases) and that by
using such remedies as he does unto horses.

The householder being a good husband, The Asses-hide.
shall keep the hide of his Ass, to ^an and dress to make shoes as well
for himself as for his family, for as much as shoo^^ made of an Asses skin,
and upon the back part, whereon the Ass does carry (...) buthens, are so
durable, as that one shall scarce see any end of them, though you wear them
amongst stones, gravel, thorns, or other such like places, notwithstanding
with their lasting they grow so hard as that they cannot be worn any more.

The hoof of an Ass burnt and made in powder does heal the
Falling Sickness* and that of the vvild Ass hanged about the neck, The
Asses-^oo^e
or set in a ring, in such sort as th^^ it may touch the flesh, is singular
good against the said disease, as also against the swimming of the head, which
comes through a weakness of the brain. Some think that the vvild Ass is
that which is called Ellend, and much seen in Polonia, Litu^n^a, and Su^cia,
and that because that the Ellend has ^ares like unto an Asses: the French men
which have traveled into Polonia, say, that the Ellend does resemble the Ass
i^ nothing but in her ears, as otherwise in all points almost being like (...)
the Heart: having a cloven foot, but that he is a great deal bigger, and in
ho^^es like unto a Fallow-Deere.

Although the Ass be mocked of the most because of his long ears, The A^^e
does (...).
yet notwithstanding those ears how great soever they be, do serve him to
show his virtue, and to make to appear his understanding and certain
knowledge which he has of the change of the weather, seeing that if it will
turn to rain, he then lays them so (...) upon his neck, that one would say
they were glued to it.

CHAP. XXX.
Of the Mule-keeper.
A Good House-holder must not be unfurnished of things necessary for his
House, whether they serve for food and sustenance, or for ease. Wherefore
although in respect of some manner of work he may be content to want Mules,
having the benefit of Horse to carry him to the Market and other ^laces
whither his business shall call him: yet notwithstanding the Mule is
necessa^ie for his ^asement, whether it be that he would rather ride upon Mules
than upon Horses, because of their easier pacing; or that, by reason of age, or
want of health of ^odie, he cannot endure the travel of a Horse, but is
constrained to provide a Horse-litter to carry him in. The Mules of Auernia.
I will further say, that in some places, as in Auernia, that for the scarcity
and small number of Horse and Oxen, the Mules are esteemed of great value, and
are used to toil the earth, to travail, and do other necessary things
tending to the commodity and maintenance of the House; to say nothing that
Mules are proper Beasts, strong and able to carry great and heavy burdens,
as Trunkes, sackes of Corn and Meal, and such other burdens which Horses
could ^ot bear.

The ordering and charge of Mules is like unto that of Horses, as well in
respect of their meat, pasture, feeding, and furniture, as in the curing of
their diseases, whereunto they are subject: and therefore we will knit up in
^ewer words what may be said of them, both for the causes rehearsed, as also
for that I willingly leave the whole knowledge of their feeding and handling to
those of Auernia, amongst whom they are in such high request. Notwithstanding,
to speak summarily, the Mule-keeper must not only be careful of the
well-feeding of his Mules, but also of making of the most profit of them. The
profit that may be raised of them, consists in the very same commodities
that may be raised of the Ass, and that is principally of goodly Herds and
Flocks. Hence he shall choose a good and goodly beautiful male Mule, Ass, or
Horse, and likewise a female, Mare, or she Ass, for the saddle: for if both of
them happen not to fit the turn, and be well conditioned, yet that which does,
cannot be but valiant and courageous: The diverse manners of the engendring of
male and female Mules.
And although that male and female Mules be engendered either of the male Ass
and the Mare, or of the Horse and female Ass, yet those are the best which
come of the Ass and the Mare: for those which come of the Horse and the Ass,
though their name be according to their fire, yet they resemble in conditions
their dammes altogether. Wherefore it is best, to the end you may have goodly
and beautiful she Mules, The marks of a good Ass to c^uer she Mules.
to make a Stalion of an Ass, which is fair and beautiful, of a good race,
and that has been well tried. You must choose one that is three years old and
upward, great and corpulent, of a strong neck, strong and large ribs, of an
open and musculous or fleshie breast, fleshie thighs, well-trus^ed legs, of
a black color, or ^lea-bitten with red, tending to a bright, or of a gray
silver color, or of a dark murrey color, for commonly Asses are of a Mouse
color: but they which are of this hair, are not so lively and stirring as the
other: and if there come forth either male or female Mule wearing this liuerie,
they are not so good and suitable. The Mare must be less than ten years old,
great and fair, and of good limbs, to the end she may take and keep the
nature of the Ass, disagreeing with her body, and being of another kind than
she her self; and that she bestow upon her fruit not only the gifts of the
body, but also of spirit and liveliness* The young stays in the dammes
body twelve months: wherefore the Mare would be covered from mid March unto
mid June, to the end she may foale when grass is in full force, thereby to be
sure to get good store of Milk. She having brought forth her young one, it
must be used after the manner of young Colts, excepted only, that after it
has sucked six months, the damme can give it suck no longer, by reason of
the ach of her teats: but it must be made to suck some Mare, that so it may
grow more lus^ie: or you must let it go with the damme, that it may learn to
eat, so that still it be provided of milk to suck.

The Horse-mule well chosen, Signs of a good Horse-Mule.
must be of a gross and round body, having small feet, and thin legs and
dry, a full and large crupper, a broad and soft breast, a long and compas^ed
neck, a dry and small head. On the contrary, the Mare-Mule must have her
legs somewhat gross and round, Of a good Mare-Mule.
a straight and solid body, and a crupper hanging toward the tail. The
Mare-Mules are stronger, mightier, nimbler, and longer livers than the
Horse-Mules: but the Horse-Mules are more tractable and more easy to guide and
learn than the Mare-Mules be. Both of them are subject to lunacie: but to take
this fault away, you must make them drink some wine oftentimes. If they be
froward, and unwilling to be sadled, you may tie up one of their fore-legges
even unto their thighs, to the end that in the mean time they may not fall
backward. If they be hard to shoe on the right foot behind, you must (...) up
the left before.

The Mare-Mule is subject to the same diseases that the Horse, The diseases of
the Horse and Mare-Mule.
as has been said; notwithstanding there is something peculiar in them, for
which the remedies do follow: When she has an Ague, Ague.
you must give her raw Coleworts: when she blows and sigheth much, and has a
short wind, you must let her blood, and afterward give her to drink three
quarters of a pint of Wine, Difficulty of breath.
with half an ounce of Oil, and as much Frankincense, and two pints of the
juice of Horehound. If she have the moules and scabs about her pasternes,
Scabs in the pasternes.
called the Grapes, you must put upon them Barley meal, Leanenes.
and open the impostume, if any thing be in it. Their leanenesse and
languishing is taken away, by giving them oftentimes drinks made with half an
ounce of Brimstone beaten, a raw egg, and a dram of Myrr^e with Wine. The
same remedy is good for the pain of the Belly, and the Cough. Cough.
Collicke.
If he be weary and ouer-heated, Weariness and ^uer-heating.
you must cast Grease and Wine into his throat.

Let all women that desire to have children, beware that they never take the
sent of the urine of a Horse or Mare-Mule: for the smell of their urine does
make women barren, because that they themselves are naturally barren.

The fume of the hoof of a Mare-Mule put upon hot coals, and set on fire, The
smo^ke of the hoof of a Mare-Mu^e.
is so odious unto Rats and Mice that are in the house, that they by and by
foeling the smell, run away with great swiftness: of which you may make
trial.

The end of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK OF THE COVNTRIE HOUSE.
OF GARDENS.
CHAP. I.
Of the Situation, Enclosure, Ground, and fashions of Hedges requisite for
Gardens, whether they be for profit or for pleasure.
IT is requisite that we should now occupy our selves in describing the manner
of husbanding and tilling of the Earth, having run through all that belongs
to the building and enclosing of a Farm, the office of the chief Lord, and of
the Farmer and his people, and generally whatsoever concerns the raising of
profit by keeping of Cattle. We will begin therefore (following the order
before propounded) to describe Gardens: And first with the Kitchen Garden;
which ^ath been devised and appointed to join to the one side of the Garden
of pleasure, and yet separated from it by the intercourse of a great Alley of
the breadth of three ^athomes, having either a Well or Conduit from some
Fountain in the midst ^hereof (if you cannot conveniently have a particular
Well in the midst of every Garden) and besides, with an Hedge of Quickset
very thick, A Quick-set Hedge.
in which there may ^e made three doors, one to the House, another to the
place of the Well or Foun^aine, and the third opening upon the Orchards
enclosure. This Hedge shall be ^lanted likewise with Hasell trees, Goose-berrie
bushes white and red, Pepper trees, Curran trees, Eglantines, Brambles,
Wood-bind, the wild Vines, both the Hollies, ^lder trees, and Apples of
Paradise, Ceruise trees, Medlar trees, and Olive trees: (...) it must be more
thick, and a greater defense than any other, to prevent danger ^f Cattle
getting loose, which might a great deal more endammage the good and profit of
their Master, than they could any way pleasure him. Yet in the planting ^f
your Quick-sets, according to the opinion of Serres, you shall have great
confide^ation to the nature of the ground on which you plant them: as, which
are apt for Quick-sets, which not apt; and which Quick-set is apt for which
ground, as thus: ^our clayne and stiff clayes which are without any mixture
of sand, are slow in ^ringing forth Quick-set, yet having once taken root, they
preserve and maintain ^^eir Quick-sets longest, and therefore the black and
white Thorn, mingled with ^ild Apple trees. Ceruise trees, Medlar trees, Olive
trees, or any other which carri^^h body and substance. Your mixed Hasell
soyles, which are Clay and Sand of an equal temper, or your fast and close
Sands, which do not divide or run to a general dust, are the kindl^est of
all other to bring forth Quick-sets, and do preserve and maintain them for a
convenient time (though not so long as the Clayes) and are very speedy in
bringing forth, therefore any Quick-set is meet to be planted on such Soyles,
whether they be Tr^es, Shrubs, or Bushes, as those before spoken of, together
with any thing else that will take root: But your grauellie, flintie, or loose
Sands, which fall away, and never fasten unto the root, are the most barren of
all other, and seldom, or with great difficulty, bring forth any good
Quick-set at all: yet Industry (which is the Mother of all profits) has found
out by experience, that the best Quick-set which can grow upon these Soyles, is
the common Bramble or wild Bri^r, out to the length of two foot, or
thereabouts, and so planted in the earth, and amongst them mingled, three or
four foot asunder, here and there diverse black thorns: then when the
Brambles begin to shoot forth, to interlace them and twynd th^^ bought-wise
about the black Thorns, making one bought run into another, and plashing
them both upward and downe-ward so close one within another, that they may
seem like a Lattice-window; and ever and anon to uphold and maintain the
earth to their roots, till they be well fastened within the ground, and then
they will hold up the earth afterward themselves. By this experiment only
has been se^^e, in di^ers of these most barren Soyles, as strong, as thick,
and as defensible Quick-sets, as in any other Soil whatsoever: as is daily
apparent to men's eyes both (...) France, England, and the Low Countries.

The situation of the said Gardens must be (as we have said before) near unto
the House, The Garden door.
placed upon the North rather than upon the South quarter, to the end tha^ the
chief Lord and owner of the Farm may out of the windows of his lodging enjoy
the pleasure and beauty of his Gardens: in some plain plot of ground, which
is as it were a little hanging, and thereby at the foot thereof receiving the
stream (...) some pleasant running water, either from some Spring, and
Fountain, or from some Well, or else from the falling of the Rain: but far
removed from the Threshing^floore and Barn, to the end that the herbs may
not be hurt by the dust, dyrt, sma^^straw, or chafe, which might be conveyed
along from the Threshing-floore unto the Garden by the wind when the Corn is
in threshing: for such chafe having taken hold upon the leaves, does pierce
them and fret them through, and being thus pie^ced, they burn and parch away
presently. The paths in the Garden.
Likewise, for the benefit of their (...), it must be justly lived out and cast
into a Square very equally and uniformly, (...) yet somewhat sloping, for
the conueyance of the fall of Rain water, and of the (...) of the dunghill,
which continually will be thereby running downward (...) the allies by means
of the Rain, and so will mend the idle and vntoiled (...) And by the side of
either of those two Gardens, within the wall and enclosure of the House, there
shall be kept two other Gardens (if possibly it may be) severed and s^parated
by other Hedges, and a great path betwixt them, containing in breadth (...)
less than three fathomes or eighteen foot, every one finely paued with good
^^^^stones, or burned Tyles, or made with Steeres, or filled with Sand; that is
to say, by (...) side of the Kitchen Garden a particular Garden for Hemp,
Line, Saffron, (...) and other things of profit and good Husbandry; and this
requires a proper and (...) kind of ordering: and by the side of the Garden of
pleasure, another Gard^^ with Pulse, as Peason, Beans* Fetches, Rice, Panicke,
Millet, and such other things for they serve greatly for the keeping of your
family. Yet you shall understand, (...) albeit I thus particularly appoint you
these two several Gardens, the one for (...) and Flax, the other for hast^e
Pease, Beans; and such like, being right necessary (...) your household use;
yet notwithstanding you may sow any of those seeds abroad, (...) your Fields,
or many other remote Croft or Close well tilled for the purpose, (...) fully
as much profit and conueniencie, especially your Hemp and Flax: for you (...)
understand, that there be some Soyles so rich and fat, that after you have
(...) Wheat, Barley, and Pease, successively year after year, that then in
stead of fallowing and giving your land rest, you may that year sow a full
crop of Hemp, which ^estroying the weeds and superfluous growths which spring
from the fertilenesse of ^^e Soyles, makes your land apt and ready to receive
either Wheat or Barley again; and so you never loose any Crop at all, bue have
every year something to reap ^^om your ground: whereas, should you let it
rest, and bestow mea^ure upon it as (...) case of more barren earth, you would
so much ouer-rich it, that it would either ^^ildewe and spoil your Grain, or
else choke and slay it with the abundance of Weeds which the earth would
utter forth of it own accord. Again, if your land ^e with your neighbors in
common amongst the general Fields* here a land, and ^ere a land, or here two
and three, and there two and three, as it is a general custom (...) diverse
places, and that such lands do butt upon green Swarthe, or Grasse-^rounds,
which are likewise common, and on which both your self and your neigh^ours
must necessarily teather your Cattle; which Cattle if at any time they
break ^ose, or by the negligence of their Keepers be stalld too near the
Corn, may do ^ou much hurt on your Grain: in this case, and to pre^ient this
evil, you shall sow ^^e ends of all such lands as butt on the grass, ten or
twelve foot in length, as your and may conveniently spare, with Hemp, for upon
it no Cattle will bite: so that ^n either of these cases aforesaid you shall
not need much to respect the preservation ^f your Hemp or Flax Garden.

The Enclosures The Enclosure.
of the Gardens must be such as the commodity and necessity of the place does
require, that is to say, of Walls, if the revenues of the House will bear it,
or of a strong and thick Quick-set Hedge, if there want either Pit-^tone or
revenues to build the wall withal. Notwithstanding, it is least cost (to
speak the truth) and more profit to enclose and compass them in with a
Quick-set Hedge than with a Wall: for the Quick-set Hedge does endure a longer
time, and asks not so great charges neither to trim it, nor to repair it,
as the Wall does. Such a one is that which is made of Brambles and Thorns, as
white Thorn, or with the plants of Elder tree, or other plants, with tufted
flowers mingled and set amongst the Brambles, the same being cut by the tail
and made plain and even when the time of the year serves, as we see here in
many places of France. Some there be that compass and enclose their Gardens
with Ditches and Banks, but small to their profit, seeing the moisture of their
Gardens, which should serve them, is thereby conveyed away and taken from them:
and this holds in all other cases, but where the ground is of the nature of
Marshes. The common enclosing used by Country men, is of Thorns, Osiers, and
Reeds: but such Hedges do require almost every year new repair, relief,
and making, in putting new stakes therein; whereas if it had an abiding and
living root, it would free the Gardeners of a great deal of trouble, cost, and
travel.

The ground Grounds.
of the Gardens must be good, of his own nature free from Stones, Dirt, and
hurtful Herbs, well broken and dunged a year before it be dug to be
sown: and after it has been dug and dunged again, or mar^ed, you must
let it rest, and drink in his dung and marle. And as concerning the nature and
goodness of it, the Clayie, Stiff, or Sandy ground is nothing worth, but it
must be fat in handling, black in color, and which crumbleth easily in the
breaking, or stirring of it with your fingers, or which has his green Turfes
or Clods breaking easily under the Pick-axe, and becomes small with
laboring, as the small Sand; and generally, all grounds that are good for
Wheat, are good for Gardens. It is requisite also, to the end it may bring
forth green Herbs in abundance, that it be a reasonable moist ground: for
neither the ground that is much dry, nor that which is much subject to water,
is good for Gardens. Notwithstanding, if the Grounds belonging unto the Farm
happen not to have this commodity of idle and vnimployed ground to make
Gardens, you must remedy that soar as well as possibly you may. The Clayie,
Stiff, and Sandy places must be amended by Dung and Marle, and would be
cast three foot deep. The Watrie place shall be made better, if there be mixed
with it some Sandy or Grauellie Ground, and therewith cast it round about with
ditches, thereby to draine and draw out the water annoying the Gard^^*. And
thus the good Husband shall do his endeavor to amend and make in so^^ sort his
ground more fruitful. Lee the dung which he lays upon it, be either (...)
Sheep, or of Swine, or of Horse, or Pigeons, or Asses, according as the nature
of (...) ground shall require; or of Ox or Cow: for albeit some Gardners
think it of (...) cool a nature, and not so nourishing unto tender herbs as
the other which are (...) hot, yet they are greatly mistaken therein: for it
melloweth the earth, and enriche^^ it more than any of the other, and makes
it more apt to sprout and put forth (...) increase: besides, it does naturally
affect no weeds, if it have better seed to work^ upon: Whence it comes, that
the Garden so manured keeps his herbs (...) the cleanest, fullest, and
largest. Also Ashes are a very good meanure for Garden^* especially if the
ground be apt to chap or break into great rifts, as diverse Cla^ grounds are:
neither, if the soil be answerable thereunto, shall you omit Mar^^, Sand,
Chalk, Lyme, or such like. And the elder it is, the better also, in as much
(...) in time it loses his filthy stink, and whatsoever other evil
quality, and gets (...) new kind of rottenness, which is more soft and
more easy to be converted into the substance of the earth, whereby good earth
is made better, and the naughty amended. This is the cause why such as have
written of Husbandry in Latin, have called dung L^tamen, and Frenchmen
Litiere, because it makes the ground me^^^e, supposed when it is once mingled
and incorporated with the same: For dung that (...) pure, and of it self, must
not be laid unto the roots of trees, but first (where there^^ need) of the
shortest earth, and afterward of dung.

The Hedge Hedges.
of Quick-set, parting the Kitchen Garden and that other for delight, would be
planted and furnished with the Plants before spoken of, in the month (...)
November, and in the beginning of October, planting there also, at the end of
every eight feet, some Elmes, wild Plumme trees, and Cherrie trees, by the
suppo^^ whereof, as of faithful props and stays, it will wind and bind it
self more firmly. This Hedge shall be very well dug and helped with dung
for a foot depth, (...) near unto the root some two years after, and pruned
every year, to keep it roun^ and even, as also to make it grow thick: and
you must suffer to grow in height and thickness such Trees as shall be planted
therein, to serve for Stakes and as Poles for your Arbors; and the more Elmes
you can put in this your Hedge, and the rest which shall part your Garden of
Huswiferie and Pulse, the better it will be, either for the making of Faggots
every year, and that so they may themselves spread more i^ thickness, as
also for Timber-wood for your Ploughes, and other Implements* (...) also that
they may ouer-grow such Arbors as you shall plant at their feet, and whe^^with
they do in that place mutually and naturally bear and suffer.

If furthermore you would know the ordering of such great and small Trees (...)
whereof the Hedge is to consist, you shall find it in the third and fixed Book.

CHAP. II.
Of the Arbors of the Kitchen Garden.
EVen as the Garden of Pleasure is to be set about with Arbors, (...) with
Iesamin, Mary's seal, Musk Roses, Myrtle trees, Bay trees, Wood^bind, Vines,
Gourds, Cucumbers, Musk Melons, Prympe, sweet ^rye^ and other rare things:
even so shall the Kitchen Garden be set with Turrets of Lattice fashion,
covered over with Bordeaux Vines, or with the best (...) of Vines that are to
be got in the Country, for to make Veriuice on, for (...) and commodity of
the Household.

The fashion of the Arbor The fashion of an Arbor.
shall be in manner of a shadowie place (for Arbors (...) costly to maintain)
to the end you may draw certain Beds underneath, or (...) ^oore of herbs,
which crave no great cherishing and refreshing, leaving notwith^^anding an
alley of three foot breadth both on the one side and on the other, for the
^spatching of such work as is to be bestowed upon the Arbor. And you must ^ant
the best and greatest sets of Vines upon the South side, not cutting them so
^^ng as the wood may grow thicker: for it is nothing but a good foot and a
thick ^at makes a fair and a beautiful fruit. The Lattice-worke may not be
too thick (...) or wrought: and it must rise and grow higher for the space of
five whole years, (...) be renewed and new tied every year about the end of
the month of January (...) the twigges of your Willowes and Osiers, or of the
Broom of your Warren: though if you make your poles of Juniper wood, you shall
not need to trouble ^ur hand with them for ten or twelve years, especially
if you strengthen your (...) with piles of Oak half burnt. Also if your poles
be of dead wood, and of (...) stocks growing or increasing, if then you bind
them with strong wyre, it shall be (...) of all, for that shall last the
longest; and keep your poles, by their fastness of ^^itting, The binding of
the Arbor.
longer found than any other binding whatsoever. Tie not the poles of your
^attic^-worke strait, nor the stocks against the trees of your hedge which
shall serve ^r stakes, for so in time the band would eat it self into the
rind as they should ^ow thicker, and do them great harm. And I would not
have you to forget to ^ung and uncover the roots of your stocks in Winter, and
to mark the young wood ^r to make sets to sell, or to store your self withal
every day more and more: Ga^^er not their Grapes very ripe, The work of the
Arbor and of the Vine is alike.
or very green, nor yet when it rameth. Finally, ^e ordering of the Arbor is
like the ordering of the Vine, and would be but a su^erfluous thing to stand
any longer upon in this place. Wherefore you must have ^ecourse to the place,
setting down the manner of the ordering of the Vine, as it shall be hereafter
declared.

CHAP. III.
Of the digging and casting of the Kitchen Garden.
AS concerning the dressing of the Kitchen or Household Garden, in as much as
there are two seasons in the year for to sow herbs, so there are two times
for to bring into order and dress Gardens, that is to say, Autumn, and the
Sp^ing: there must such consideration be had, as that ^he first workmanship and
tilth be bestowed about the beginning of November upon that ground which we
intend to sow in the Spring, and to dig in the month of May such other
grounds as we intend to sow in Autumn, to the intent that by the cold of
Winter, or by the heat of Summer, the clods may be apt to turn to dust,
becoming short and brittle, and all unprofitable weeds may be killed. But in
the mean time, before this first tilth and workmanship, it will be good that
the ground for one whole or half year be manured with old manure, All man^^r
of ground, by being long (...), does grow lea^t.
and made good and fat; for the best liking earth that is, in time becomes
lean and wasted by long and continual occupation. Wherefore it behooves, that
the vnimployed, or fallow ground, which you shall appoint for your Gardens, be
first well cleansed from stones, and afterward cast up and dug into new and
fresh earth, and the bad weeds rooted out, even by the end of the roots;
whereof the good huswife shall make good ashes: and afterward amended with some
small quantity of Cow^^ dung and Horse dung well mixed together, and well
rotted, and having laid a long time; or else of Asses dung, which is the best
of all for Gardens, because the Ass does chew his meat with leisure, and
breaks his meat thoroughly, and so by that means does make his dung better
digested, and better ground than other beasts do, and which also for that
cause does beget almost no weeds. In stead of dung, the chafe and trodden straw
of Corn, having rotted in the high ways for the space of a year, may serve,
which being by nature very hot, does so greatly fat the earth, as that (...)
Herbs, Trees, Citrons, Limons, Oranges, Cucumbers, Citruls, and all other
(...) planted in that ground, or sown, do come up very fair, and bear
fruit (...) quickly and in great abundance. For the second tilth, it shall be
wrought and labored as a man would work Morrar, from the one end to the
other: and in thus laboring it, you shall mix the dung or marle very well
with the earth. For the (...) tilth it shall be clotted, laid close, and raked
into a flat form, and with the (...) of the Rake, in going over it, you shall
mark out your Beds and Floores, and the Paths running along betwixt them, and
those so long and so broad as you can (...) them, according to the contents and
largeness of the place. And you must (...), that you make your Floores of such
wideness, as that you may stride and (...) your arms from one side to
another, according to that their said breadth, to the end, that such as are to
weed them, or to rake them, may from out of the said (...) Paths be able to
reach into the midst of the Bed, and not to tread with their (...) upon that
which is or shall be sown. Wherefore, if your said little Paths (...) two
foot wide, it will be enough: for to make them any broader, is but (...)* and
loss of ground.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the disposing or appointing of the Floores of the Kitchen Garden.
YOu shall dispose of your Beds in such sort, as that they may be in the
midst of your Garden, giving and allowing unto your Turnips the largest
room, Little Turnips or Nauest.
and next to them the Coleworts: Coleworts.
and unto them you^ shall join the space for great Turnips of both sorts,
Great Turnips of both sorts.
and that of (...) much ground as would make two of the former: After these
floore^, you shall make a path of three foot breadth, after which, you shall
prepare other floores by themselves, for Spinach, Spinach.
Beeres, Arrach, Rocket, Parsley, and (...) Again, you shall make another path
of other three feet: and on the further side you shall quarter out a Bed for
Leekes and Cyues, Leekes and Cyues.
and join thereunto two other for Onions Onions.
and Chiboles, Chiboles.
and for Garlic, Scallions, and Carrets. Carrets.
By the side of (...) floores you shall make out a path of three feet and a
half, and after it, you shall mak^ many floores for slips to be let upon, as
well for the maintaining of a Plat for (...) flowers, as also for your Borders:
and yet further, for your Winter pot-hearbs. And it will be good to this end to
prepare a Bed for Sage, and another for Hysope; and for Thyme, Sage and Hysope.
(...) another for Mari^rome, and another for Lauander, and another for
Rosemarie, and another for Sothernwood, and another for small Cypress: again,
one for Sauorie, for Hysope, Costmarie, Basil, Spike, Balm, Pennyryall, and
one of Camomill, for to make Seats and a Labyrinth. A Labyrinth.


It shall be good also for necessity sake (for it concerns the good Huswife
(...) know many remedies for diseases, and you must not doubt but that I my
self (...) learned many remedies from the experiments and observation of
those sorts of women) to shape out below, or in the further end of the Kitchen
Garden, near to the enclosed ground for Fruits, certain B^ds for Physic
herbs, as for Valerian, (...), Asparagus, Mugwort, Asarum Bacchar,
Housel^^ke, Patience, Mercury, P^^litorie, Nico^ana, and other such like,
whereof we will make some short (...) hereafter.

CHAP. V.
Of the situation of the Beds of the Kitchen Garden.
IN such place as the Sun shines upon at noone, you shall provide your Beds
somewhat raised, and well mingled with Earth and Horse dung, and you shall let
them rest sometime before they be sown. In one of which floores you shall sow,
in the increase of the Moon of March, (...) seed of Lettuce Lettuce seed.
and Purcelane (for they will be grown as soon being sowed (...) March as in
April) for to set them again in their floores, when they be sprung (...)
half a finger. In this same Bed you may put the seed of Pimpernell, Hearts
horn, ^rick-madame, and Sorrel of England, and other sorts for Salades, all
thick, and and over head, one among another, to separate and set at large by
themselves when ^^ey be grown. To choose seeds*
Look very well to your seeds, that they be not too old, that they (...)
winnowed and clean, that they be moist and oily, but not mouldie; and by the
(...) of this Bed, Fine herbs.
the breadth of two hands, you shall sow Artichokes. You shall so make a Bed
for fine herbs, which in Winter serve for the Pot, being kept dry, and for
slips for the Garden of flowers, as are Garden Balm, Basil, Costmarie, ^hyme,
Seeds that will hardly grow.
Hyssope, Sauorie, Mariero^^e, and Sage. Again it will be good to make (...)
to sow the seeds and kernels of Citrons, Oranges, Limons, Pomegranats, (...)
trees, Bay trees, and Date trees in: and seeing they are hard to grow in this
Coun^rey, because it yields no air either from the Sea, or fit for them, it
must be well and ^duisedly considered, that in planting or sowing of them you
set the smaller end vp^ard, and that they be not tumbled on the side: and when
the Citrons and such like ^eeds shall be grown up and sprung, you must
transplant and remove them into ^ome Caske, or such like thing, that may be
removed hither and thither, to the end to ^^eepe them from very much heat and
excessive cold, and to cover and use them dain^ly according to the times, and
as shall be said hereafter. In another Bed, which shall (...) a very long one,
Cucumbers and Citruls.
and toward the Quick-set Hedge and the Arbors, you shall sow Cucumbers,
Citruls, long and round Gourds. In a plot long and narrow like the for^^er
(because they must be often watered, and water powered at their roots) you may sow
Melons of diverse sorts.

And for fear of flying Foul and Birds, cast Thorns very thick upon your
^eds; and, if they be sown in the increase of the Moon in February, for to
have them the sooner to grow, yea though it be in March, yet spread upon the
Thorns ^traw, and that such as is bright, and let it be thick, that so it may
the better defend them from the danger of the Frosts: which if you perceive to
be great, as it falls ^ut some years, spread over them, in stead of straw,
old or whole Ma^s, and yet in ^uch manner, as that they may not lie pressing of
the earth, thereby to oppress and ^eepe down that which would spring and grow
up. Or for a more perfect surety, ^oth to preserve your seeds in growing, and
to maintain such as are grown, how ^ender soever their natures be, from all
manner of Frosts, Storms, or Colds, which ^ither the Winter of Spring can any
way produce, you shall take halfe-rotten Horse^^tter, and with it lightly cover
all your Herbs, Seeds, or whatsoever else you fear ^he sharpness of the
Winter may annoy: for besides that it is a defense and coue^ing against the
bitterness of all weathers, it has also in it a certain warm quali^ie,
which nourishes and strengthens the Plants, and makes them more forward ^han
otherwise they would be by diverse weeks: besides, it keeps your herbs from
running into the ground, and hiding their heads in the Winter season, and ^s if
they were comforted with a continual spring, keeps them fresh and green, and
fit for your use at all times. And what you would have to continue still upon
their first Beds, as the Cucumber, Melon, and other Fruits, make some small
separation betwixt them and the other, and water them often with water warmed in
the Sun, and drawn a long time before, having stood in the (...) or Caske
placed near unto the Well. Notwithstanding, all herbs and fruits (...) from
out of this Garden are much better by removing: in doing whereof, they are also
not only more freely bestowed, but become of a better taste and verdure.

CHAP. VI.
Of the time of sowing the Kitchen Garden.
ALl seed which are for the store of the Kitchen Garden, must be Sown (...)
removed in the increase of the Moon, The power of the increase of the Moon.
as namely, from the first day (...) the sixth: for those that are sown in the
decrease, they either come (...) slowly, or else they be nothing worth. Besides
that, although you sow (...) the increase of the Moon, it sometime falls
out, that notwithstanding your (...) be fat, full, make a white flower, and be
nothing corrupted or hurt, yet some (...) constellation (which the Gardiners
do call the course of the Heavens) do (...) them that they profit not, nor
yet thrive any thing at all. Although that (...) the Husbandman say, That the
Earth, which has the favor and benefit of a (...) and mild air, and is
watered with some running stream, is in all points and r^spects free, and not
tied or bound to any laws of sowing: but he cannot (...), that whatsoever
grows, whether it be Plant or Seed, has two ends, that is to (...), the
Root, which has altogether to do with the Earth, and the Branches, or
uppermost part thereof, which has altogether to do with the Air and the
Heauen^ and that the observations drawn from superior bodies, as from the
proceeding and disposition of the Moon, do show and prove the ouerthwarts and
(...) encumbrances wrought against the creatures of the earth, both in their
(...) forth of the earth, and drawing to stalk, as also in the government of
them a^terward.

In moist places, To ^^w seeds in the Spring.
and such as are served with some small current of water, it is (...) to sow in
the Spring: for then the mildness and gentleness of the year followin^ does
entertain in very good sort the growing seeds; and the dryness of the (...)
cannot hurt them, because of the water pressed and at hand. But when as the (...)
of the place has no natural supply of running water, or else such as is very
(...) come by in respect of the bringing thither, there is no other refuge but
the (...) of the Winter rain: wherefore in such places it is more sure to sow
in A^tumne; and yet one may well sow there in the Spring, so that you cast your
(...) three foot deep.

If a man be disposed to sow Seeds in Summer, To sow seeds in Summer.
it must be in the increase of the Moon of July and August; and in Autumn, in
the increase of the Moon of September and October; as also for the Spring, in
February and in March. In (...) naturally cold, At what time seed must be
sown is cold and hot places.
or which receive no great heat from the Sun beams, the sowing (...) the
Spring time must be toward the later end thereof; and that in Autumn, must
(...) hastened and early performed. On the contrary, the sowing of Seeds in
the Sprin^ time in a hot place must be early performed: and the Sowing or
Seed-time of A^tumne must be somewhat deferred. Seeds do grow the better when
they be (...) upon warm days, or days that are neither hot nor cold, than
and if they be (...) upon hot, cold, or dry days. The Seed that is to be
sown, must not be above (...) year old: The age of seeds.
otherwise, if they be very old, dry, wrinkled, lean, soft, false or (...)
gathered, they will never grow nor thrive. Wherefore, by how much the (...) the
seeds of Cucumers, Melons, Leekes, and Gourds be, so much the sooner they grow:
On the contrary, by how much the elder the seeds of Parsely, Beets, (...),
Cres^es, and Coriander be, so much the more hastily do they put out of the
earth* supposed always that age has not corrupted them. Coleworts and (...)
of all sorts, white Succorie, Garlic, Leekes, and Onions, are sown in
Autumn, and live all Winter. Coleworts, Rocket, Cresses, Coriander, Cheruill,
Nauets, Turnips, Radishes, Parsneps, Carrets, Parsely, Fennel, and other
herbs, whose roots are good in pottage, are sown in Autumn and in the
Spring, notwithstanding they grow better being sown in July in hot Countries,
and in August in Countries indifferent hot, and in September in cold Countries.
Lettuce, Sorrel, Purcelane* Cucumbers, Gourds, Sauorie, Harts-horne,
Trick-madame, Beets, and other tender herbs, as also Artichokes, are sown in
the Spring: and for the most part also those of March and April grow more
early than those of February, according to the diversity of the time.

Above all, the Seeds which are to be sown must be well-conditioned, full,
heavy, corpulent, gross, having a good color, yielding a white flower when
they be broken, not dustie: for dust falling from them when they be broken,
shows, that they are corrupted and nothing worth.

CHAP. VII.
Within what space Seeds are w^nt to grow, after they be sown.
NOtwithstanding that the nature of the Ground, the mildness of the Air,
favorable furtherance of the Heavens, and the age of the Seed, do cause Seeds
to hasten the more, or to be the flower in springing out of the bosom of their
mother and nurse the earth, (for as much as that which is sown in fair
weather, and an open air, in a hot place, and open upon the Sun, and of new
Seed, does show it self sooner than that which is sown in a contrary time
and place) yet every Seed has a certain time to manifest in self in:
whereto we must have due regard, to the end that there may be prefixed times to
sow, and look for the growth of every Seed: Spinach, Basil, Nauets, and
Rocket, grow within three days after they be sown; Lettuce, the fourth day;
Cucumbers and Citruls, the fifth; Purcelane a little later; Annise, the fourth;
Cresses and Mustard Seed, the fifth; Beets in Summer, on the sixth; and in
Winter, on the tenth; Arach, the eight; Coleworts, the tenth; Leekes, the
nineteenth, or ofter the twentieth; Coriander about the five and twentieth, or
else more late, if the Seed be new; Organie and Sauorie, after the thirtieth;
Parsely in the fortieth, for the most part, and oftentimes in the fiftieth. It
is true, that in this place the age of the Seed, and state of the Air, when
the Gardener does sow them, is of great moment: for (as I have said) the Leeke,
Cucumber, and Citrull, grow sooner if the Seed be new: And on the contrary,
Parsely, Spinach, Organie, Sauorie, Coriander, and Cresses, when their Seed is
sold: likewise the Seed of Cucumbers, steept in milk, or in warm water,
puts the sooner out of the earth: after the same sort you may make reckoning
of Artichokes, and many other herbs, as you shall know hereafter in their
particular Treatises.

CHAP. VIII.
Of watering, weeding, sweeping, and cutting of Pothearbes.
SO soon as the ground is full of Seeds in all places, Watring.
you must be careful to water it, if by hap the place be dry of his own
nature, that so the Seed may not be hindered of his sprouting by the too much
dryness, or that the herb already sprung may not die. What water is good
for Seeds.
The best water to water the pot-hearbs withal, is rain water, if it fall in
the night, or in such a time as that it may not heat the herbs, for it
washes and cleanses them from the dust and (...) that eats them, especially
if the Rain come driving with a Northern wind: for want of this, the River or
Brook water is best next, being a little warm: in place of this, Well water
drawn in the morning, and put in a barrel, or in some other thing of receipt,
that so it may take the heat of the Sun beams, may serve: for cold and salt
water is enemy to all sorts of herbs, although that Theophrastus say, that
salt water is more convenient than any other to water certain plants.
Beside^, you shall understand, that for the speedy growing of herbs, or for
comforting them after they are once sprouted and risen above the earth, there
is nothing (...) the world better, or more comfortable, than Soap ^uds, after
they have been (...) in, and are very well cooled. The dregs of Ale, or
lees of Wine, are (...) good to water Rosemarie with, or any other tender
Herb, Flower, or Pla^^ whatsoever. What time is good to water.
The time to water them, is the evening and morning, not the midday for fear
that the water, heated by the heat of the Sun, might burn th^^ at the root.

After that the herbs have begun to put forth, Weeding and raking.
you must weed the bad from the good, whose nourishment they would consume and
ouer-shadow them withal: this must be done with a forked trowell whiles they
be very small, and with the hand (which Gardiners call by the name of making
clean) when the pot-hearbes are grown strong and great. Some do also weed
them thus, as well for the weight of the earth, and heavy falling of the water
upon them, as also because of the (...) of folks feet, whereby the earth
becomes hard: Wherefore if the (...) be soft, you need not to ^ake it but
very slightly. And you must know, that weeding is necessary for Gardens at
all times, except in the height of Winter, that is to say, from November till
March: in all which time it is not good to weed, because those weeds which do
then grow do not offend or choke the hearbe^, but rather keep them warm and
comfort them: whereas, should they be taken away, you would leave the stem
and roots of your herbs so naked to all the bitterness of Winter, that
every small Rind or Frost would endanger the utter killing and destroying of
them, as you may find by proof, if you please not to give credit to our
relation.

Cutting of herbs is also profitable for them at what time as they be
somewha^ grown, Clipping or cutting of herbs.
thereby to make them to keep their greenenesse the longer, and to (...) them
the more beautiful and tufted, to keep them from seeding, as also to (...)
them somewhat a more pleasant smell than they had in their first stalk. By
this means Lettuces and Coleworts are made better, and of a more pleasant
taste, (...) their first leaves be plucked from them. In like manner, Turnips
and (...) grow more beautiful, and tufted, if their leaves be cut. But all
herbs must not be cut at all times: for such as have a hollow stalk, as
Onions, and others, if they be cut when it rayneth, the blade or stalk of the
Onion is filled full of water, and rotteth. And this is the cause why herbs
of such nature are not (...) be cut but in a fair and dry time: Or if not cut
at all, it is better, except it be to keep them from seeding, or to make the
head a little the fairer; which, fresh moulding will better do, and with less
labor. As for your Scallions, Chyues, or Leekes, to cut them it is not amiss,
because they are herbs continually to be used for the Pot; and in that
respect, the oftener cut, so much the better.

CHAP. IX.
Of setting and removing of Pothearbes.
TO give the greater scope and liberty to herbs, and to make them greater,
men use to remove them: and this is done either by removing of them from one
bed to another, or from one floor to another, when they have four or five
leaves out of the ground: and this may be done at ^y time, but specially see
that the season be inclining to moistness and rain: and (...) must be set in
ground that is well furnished with fat, without any amending of with dung.
If the time fall not out rainie, you must water them after they be new (...)
in good and due time, not staying too long, and from some of them you must cut
(...) the ends of their roots, and set them thin, that so they may be wet,
and have (...) earth lightened when need requires, and that thereby they may
grow better (...) fairer. And of these herbs which are thus to be removed,
none is more neces^^rie than the Lettuce, because being very swift of growth,
and naturally apt to mount (...) it be not corrected and stayed by removing, it
will presently run to seed, and (...) that virtue for which it is principally
preserved: Therefore the sooner you re^oue your Lettuce (provided that you have
a shower to do it in) the better it is, and (...) sooner it will Cabbage and
gather in his leaves, growing hard, firm, and thick: Also, if after their
removing you lay some heavy Tyle or Slate stones upon them, which may a little
press down their leaves, it will be so much the better, and they will Cabbage
so much the sooner: Generally, what herbs soever you would keep from seed,
that you may thereby take the profit of the leaf, and keep the full strength
of the herb in the same, you shall, as soon as you perceive some leaves to
^e sprung above the ground, forthwith remove them into some other new-digged
Beds of good and perfect Mould well broken and manured for the purpose: and in
^his removing of your herbs, you shall observe to set them rather deeper than
^hallower than they were before, and to fix the earth close and fast about
them, and not to forget to water them, as aforesaid, till you see they have
taken fast root, and begin to shoot up.

Slips Slips.
for the Garden, of sweet and fragrant herbs, are gathered at all times, and
^hey would be of young sprigges of a year old, taking part of the old wood;
and ^vrything that, to put it into the earth: or else cleaving it below, and
putting in the ^left an Oat, and round about it some other grains of Oats
rather than dung; for ^earbes that are removed, do not require dung at their
roots, but rather they have ^eed that the lowest parts of their roots should be
a little steeped in water, as I will show herea^^er.

CHAP. X.
Of gathering and keeping the seeds, roots, and flowers of Pothearb^s.
Roots for the most part are gathered Gathering^
when the leaves are fallen off: and in like sort are the flowers gathered, as
Borage, Buglosse, All-good, and Marigolds, when they are thoroughly open:
notwithstanding, the flowers of Roses and Capers must be gathered, to be kept,
while they be (...): likewise the leaves and whole herbs are gathered when
they are grown to the full: fruits* as Melons, Cucumbers, Citruls, and Gourds,
when they turn yellow, and are grown to their perfection. If they be purposed
to be made serve for seed, then they must be let alone longer, and afterward
kept in convenient place (...) be time to sow them, and they must be gathered
in a bright weather, and in the ^^crease of the Moon. Seeds are gathered when
the herb is all laid and dry. (...) it must generally be observed in all
manner of gathering, The time to gather Seeds.
as well of herbs, (...) roots, as of fruits and seeds, that it be done in a
fair and clear weather, and in the ^^crase of the Moon.

Such herbs as are to be kept, The way to keep herbs.
must first be made very clean, and dried (...) shadow, which is the best
means to keep them the strongest in their virtues (...) qualities: or else in
the Sun, and after to put them up in bags of Leather, vvollen stuff, nor
in vvoodden boxes, that so they may not loose their (...) see it put in
practice by sine herbs which are kept to be used in Winter. (...) me thinks
that the Apothecaries fail much in their doings, which hang their ph^sicke
herbs in the roof of their house, for by this means they do not only
(...) their force, but become laden with dust, cobwebs, the dung of flies, and
a thousand ^^ther filthy things.

Flowers must not be dried in the Sun, The way to keep flowers.
not in the shadow that is made by (...) South-Sunne, nor yet in any high
room, because of their tenderness and (...), which would cause their force to
vanish away, either in the burning heat of (...) Sun, To keep Prouence Roses.
or in the more modern heat of the very air. If it be not the Prouen^e (...)
which (that it may be kept long) requires to be dried in an high place, open
to (...) South-Sunne, where the beams of the Sun do enter, but touch not
the (...) The best way to dry flowers will be in a temperate place, and to
turn them (...) the end that they may not corrupt, having also this continual
care, that they (...) neither loose their color nor their smell. And when they
are dried, they must (...) put into an earthen vessel.

Seeds must be kept in bags or vessels of earth which have narrow mouthe^ or
in boxes, To keep seeds.
or else in bottles of the rindes of gou^ds well stopped and set in (...) dry
places, and where there is no water shed; for seeds do mightily spoil (...)
moisture. The seeds of Chibols, Onions, and Leekes, as also of Poppie, are kept
(...) their rindes or heads.

For to keep Roots, To keep roots.
you must observe two ways: for either they are to be (...) new, and as they
are yet green, as Nauets, Turnips, Carets, and such like; or (...) they are to
be kept dry: For to keep them new, you must lay them upon sand (...) gravel
very thin, in some place under the earth, and a little covered, or else to
(...) them under the earth in the garden, as we see it done in Turnips and
Nauets, to (...) them the greatest part of Winter. To keep roots dry after
they be gathered, (...) must wash them diligently with clear water, and after
take from them all the (...) ^ibres or hairie threeds that hang about them, and
then to dry them either in (...) shadow of the Sunne-rising, if they be but
small and thin, as are the roots of (...) Succorie, Parsley, Sperage, and such
like: or in the South-Sunne, if they be (...) and thick, at those of
Daffodils, Gentian, Sowbread, Water-lilly, Brionie, and such like. After that
they are dried and thus prepared, you must hang them in some (...) and upper
room, open upon the Sun when it is in the South, or else upon the (...)
quarter; and in which notwithstanding neither the smoke, nor dust, nor (...)
beams may any thing hurt them, notwithstanding that the counsel of (...) the
prince of Physicians, is, that herbs, flowers, and roots, as well green as
(...), should not be put to keep in any place where the wind should come, but
rather (...) up in vessels or some other such like means of keeping of them,
to the end that they should not loose their force, which indeed they might most
easily loose, being (...) open and subject to the wind.

CHAP. XI.
P^t-hearbes, and particularly of Coleworts.
FIrst of all we are to speak of Coleworts, both because they are most common,
and also most abundant of all other sorts of herbs: all kinds of Coleworts
do love a clean ground, fat, and well tilled, not consisting of clay or sand.
And although they grow indifferently in any air, but ^pecially in a temperate,
yet they become greater and more massy, sound and safe (...) vermin in cold
places, as are those in Germany, than in hot places, and for (...) cause they
delight a great deal more in the tops of hills than in plain grounds; (...)
yet in those plain grounds more in the raised parts of borders than in the
flat (...) middle parts thereof, and they be more pleasant, more wholesome for
the (...), and better in Autumn, Springtime, and during great frosts, than
they be in ^ommer. They crave much dung, and that especially which is of Asses,
as being the (...) of all for other men: and to be raked in and covered over
with good earth: not to (...) watered in any case; notwithstanding that water
does make them look fair and ^^ourishing, but then not so sweet to the taste,
nor so wholesome for the stomach. When they have got six leaves upon their
stalks, you must remove them, but let it (...) in a mild and calm time
whether Winter or Summer. And to speak particu^arly the common Coleworts,
Common Coleworts.
called long or green Coleworts, must be sown in (...) August or September,
if you desire to have the leaves in Lent and in Winter. Some plant them in
October, and remove them in December, to have the leaves in Winter, and the
seed in June and Iulie, and that to make them the more tuffed, though there may
be as much accomplished that way at other times of the year; ^ut not so
commodiously.

And look well to it, The seed too old.
that your seed be not too old, for if it be three years old, it will bring
forth Radishes. And that is the cause why some say, Sow Coleworts, and ^here
will grow up Radishes or Nauets: Proverb.
notwithstanding it continues six years (...) his nature, if it be well kept.

Cabage-colewort, Cabage-cole.
which are called white or apple Coleworts, are sown upon (...), and removed
to stand a foot one from another, well covered at the root with a (...) and
enriched earth, when they begin to rise up into a great stem; and love ^^e
cold air, for in a hot air they cannot live: and you must cover them with
straw (...) make them cabage the better, The curled cole.
and become the whiter. The curled and Roman Coleworts being more tender by
nature, are sown in March, and are planted far ^ithin the year, and covet
to be often watered.

When you see the leaves of Coleworts wax bleake and pale, or yellow, it is a
^igne that it needs water: and you must oftentimes take from them their
yellow ^^aues, as also those which are eaten thorough, or rotten, or dried; for
this would make them die.

If you would have Coleworts of a good taste Coleworts of a good taste.
and pleasant, take away their first ^eaues; for those which come after will
have a better taste, and more pleasant savor than the first.

Red Coleworts Red Coleworts.
grow naturally of the abundance of dung, or for that they are watered with
the Lees of Wine: or by being planted in a place where they are hea^ed
continually with the heat and burning of the Sun.

Do not at any time gather, or at the least use the tops and edges of the
curled Roman Colewort, neither yet of any other, but the rest of the leaf
down toward the stalk.

All sorts of Coleworts may be planted at any times; The planting of Coleworts.
provided it be not too hot or too cold: and when you plant them, break their
root, for fear it be not doubled again or turned vpside-downe in the earth,
and that you put it not so far in, as (...) there be nothing of the top left
above.

Some men use to water Coleworts The watering of Cole^^^ts.
with Salt Water to make them the more (...): and some do cast and sow
Saltpeter amongst them upon the upper face of the earth: or else small ashes
sifted to keep them from Locusts, Palmar-vvo^mes, (...), The (...) betwixt
(...) the vine, and the Colewort.
and other vermin. Above all things the Colewort may not be (...) near unto
the V^ne, nor the Vine near unto the Colewort: for there is such (...) betwixt
these two plants, that being both of them planted in one ground, (...) they
become to some growth, they turn and grow one from another, (...) will they
prosper and bear fruit so well. And admit it to be true which is (...) namely,
that if a man do mingle wine, be it never so little, in the pot where
Coleworts are boiling* that then the Coleworts will leave boiling by and by,
and (...) boil any more, Coleworts do keep one from being (...).
but loose their color. Likewise such as are disposed to drink (...) wine and
not to be drunk with it, must eat some raw Coleworts aforehand, as (...)
Alma^gnes are wont to do, when they mean to quaffe you off a whole pot (...),
and to overcome ^uch as with whom they strive in drinking. The (...) also may
not be planted near unto Organy, Coleworts enem^e unto Organic and Rue.
Rue, and Sow-bread: for being (...) sown near unto these herbs, it
thriueth not at all, and again it infecteth his neighbors with some of his
ill qualities.

The careful Gardener must never abide to have in his Garden so much as (...)
rotten cole, Rotten Coleworts.
not yet water his herbs with the water wherein Coleworts have (...) steept
or boiled: for both the one and the other does cause his neighbor herbs (...)
have an ill taste and savor.

A good huswife will have Coleworts in her garden at all times, The virtues of
Coleworts.
for the relief (...) her family: for besides food, she may comfort her
people with them in the time (...) sickness: As thus, the first decoction
especially of red Coleworts, with Butter of Oil, without Salt, does loosen the
belly, ripen the cough, and makes the voice be^^ter: and if unto this broth
you put some Sugar, it will be singular for such as ar^ short winded: the juice
also of Coleworts is good for these diseases, if you put Suga^ to it: the seed
of Coleworts in broth or in powder, is good against the Wo^men (...) li^^le
children: Coleworts boiled in two or three waters do stay the laske: Coleworts
boiled and sprinkled with Long-pepper and eaten with the broth, (...) great
store of milk in nurses: the juice of Coleworts drunk, does expel and kill
(...) poison of Toad-stooles: the pith of the Colewort boiled with fat and
(...) honey, is singular for such as are short breathed to use in manner of a
lotion. To (...) the Colewort is good for all things, whereof the Romans when
time was, (...) such account, as that having expelled all other physic out of
Rom^ for the space (...) an hundred and fifty years, they used no other
physic but Coleworts in all manner of diseases. The Lee made with the ashes
of Coleworts is good to wash the head. The breasts fomented with the decoction
of Coleworts increases the milk of n^^ses. The ashes of Coleworts mixed with
the white of an egg does heal burning^ Cataplasines made of boiled Coleworts
and mingled with the lees of vinegar, (...) yolks of raw eggs and a little
clear vinegar of Roses, all well beaten and (...) together, is a singular
medicine presently to take away the pains coming (...) rheum.

There is nothing better to make clean a pot all ouergrowne with (...)
(wherein ^lesh has been accustomed to be boiled and water to be heated, (...)
as (...) pot, brass pot, or such like, and which cannot by any other means
be (...) scoured) than to boil Coleworts in it.

CHAP. XII.
Of Lettuce.
SOw your Lettuce as thick as the Colewort, in a moist ground, well dunged,
^at, light, and easy to turn over: it must be specially in March, for it
cannot well endure much heat, or much cold. Notwithstanding if you will sow it
in September, yea at all times make choice of sun^e (...) warm places, and
such as are well stored of dung well rotted, notwithstanding (...) it will wax
hard with Winter, and may continue some time being planted again* (...) must be
watered once in every two or three days, if the weather be not dropping (...)
moist. And in the sowing of it, you must water it, for fear that the heat of
the (...) should cast out the seed: it puts forth of the earth the fiftieth
day after it is (...). Being grown above the bed, the height of four or five
leaves, you must (...) it with your hand (but never with any rake) and set it
again in a fat ground, and ^^ood distance one from another, and cover the
roots and shankes with cows, goats, (...) sheep dung, for so they will be of
a better taste, and water them at the foot, but it (...) not be when it is
either very hot or very cold.

Some do nourish four sorts of Lettuces here with us in France, The curled
and cabbaged Lettuce.
not differing (...) from another in virtue, but in taste somewhat more or less
pleasant, that is to say, (...) curled; the headed; cabbaged or white; the
common; and the little and small (...): The Roman Lettuce.
Men use not to plant the small or common lettuce, but the great one, which
(...) be curled, and that which will cabbage, otherwise called the Roman
Lettuce, which has a white seed, and a greater than the other, and is of a
sweeter relish, espe^^ally if his first stalk be cut away, which it puts
forth after it has been planted (...) second time, for the first stalk
having in it very much milk, does easily become (...) by the heat of the
Sun. White Lettuce.
If you desire that it should have great leaves, when as (...) begins to put
forth a stalk, cut off the same in the half, then put upon it a clod (...)
earth, or some small tyle. If you covet to have it fair and white, bind
together the (...) of it two days before you take it from the first bed, and
set it in another place, (...) sprinkle it over with sand.

The cabbaged Lettuce Cabbaged lettuce.
being leaued and curled, and not growing higher than a (...) for the most
part, is made by being trodden down. After that it is planted (...) second
time, put unto the root some cowes dung that is very new, afterward tread
(...) down again* and water it, and when it begins to gather strength
and grow, (...) the branch which it puts forth, and cover it with a new
earthen pot in such (...), as that the top thereof by it may be beaten and kept
down; and by this means (...) will become tufted, cabbaged and white: or
else if you would have beautiful (...) fair lettuces, two days before you
take them up by the roots, you must tie toge^^er the tops of them, and then
cover them with earth up to the very said tops so tied: (...) so they will
become white and fair. White and fair^ Lettuc^^.
In like manner, sand cast upon them ma^^th them to become white. If you fear
that it will not grow hard enough, by rea^^^ of some fault in the place, or in
the time, or seed, take it up and set it in some (...) place.

To cause Lettuces to have a sweet smell more than ordinary, To cause Lettuce
to small well.
sow them with the (...) of Citrons, or else steep the seeds in Damask, or
other sweet water, three (...) days together.

To mingle Lettuce with other Salad herbs, Salad hearb^ mixed together.
as Rocket, Sorrel, and such like, and (...) in such sort, as that they may
all grow up together from one and the same root, (...) all your sorts of Seeds
into a Sheep trottle, made good and hollow for the (...); afterward set it
very deep, as namely about the depth of eighteen inches in (...) ground, and
water it often, and by little and little, and have great care and regard (...) it
when it puts forth of the earth. Others do crumble and break three or four
^^ottles of a Goat or Sheep, and put their seeds in the midst thereof, and
then (...) them with a linen cloth fast bound in manner of a knot, and do
plant them (...) were in the uppermost part of the earth, very diligently
regarding and looking (...) them when they come up. Some pluck away the leaves
of the Lettuse, which (...) next unto the roots, and in stead of the leaves so
plucked away, they put one (...) seed of rocket, cresses, or sorrel, and other
such like, by which means there grow (...) and diverse sorts of branches.

The Lettuce is not without good physic helps, The virtues of the Lettuce.
for it cools the (...) the belly, causes abundance of good blood. The
juice thereof mixed (...) Roses, as^wageth the pain of the head, and causes
the sick^ of agues (...) rubbed upon the brows and temples: it serves for a
Gargarisme with (...) of Pomegranats, for the Inflammation of the throat: being
rubbed upon (...) it staieth the night pollutions or Gonorrhaea, especially if
thereunto be added (...) Camphire: the seed thereof beaten with the seed of
white Poppie in form of (...) or extract does effect the same, and also cures
the scalding and burning of the (...) the seed thereof steept in water, wherein
has been quenched steel, with (...) quantity of Iourie powdered is very
sovereign against the white flowers of (...) The leaves of Lettuce boiled and
moystned in broth, or salades of them in like (...) after supper, does provoke
sleep: the seed thereof powdered, and mixed (...) milk of a woman that has
brought forth a daughter, and the white of an (...) to make frontale for the
very same purpose. The decoction of the (...) boiled in Barley water and
drunk, causes great quantity of milk in (...) if afterward the dugges be
well rubbed with the hand: such as have a short (...) spit blood, or have weak
lungs, as also such as desire to have children, must (...) Lettuces.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Endive, Sowthistle, and Succorie.
Endive ^ndiue.
having narrow leaves (otherwise called Scariole, or (...) wild Lettuce, and of
the Latins Intybus or Seris) is more (...) Physic than any other ways, and
is not planted in Garden^, (...) it is always bitter, notwithstanding that it
be of the sorts of (...) rather of Succorie. It is true, that in often planting
and transplanting of it, and (...) moving it from one place to another, and by
binding and covering it with (...) ring the Winter time, the nature thereof may
be changed and become tender (...) white, and without any great pains to the
Gardener may be kept all (...) thing our Gardiners have practiced, seeing by
experience that wild (...) comes fair and flourishing after it has been
overflowed with water, and (...) with sand or earth.

Sowthistle, (...)
called in Latin Sonchus, or Ci^erbita, was of old time in (...) salades, but
now there is no such account made thereof, save only that it is used (...) to
teed Conies and Hares: in like sort it is not planted in gardens, because it
(...) plentifully amongst the vines: notwithstanding the Italians do use the
(...) it in Salades in Winter, finding them sweet and of a pleasant taste: his
stalk is (...) milk, sometimes drawing near unto a yellow: this milk taken
in drink, is (...) for them which have a short breath, and are stopped in their
lungs: (...) pains of the ears, if you drop certain drops thereof into them,
especially if (...) cause it to boil with some Oil in the ri^d of a
Pomegranat: it heals (...) the strangurie and pains in making water, if it
be drunk to the quantity of (...) The leaves of Sowthistle chewed, do take
away the stinking of the mouth.

Succorie Succori^.
is of the nature of Endive, having large leaves, and without (...) and good
handling does always continue bitter. It loves a moist place, and (...)
labored ground. When it has put forth four leaves, you must translate it to
^ell dunged soil. And to the end it may have fair, large, and well-spread
leaves, (...) it begins once to come to any growth, in the midst of his
leaves you must (...) some pretty little tyle; for by this means it will
spread forth his leaves, and (...) have them a great deal thicker standing and
tufted. By this good husbanding (...) his bitterness, and then there is use to
be had of it in sallades in Winter, (...) it is called white Succorie; and to
this end it is wont to be planted again in the (...) of August: after that in
the beginning of September, to the end that the leaves (...) may be the
greater, it must be taken up without the breaking of any thing, (...) with a
small blade of a straw have the leaves tied together very easily and gently,
(...) wringing or brusing of them: afterward it must be laid in a well (...)
soil, the leaves downward into the ground, and the root upward toward the
(...) of the earth, and above it there must be made something to cover it in
manner of (...), under which there must straw be cast to keep it from frost
and bad winds: (...) like is done with Endive, and it is found white when it is
pulled up again; and (...) very delicate in eating. Some for the same end,
when Succorie has put forth (...) leaves, tie them all together with a very
small thread, and after cover them with (...) of earth, to the end that it may
continually draw by his root nourishment out (...) the earth, and by this
means it becomes white and tender, and loses a great (...) of his
bitterness.

Every man knows that the decoction of Succorie drunk in manner of an
(...), The virtues of Succorie.
is good for them which have the jaundise or heat of the liver. The juice of
(...) drunk every second day fasting, Spitting of bl^ud.
stays the spitting of blood. Succorie (...) and put under the lest dugge
does heal the heart-ache. Some say that the (...) of vvild Succorie often
drunk, makes the visages and countenances of (...) more clear and pleasant.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of Artichokes.
THe Artichoke plant is a diverse thing from End^ue and Succorie: for (...) for
Artichokes to plant them in Autumn^, which is about the month of October, they
are so fruitful and forward to thrive, as that you need not to take any more
but the great leaves with their branches, of (...) as bring forth the fairest
and greatest fruit, and in like manner of the thick (...) in the midst,
serving for no manner of use after that the heads of them be (...): and to
plant them again. Also some have otherwise used to cast down (...) said
stalks, and bury them a foot deep in good manured ground, the leaves at
(...) top bound at the end with a little straw, and the stalk laid down and
well (...), and they keep them thus, watering them now and then, if the time
be not (...) enough of it self, for to make shootes and young sets of in
Winter, or at other (...): and some there be that prick the heads in a well
manured earth, and being (...) planted, do cover them in Winter with the
chafe or dust of Line or Hemp (...) keep them from the frost, and that in
the year following they may bring forth (...) fruit.

Moreover, the Artichoke To sow Artich^kes upon beds.
is sown in the increase of the Moon of March, (...) beds well dunged and
fatted, but you must not look to have any whole and (...) fruit of them,
until the next year after. And, if you would have the seed to (...), make
little small pits upon your bed a good foot one from another, and half (...)
foot deep, and as much broad, and these fill with old dung that is very
small, and ^lacke earth that is very fine, mixed together, and above the same
plac^ prick or thrust in the seed of your Artichoke two inches within the
earth, the small end (...) and putting five or six seeds in one pit together,
and making many pits near (...) in a round compass, that so they may make a
fair knot and plant, and (...) you may cover it again easily without much
stamping or treading for it. And (...) soon as the Artichoke has leaves big
enough, it must be watered; and (...) continued in such places as are very
dry, that so it may bring forth a (...) and great fruit. Above all things care
must be had that the small end be not (...) contrary put downward, for then
it would bring forth writhen, weak, small, (...) hard Artichokes. You must
also make choice of the fairest and greatest ^eed (...) may be found, and that
the small pits be made a good fathom the one from the (...), that so one plant
may not hinder another. It is true, that it is better to (...) slips and
branches than the seed, because there comes fruit the sooner of the (...)
than of the other, and because that in so planting of them, you may be occupied
(...) well employed every month, and so reap your fruit in diverse seasons of
the (...) according as the earth is fat or lean, hot or cold, moist or dry,
or as the (...) hardly agreeing with and unfit for this plant. And in any case
plant of those (...) bear the fairest fruit, according as there are diverse
sorts, in respect of their (...), length, roundnesse, diverse colors, and taste,
some also being prickly, and (...) without pricks. Choice of Ar^ichokes.
For of Artichokes there be diverse kinds; as the round and the (...) the red
and the green: the round, which is green, is a good Artichoke, so (...) red,
although it be long, yet the soale is but thin, neither is the leaf very
(...), only it is exceeding pleasant in taste: the green, which is long, is of
(...) sorts the worst, for it neither bears good soale nor good leaf, but is
a loose (...) leaued Artichoke, ever wallowish and unpleasant: but the round
large (...) whose tops of leaves are red, being hard, firm, and as it were all
of one piece, is of (...) other the best Artichoke, has the deepest soale, the
thickest leaf, and is the (...) to grow in any soil whatsoever: And
therefore I would with every man, as (...) as he can, to make choice of these
before any other kind.

If you would that the Artichoke should grow without pricks, you must (...)
against a stone, and break the end of the seed which is sharp: or else put
the (...) after the manner of a graft in the ^oot of a Lettuce which has no
rind, and (...) small pieces, in such sort as that every piece may be grafted
with a seed, and so (...). You shall have Artichokes of good taste, Artichokes
of a good smell.
if you let the seed steep three (...) before you plant it, in the juice of
Roses or Lillies, or oil of Bay, or of (...) or some other sweet and fragrant
juice, and then afterward dry it, and so plant (...) it: Although, that as
concerning the former oils, there be some which are of a (...) opinion, and
do think that the oil does spoil the seed. You shall (...) Artichoke of the
smell of the Bay tree, Artichokes smelling like Baye^.
if you clea^e or make a hole in a Bay (...) and putting therein the seed of an
Artichoke, do set it so. Artichokes will be (...) in taste, Sweet Artichokes.
if before you set the seed, you steep them in milk; which must be (...) and
changed twice or thrice before that it sour; or in honey: and then (...) dry
and set them.

Two sorts of beasts do annoy the roots of Artichokes, Mice and Mo^les. (...)
dung of Swine, or the ashes of the Fig Tree spread about the roots of the (...)
do chase away Mice: and the like will fall out, if you wrap their roots abo^^
(...) wool. Some, to drive away Rats that destroy the roots of Artichokes
under the (...) prick down, half a foot deep in the earth, certain sticks
of Elder tree, (...) some four inches from the other; the smell of which Elder
is so odious (...) beasts, that they have no desire to come near it, either
under or above the (...) so long as it is green: and therefore when these
first sticks shall be dry, you (...) renew them. Othersome put Thorns that
are very sharp and pricking, or (...) of Chestnuts under the earth, round
about the plants of the Artichokes, (...) one near unto another, to the end,
that the Rats, coming near unto the (...) may presently be driven back
again. Others cause Beans to be boiled (...) poisoned water, and do put them
in the holes of this wicked cattle: for they (...) (...) sent thereof, they
run thither presently. As concerning Moules, we will speak of (...) manner of
killing them hereafter.

The root of Artichoke sodden in Wine and drunk, The virtues of the Artichoke.
is sovereign against the dif^^cultie of making water, for the stinking and
strong smell of the arme-pits, and of (...) urine also, for the hot and
scalding fretting of ones urine, whether it come of the (...), or of some other
cause, and so also for the dropsy: the pulpe boiled in flesh (...), and eaten
with Salt, Pepper, and Galanga made in powder, helps the weak^sse of the
generatiue parts. The Italians eat them in the morning raw with bread (...)
salt, whiles they be yet young and tender.

CHAP. XV.
Of Sorrel and Burnet.
SOrrel and Burnet notwithstanding that they grow untilled in great abundance,
yet they may be sown in fine ground, and well manured in the Spring time,
especially the Sorrel: for as for Burnet, it grows likewise, and as well in
dry grounds, nothing tilled or stirred: both of them (...) planted in gardens,
must from the beginning be well watered: and he that de^reth to gather the
seed, must take them up and plant them again, suffering them to ^row to their
perfection, and then to dry and wither. They fear not cold or frost, neither
yet abundance of water: but they look (especially the Sorrel) that they
(...) become the fairer, to be cut three or four times a year.

All the sorts of Sorrel, The virtues of Sorrel.
as well those of the field as those of the garden, have this ^ertue, that
being boiled with flesh how old and hard soever it be, yet they make it under
and loose the body.

The leaves of Sorrel roasted in hot ashes, have a singular force to resolve or
to cause (...) Apostumate the swellings of the eyes: or as some Surgeons use,
if you take the (...) of Sorrel, and lap them up close in a Burre-docke leaf,
then lay it in the hot (...), and roast it as you would roast a Ward, then open
it and apply it as hot (...) the patient is able to endure it to any
impostumation or byle whatsoever about (...) part of a man's body, it will not
only in short space ripen and break it, but also ^raw and heal it very
sufficiently: it is also, being boiled in Posset-ale, a very ^^od cooler of
the blood, and a great comferter against inflammations which come by ^^urning
Feauers. A Cataplasme made of the leaves of Sorrel, with twice as much (...)
Swines-grease, all beaten and mingled together* and afterward put in the leaf
of (...) Colewort under the hot ashes, is sovereign against cold Apostumes.
The seed of ^orrel powdered and drunk with water or wine, The bloody flux.
does assuage the pain of the blou^ie flux. Sorrel steept in vinegar and
eaten in the morning fasting, is a preservative against the plague, The plague*
as also the Syrope or Iuleb made with the juice thereof. The ^aues of Sorrel
well stamped, and applied unto the wrest, does tame the fierceness (...) the
ague.

Burnet of the garden being an herb that some use to put in their salades, The
virtues of Burnet.
whereof (...) have here spoken, and which is also the same which the Latinists
call Sanguisor^^, taken in drink is good to restrain the monthly terms of
women, and all other (...) of the belly, but especially such as are of blood:
it is good also to dry up wounds and vl^ers if it be applied unto them in form
of a Cataplasme. Some do much ^teeme it in the Plague time: and some say, that
the often use of Burnet, especially (...) juice thereof, is a very sovereign
preservative against dangerous diseases, be^^use it has a property very much
strengthening the Liver, the Heart, and the Spi^^^ts. The leaves of Burnet put
into the wine, make it more pleasant, more strong, and ^omewhat Aromaticall,
and of the taste of Millions: they are very good to be put in sallades made
with Oil, Salt, and Vinegar, according as we see them used (...) day.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Harts-horne, Trickmadame, and Pearcestone.
AS for Harts-horne Harts-horne.
and Trickmadame they have no need of any (...) or planting: To cause
harts-horne to thrive.
for both of them will come in any ground that (...) would have them, whether
it be husbanded or not. True it is, that if (...) would have Harts-horne
flourish and fair liking, you must cut it often, (...) it along upon some
roller, or cause it to go upon foot by it self: for it delights to (...) so
entreated, and utterly refusing to grow otherwise than against the ground.
(...) madame does nothing fear the cold, and does grow principally upon the
old (...) of vines, in a stony and grauelly earth. These are put in
Summer-sallades, (...) neither of the^^ have either taste or smell fit for the
same. The virtues of harts-horne.
The Harts-horne is good^ stay the flux of the belly.

Trickmadame stamped with Lettuce, The virtues of Trickmadame.
and applied unto the pulses, does delay (...) heat of an ague. The distilled
water thereof being often times drunken, does (...) roughly heal burning and
tertian agues.

Pearcestone is sown in a dry and sandy soil, Pearce^^one or Sampier.
and craves to be much (...) even from the beginning: he that desires the
seed, must let the herb grow to (...) perfection, and afterward to dry the
seed as corn is dried.

It may be preserved in salt and vinegar after the manner of purcelane, The
preserving of Sampier.
and then (...) sovereign for the difficulty of urine, for the jaundise,
Iaundise.
and to break the stone, Stone.
to pro^^uoke vvomens terms, and to stir up ones appetite, if it be used in
the beginning (...) meat. For want of such as is pickled in vinegar, you may
make the decoction of (...) leaves, roots, and seeds in Wine, for to use in the
same disease.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Marigolds.
MArigolds Marigolds.
have not need of any great ordering, for they grow in (...) fields, and in any
ground that a man will, neither do they (...) to (...) sown every year: for
being once sown, they afterward grow of the^ selves, and bear flowers in the
Calends of every month of the year, (...) in Summer as in Winter, for which
cause the Italians call them the flower of all (...) months: To be short, the
place where they have once been sown can hardly (...) of them. Tu^ied and well
thriuing Marigolds.
If they be never to little husbanded, and cut many times, they will bear
(...) fair ^lowers and very great but yet ever more in Autumn than in the
Spring.

The juice of the flowers of Marigolds drunk fasting, The virtues of Marigolds.
have great force to (...) the terms of women: the fume or smoke of them
taken through a (...) into the secret parts does the like, and causes the
afterbirth to come forth, and (...) young maids out of the Greene-sicknesse.
The conserve of the same (...) have the same virtue. The women of Italy as
well to provoke the (...), as to (...) them, do fry the juice and tender
crops of this herb with the yolks of (...) and do eat them. The very same
juice mingled with a little Wine or warm (...), is a sovereign remedy to
assuage the extreme pains of the head and teeth, (...) one use ^t in manner
of a lotion. This juice drunk to the quantity of an ounce, (...) the weight
of a French-crowne of the powder of Earth-wormes rightly prepared (...) help
greatly against the jaundise. Some say that to eat often of Marigold leaves (...)
make a good countenance: the distilled water of Marigold leaves being dropped
(...) his eyes, or linen clothes wet therein and applied unto them, does heal
the (...) of the eyes. The powder of the leaves thereof dried, and put in the
hollow (...) the tooth does cure the aching of the same. The juice of the
flowers of Marigolds (...) to the quantity of two ounces in the beginning of a
pestilentiall ague, does (...) the plague, so that the sick after he has
drunk this juice, do presently lie (...), and be made sweat, being thoroughly
covered in his bed: it does cure also the ^ndise, and beating of the heart. The
conserve of the flowers of Marigolds does (...) like. To drink half an hour
before the coming of the fit of a quartaine agu^ ^^out three ounces of white
wine, wherein have been sleept seven seeds of Mari^^ds, and to go over this
drink for diverse mornings together, is a sovereign medi^^^ against a
quartaine ague.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Beets and Blites, white and red.
BEets, Beets.
as well the white as the black and red, which is called B^tte and lotte of
the inhabitants of Tourraine, or Roman of the Picardes, are (...) not only in
Le^t, but at all times, especially after December until March, and in August,
to the end that there may always be in a rea^nesse both old and young, and for
to gather feed which may endure good thr^^ ^^ares. And for this cause you must
take them up and plant them again, when they (...) put forth five leaves, and
put unto the roots a little new dung, and afterward (...) and raise their
earth, and free them quite from weeds: they are apt and easy ^^ough to grow,
A spe^iall (...) of the (...).
and though they be cut, yet they will spring again if they be plan^^d in a
fat and well manured ground. They have this special and as it were admi^^ble
quality in them, namely, that they never come to their full perfection, until
the (...) year after they be sown: in respect whereof, I could advise the
gardener not (...) gather any seeds of the beets to sow, but such as the beet
shall bring forth the third (...) for of such seed there grow very fair and
goodly beets.

If you would make choice of fair beets, choose rather the white than either
the ^lacke or red, as being the fairest and tenderest: but to have such as
shall be very ^reat and white, you must cover the root with the new dung of
Oxen, and cleave in under their sprout, as is done with Leekes, and to lay upon
them a large and broad ^one or a brick. If you would have your beets red, Red
beets.
water them with the Lees of (...) Wine: or else plant them in such a place, as
wherein they may have great heat (...) the Sun.

Beets ^aten in pottage do loose the belly: The virtues of the beets.
the juice of beets drawn up into the ^^ose, does purge the brain: the same
juice ^ubbed upon the head, causes Lice and (...) to die. The roots of beets
roasted in the ashes and eaten, do take away the ill (...) that comes of
eating Garleeke. For ^o make (...) quickly.
The root of beets stamped and cast in wine, ^oth turn the same within three
hours after into vinegar.

Blites are sown in March, and are not long in coming out of the earth. If
they (...) sown in a well tilled ground, they will also grow the next year
following without any new sowing, in such manner as that the ground will hardly
be rid of them (...) crave no weeding or sweeping.

Blites do loose the belly: The (...) of (...).
their decoction wherein has boiled the roots and ^^aues, kills lic^ and
nits: their leaves roasted amongst ashes or boiled, do heal^ ^^rnings: the
first boiling of Blites with the gall of an Ox, and the Oil of (...). ^oth
take away all spots out of garments without doing any harm: (...) presently
(...) you must wash the place with warm water.

CHAP. XIX.
Of Arrach and Spinach.
THe herb Arrach (in Latin called Atriplex) as well the white and (...) as
the green, do naturally grow in grounds manured with (...) and in such place
as where there has beets grown at other time. (...) become red in the same
sort that beets do in a fat and well (...) ground. But they are sown in
February, March, and April: and they would (...) sown thin and not thick,
and oftentimes watered. Some sow them in (...) to gather them in Winter. They
will not be removed, but rather wed, (...) dunged with good dung, often cut and
pruned, and that with an iron tool, (...) they may not spend themselves in
turning all their substance into leaves. But (...) after the time that the seed
is scattered upon the earth, it must presently be (...) with earth, and they
must be sown as clear as may be, that so they may (...) and come fair and
goodly ones. In less than fi^teene days they be ready to (...) The Italians
use to make a kind of Tart of Arraches: They chop small the (...) and stamp
them with cheese, fresh butter, and the yolks of Eggs: afterward (...) put
them in paste, and bake them in the oven.

Spinach Spinach.
(so called because his seed is prickly) is of two sorts, the male and (...):
the female bears no seed. Both of them are ^owen in August, Septem^^ and
October, for to be used in Lent time, and in December, January, and (...), for
Summer: they bear out the roughness of all seasons very well and (...),
whether it be frost, cold, or snow: they grow also in any ground, so that (...)
well dressed and somewhat moist; they require (to the end they may prosper
(...) and spring quickly) to be watered every evening, and to be covered either
(...) or stubble: they stand not in need to be wed, but if they be cut often they
grow the (...). And he that would have them to continue long and flourish, must
at (...) cut off the one half of the stalk, and at another time, the other
half. Likewise (...) that would have them to continue sometime without being
sown every year, (...) at the first when he sows them, see that the seed be
a good, full, and well fed (...) for then for some years following, they will
grow without being sown again, (...) though the seed of the second year will
be somewhat weak: for to keep (...) the f^ost, you must cover them with
Walnut-tree-leaues, and that before (...) or ^ogges do fall in any manner of
sort.

The inhabitants of Paris know well enough how profitable Spinach is (...) make
meat o^ it Lent, The virtues of Spinach.
which use to make diverse sorts of dishes thereof for their (...); as sometimes
they ^rie them with butter in pots of earth: sometimes they (...) them at a
small fire with butter in pot of earth: sometimes they make (...) of them, as
also diverse other fashions: especially they make a most excellent (...) sallade
thereof, by taking the green leaves thereof, and boiling it in ^aire (...) i^
be soft as pap, then take it from the fire and strain it, and with the backs
of (...) chopping-kniues, chop it so small as possibly you can, then put it
into a very (...) sweet pipkin or skelle^, with a good quantity of sweet
butter* and currants very (...) vv^sht, and so bo^le it over again a good
space, then with vinegar and sugar, (...) i^ according to the taste which
pleases you best, and so serve it up upon (...) hard eggs, or otherwise as
you please, for it is of all sallads the best. The use of (...) is good for
them which have some impediment in breathing or speaking, (...) which are
much troubled with the cough, especially if such a one in the morning (...)
the broth of Spinach boiled with fresh butter, or oil of sweet Almonds, (...)
loosen the belly: their juice is good against the stinging of Scorpions and
(...) whether you drink it, or (...) it to outwardly.

CHAP. XX.
Of Borage and Buglosse.
BOrage and Buglosse being herbs much differing in leaves and flowers, are
alike notwithstanding in their roots, seeds, and virtues, serving to put in the
pottage whiles their leaves are tender, and the flowers are used in Salades.
They are sown in August or September for Winter use, and (...) Ap^^ll for
Summer: they may be removed at any time: And as for the seed, it (...) be
gathered half ripe, that so it may not leap out of his coat. And of this
(...) and Buglosse you shall sow but a very small quantity: for it is ^o apt
and (...) of growth, the seed so soon ripe, and so apt to shed, that albeit
your vigilance (...) very great, yet you shall find it will in short space
soon spread and overrun (...) ground: neither, where it is once sown, can
it, but with great difficulty, ever (...) be rooted out.

Buglosse, The virtue of Buglosse.
but especially the flower, does minister pleasantness unto men that use (...)
times, because it cheareth up the heart, purges the blood, and comfort the
(...) spirits. The broth wherein Buglosse shall have been boiled, does loose
the (...). The root that bears three stalks, stamped with the seed and
boiled in (...), does serve to be taken against tertian Agues. The wine wherein
the leaves of (...) shall have been steept, takes away all sadness. The
juice of Buglosse, (...), and Parsley, mixed with Wine, or oil of sweet
Almonds, is a sovereign (...) to cause the afterbirth of women to fall away.
The juice of Borage and (...) drunken, is a preservative against poison, if a
man have drunk it; as also (...) the biting of venomous beasts. Buglosse
having three leaves, being stamped (...) his seed and root, and drunk, does
help to put away the shakings of a (...) Ague: and that which has four,
against the shi^ering colds of quartaines. (...) water distilled is singular
against the do^ages happening in Feauers, as also (...) the inflammation of the
eyes.

CHAP. XXI.
Of Leekes both great and small.
LEekes, (...).
as well those that are long headed, as those that are round, do not require
so rich and fat a ground as the herbs going before, and they may be sown at
all times, if it were not for the gathering of the seed: for which cause they
must be sown in December, January, and (...), and there it will be ripe after
March and mid August, and that if from the (...) that they are sown, you go
and tread upon the Beds, and water them not but (...) days after.

They are wont to be removed when they grow of seed, and that either into
(...), every one being set four inches from another, and then there is
nothing (...) from them but the ends and tops of the leaves, or into a hole
made with a stick, (...) then the roots must be made clean and cropped off,
as also many of the leaves, (...) sand with the earth: or you shall plant them
to make them great, if you (...) a brick upon the head of them after you have
planted them. This must be in ^prill, May, or all June, to have for Summer use;
and in August, September, and ^ctober, for the Winter use: in any case you
must weed, water, and dung them (...) times, especially the round headed ones.
Furthermore, to make them very ^^icke, put the seed of a Cucumber and of
Nauets in a Reed, or in Box boared through, and graft this reed into the head
of the Leeke, when you plant it the second time: or else if you will have great
and gross Leekes, you must put so much of their seed as you can hold in three
fingers in an old Linen Cloth that is foul, and put it into the earth,
covering it with dung, and watering it by and by: for all this little heap of
Seed, thus put together, will make one great and thick Leeke.

Ner^ used every morning the leaves of Leekes with oil, The virtues of L^^kes.
to have a good voice^ although that Leekes be noisome to the stomach, as
being very windy, except they be boiled in a second water. If you eat Cummin
before you eat Leekes, your breath will not smell afterward of Leekes. The
leaves of Leekes boiled and applied unto the swol^e Hemorrhoids, does very
much good both against the swelling and pain of them. The leaves of Leekes
stamped with Honey, and applied inform of a Cataplasme unto the stingings of
Spiders, Poison.
or upon the biting of venimou^ Beasts, (...) at the (...).
are sovereign remedies for the same. The juice of Leekes mixed with vinegar
and rubbed upon the brows, stays bleeding at the nose. Difficultie^ of
making water.
The seed of Leekes stamped and drunk with white or sweet Wine, does heal the
difficulty of making Water. The juice of Leekes drunk with white Wine, For
(...) in (...)-birth.
helps to bring Women a bed which travel in childbirth. The seed of Leekes
stamped with Myrrh and the juice of Plantaine, Spitting of blood.
it good to stay the spitting of blood, and bleeding at the nose. The seed of
Leekes cast in a vessel of Wine, does keep the Wine from sowring: and if it
should be sour already, it renews it, and returns it to his former
goodness. The juice of Leekes, or Leekes themselves boiled in oil, take away
the pain and worms in the ears. Leekes roasted under embers, and eaten, is
singular good against the poison of To^d-stooles, and to preserve from
drunkenness, or else to dri^e (...) away, being already possessed. If you
boil Leekes with Earth-wormes in Oil unto the consumption of the third part,
and afterward strain out this Oil, it will be singular good for the ulcers
and noise in the ears.

Small Leekes Small Leeks.
must be sown in the Spring, at such time as other herbs are sowne^ they make
a fair show because of their thin and little leaves, and because also they
keep green all the year long: they may seem to be the same with Chibols and
Cyues, which are wont to be used in Salads to help to temper the coolness of
other herbs used in Salads, because the Chibols and Cyues have no head, but
only a long stalk like unto Leekes.

CHAP. XXII.
Of Purcelane.
PVrcelane loves to be sown in February, March, April, May, and June, but
not at any other time, for it cannot abide the cold. It comes in great
abundance upon Beds mixed well with old dung, or in a ground that is very fat
of it self, especially if it be sown amongst Colewo^^, Onions, and Leekes:
and after it has once taken with the ground, it will not fail any year
afterward, though you take no pains with the sowing of it: notwithstanding it
craves to be often watered, that it rise not upright like the stock of a tree.
It must be placed in the shadows of trees, and amongst clods full of herbs,
but not thick, for then it could not well spread it self abroad.

Purcelane eaten does cure the roughness and astonishment of the teeth, (...).
stays spitting of blood, and quenches the heat of the reins,
notwithstanding that this herb is hard to digest, and nourishes but a
little: being applied unto the brows, is appeaseth the headache, and being
laid upon the navel, it kills the worms (...) children. (...).
The decoction of the leaves thereof, or the seed, or the water distilled, is ^
sovereign remedy against the Bloody flux and the Worms in children. A lea^e
of Purcelane put upon the tongue, D^ought.
assuageth thirst. A Cataplasme made of Purcelane and Barley m^ale, applied unto
the liver and ^lanke, works a marvelous effect against burning Agues.
Burning agues.
A Liniment made with Honey, and the powder of the root of Purcelane dried,
heals the chaps of the lips and hands. Chaps in the lips.


This Purcelane is an excellent Salad, To preser^^ Purcelane.
and by a cooling operation which it has keeps the blood in a most excellent
temper. You preserve it all the year, by boiling it first in fair water, then
drayning the water from it, spread it upon a fair table, and cast good store
of salt amongst it: then when it is thoroughly cold, pot it up in clean sweet
pots of Earth, and pour upon it either a good strong Brine, or Vinegar and
Salt mixed together, till the Purcelane be clean covered: or if you fear the
ouer-saltnesse of it, then you need but only make a well-tasted pickle, such
as you put to Olives, and with it cover the Purcelane, then close the pot up
close till you have cause to use it: And if at any time you find the pickle or
brine to (...) away from the herbs, and leave them dry, you must immediately
renew it, and cover it all over again, for it is apt to putrify, and nothing
brings it more sooner thereunto than the want of moisture: Therefore you must
have care ever once in three of four days to open your pots, and to mend what
you shall find amiss in them: and if you find any ho^rinesse cleaving unto
the pots sides, you must cleanse that away also.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of Onions, Chibols, and Chy^es.
FOr the most part, Onions (so called of the French, because they have but
only one white root, like to a pearl; which the Latins call Vnio whether
they be white, red, or round, would be sown in January, February, and March,
in a fat ground, well dunged, black, well turned, as also well cleansed from
stones, and enriched: or else in a red earth, which is short and murlie; for in
it they grow excellently. They would be removed in April all along, well
weeded, and often labored, to cause them to grow great and thick: and they
must be kept from cold and freezing winds. In them we must observe a nature
contrary unto that of other Herbs and Plants, being of great^^ force and
virtue in the increase of the Moon than in the decrease, quite conrarie to
that of Onions, which in the wane of the Moon is more effectual, and in the
growth of the Moon more dry and weak. Such as are intended to be kept for
seed, when they begin to put forth their stalk, and to rise aloft, must have
small s^ickes or poles to set by them and keep them upright, that the wind do
not bow or break them down. They must be gathered in the old of the Moon, in
fair and dry weather, when the leaves begin to dry, and the seed to grow
black, (...) then you must pull up the whole stalks, and dry them in the
Sun: And it is said, that if they be sown and planted when the Moon is
under the earth, they taste the stronger, but are smaller and less:
Furthermore, they must be ordered as Leekes. But i^ must be observed, that they
love and delight in a red earth, and to be sown in fair weather, in the
decrease of the Moon, to be taken up again, and by and by watered: and for to
make them grow great, they must have their top taken away when they are
planted, and their heads uncovered, and their earth must be dug twenty
days before they be removed again, that so it may dry, and not have any
moisture in it. And to keep Onions from rotting, To keep (...) from r^tting.
you must cast them into warm water, and dry them in the Sun, and after
that they are dry, to lay them upon Barley straw, so as they may not touch one
another. Who so would make choice of Onions, To make cho^ce of (...).
must know, that the round and white ones are a great deal better than those
of a rus^etish or reddish color, and not to be so hot and sharp as the other.
The best in France are those which grow at Fertlonion, a small village near
vn^^ Estamps, for it has his name upon that occasion.

The Onion, The virtues of (...).
though it be the Country man's meat, is better to use than to (...) for he
that eats every day tender Onions, with Honey, to his breakfast, shall live
the more healthful, so that they be not too new: for the dry are more
healthful (...) the green; the boiled, than the raws; the preserved, than the
dry: wherefore the dry must be chosen to use in Salads, fried Meats,
Gallymawfries, baked Meats, Sawces, Bean pottage, and other uses.

The juice of Onions causes hair to grow again, cleanses filthy ^ares, and
such as run with mattar; takes away white spots, as well out of the face, as
from the rest of the body: It cures the Dropsy Dropsy.
with the juice of Fennel, if it be but beginning: it purges the brain
through the nosthrils: mingled with Hens grease it dries up the Kibes: Kibed
heels.
applied with a linen cloth unto burnings, it eases and taken (...) the
pain: being mixed with strong vinegar, it stays bleeding at the nose, if it
be dropped and put into the nose with a feather.

An Onion roasted upon hot coals, and eaten with Sugar, Oil, and a little
Vinegar, does cure the Cough, and is good for them that are stopped or stuffed
in their Lungs, and such as are short breathed. Take away the heart of an
Onions, (...) it with Cummin seed powdered, stop the hole, and roast the Onion
thus prepared ^^der hot ashes, when it is roasted, strain it out, this juice is
singular good for the noyses and deafness of the ears, being dropped into
them. The thick ri^de of the Onion burned or roasted under hot ashes, assuageth
old Headache and Megrams, if you put in little morsel, moistened or
besprinkled with Oil of Roses and Bays, within the ear of that side of the
head that aketh.

An Onion stamped with fresh Butter, eases the pains of the Hemorrhoids:
stamped with Honey and Salt, The biting of a ^ad dog.
it is a sovereign remedy for the biting of a mad dog, and other such like
beasts: mingled with Hens grease, it takes away the red and blew spots of
the face: Red spots.
boiled in Wine, or in Water, and afterward stamped and fried in common Oil,
and applied in form of a Cataplasme unto the Navel, it assuageth the throws
of Women newly brought in bed: roasted upon hot coals, and mixed with Leaven
and Oil of Lillies, it ripeneth Impos^umes. Take away the heart of the Onion,
fill the hollow place with Tracle or Mithridate, dissolved and beat with the
juice of Citrons, stop up the hole again with the Cap or upper Crust which
you cut of^, roast all together under the hot ashes, and that so long, as until
all be well incorporated and drencht in, afterward strain the Onion so roasted,
and give that which shall be strayned to drink to him that is infected with
the Plague, and cause him by and by to lie down, and to be well covered, to
the end that he may sweat. This Medicine has not his match against the Plague,
provided that the sweat break forth by and by.

As for Chibols and Chyues, they come more near unto the nature of Onions (as
by the smell one may well perceive) than unto the nature of Leekes, which they
nothing resemble, save only in the blade or stalk, and in that they have no
head. They must be sown in the Spring, as other herbs, in the same ground
with the Onion: They are very pleasant in Salads, to temper the coldness of
other cold herbs.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Of Garlic.
Garlic Garlic.
(as is well known unto the inhabitants of Gascoine, Aquitaine, Limosin, and
those about Bordeaux) would be planted at the same time that Onions are, and in
the new of the Moon, that so they may be great: and it must not be set in
whole heads, but in those little ^loues and parts which may be divided and
taken off from the head. They shall be set all along upon beds divided by
ridges, like unto ridged grounds of the Country of Beaux, to the end that the
water may not destroy them in Winter: For this herb desires a dry ground,
and but a little moist, very white, and not much dunged, or very fat. When
they shall have put forth three leaves, you must weed them as often as you can,
for so they will become fairer, and their seed will be the greater. Who so is
desirous to have it great headed, must take away the tops of it, or else tread
it down with his feet before it put forth his stalk: for by this means the
juice will return into the head. It grows likewise of Seed, but more slowly,
for it has no better a head for the first year than a Leeke, the second year
it begins to be better headed and more like it self, but is not perfect and
absolute until the third year. If you sow it in the wane of the Moon, and
take them up in like manner when the Moon is under the earth, Sweet Garli^^.
you shall have Garlic that will not smell so strong: but contrariwise, if
you sow in the new or growth of the Moon. Likewise it will have a sweet
savor, if when you sow it you set in the midst thereof the kernels of
Olives: as likewise, if in planting it you set by the side thereof a Cloue,
joined very close thereunto, it will retain the smell and taste thereof. In
like manner it will be of a better taste, if you steep it in good sweet Wine a
day before that you sow it: And if you steep it in Milk two days before you
sow it, it will become both greater and better.

The fit and convenient time to gather and take it up, How to keep Garlick^.
is in the wane of the Moon, and in dry and fair weather, when the stalk
will no longer stand upright. It is kept well upon straw lying bare, or hung up
in the smoke of the chimney, or being steept a little in salt water. And to
keep it long, you must let it ripe well, and when it is gathered, to lay it in
the Sun, that it may dry thoroughly, and afterward to lay it up in a place
that is not moist, and whereas notwithstanding the Sun comes not, for so it
would continue but a while. It is true, that if you mean to sow and set it
afterward, that then you must not hang it up in the smoak^, nor steep it in
salt water, for such kind of keeping does make it barren and not fit to grow
any more.

Garlic eaten, The (...) of Garlic.
brings a very unpleasant smell unto the mouth: and for the taking away of
the same, you must eat a raw Bean by and by after, or the ribbe of a Beet
roasted in ashes, or some Smallage or green Parsley: or which is better, if you
love Garlic, The (...) of Garlic.
and hate the stinking breath that it yields, then use vinegar wherein it
has been steeped: or else cause the Dishes and Vessels whereon your meat is
to be served, to be rubbed therewith: for by this (...) you shall have the
taste thereof in your mouth, and yet your breath shall not smell any thing ill.

Garlic eaten fasting, is the Country man's Treacle in the time of the
Plague, The Plague.
and other dangerous diseases, as also against all manner of Venime and Poison.
It is true that it causes thirst and heat throughout the body, and headache
when it is of^ used: but all these inconveniences will be easily corrected, if
you eat some Smallage or Parsley presently after. Very many men, but
especially the people of Aquitaine, in the beginning of the Spring time,
namely, the first day of May, do eat every morning Garlic with fresh
butter: by this means they hope to continue sound and strong all the year.

Garlic applied in form of a Cataplasme unto the stingings of Serpen^s, The
(...) of a mad Dogg^.
or biting of a mad Dog, is a sovereign medicine against the same. A
Linimen^ made of Garlic, Salt, and Vinegar, kills Nits Nits.
and Lice. Li^e.


The decoction of Garlic not bruised, given in Clysters, or applied unto the
belly in manner of a fomentation, assuageth the pain of the Colicke, Colicke.
and expels wind.

Against an old Cough, Cough.
coming of a cold cause, it is very good to rub the soles of the feet, the
back bone, and wrists of the hands with an Ointment o^ Liniment made of three
Garlic heads, well powned and beaten in Swin^ Seame.

Against the pain of the Teeth, (...)-ach.
coming of a cold cause, there is nothing be^ter than to hold in the mouth
Vinegar, or the decoction of Garlic, or to apply unto the aching tooth three
cloves of Garlic stamped in Vinegar. For the killing of Worms Worms.
in children, it is good to give them to eat Garlic, with fresh Butter, or
else to make a Cataplasme thereof, to lay upon the Stomach. They which can
scarce or hardly make their Water, Difficulty of (...).
or are subject unto the Stone, receive great comfort by eating of Garlic. To
keep Birds Birds.
from h^^ting of young Fruit, you must hang at the boughs of those Trees some
quantity of Garlic.

CHAP. XXV.
Of Scalio^s.
SCalions (...).
are like unto Garlic in taste and smell, but in stalk and fashion the leaves
resemble Onions, save only that out of their head there grow many hulles or
husks, which bring forth many round little leaves. They thrive and grow
better when they be set than when they be sown: for when they be sown, there
is no great hope of their coming to any fairness before the second year.
They may be planted from the first day of November unto the month of
February, to have the fruit thereof the next Spring: and they are planted as
Garlic: But in the mean time you must gather (...) before the March Violets
do flower: for if one use them not before that they be flowred, they will fall
away, and become but silly ones. They are known to be ripe, if their leaves
begin to dry away below. For to cause them to have (...) and thick heads, you
must put brickes round about their roots, as has been said of Leekes.

As concerning the use of Scalions, The virtues of (...).
there is no great help or profit to be hoped for, or expected, except of such
as are given more to their pleasure than to their health: for the Scalion
serves for no other thing but to provoke and stir folk (...) the act of
carnal copulation, and to have a good appetite. They have the same ve^^wes
that Garlic, save only that they be somewhat troublesome to the (...),
because of their more sharp and subtle taste.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of Parsley.
PArsley Parsley.
craves no great labor, but loves a stony and sandy ground, for which
cause it is called Parsley: again, it craves not any store of manure;
wherefore it will be good to sow it under Arbors. It desires above all things
to be well watered: and if it so fall out, as that it be sown or planted near
unto any Fountain or River, it grows very fair, and in great quantity.
And if any be desirous that it should have large leaves, he must put into a
fair Linen Cloth so much seed as he can hold in his three fingers, and so
cast it amongst the stones in the ground: or else he must put in a Goats
trottle a quantity of Parsley seed, and so set or sow it. And he that will
have it curled, must bruise the seed with a pestle of Willow, to the end that
the husk may break and fall off, and afterward wrap it in a Linen Cloth, and
so put it in the ground. Otherwise, without thus much to do, it may be made to
curle howsoever it be sown, if you draw a Rowler upon it so soon as it
begins to grow. It is a good time to sow it from mid May until the Sun be
risen to his highest point in the Heavens, for it somewhat craves the heat.
The seed thereof that is but a year old, is nothing worth: for look how much
elder the seed is, by so much it is the better, and endures a long time
unsown: in such sort, as that it will not be needful to sow or plant it of
five years; although, when it is sown, it grows not under the space of
threescore days. Notwithstanding, to cause it to grow, and put more speedily
out of the earth, it behooves that the seed be steeped in vinegar some certain
time, and after sown in a well toyled ground, and filled or mixed with one
half of the ashes of Bean stalks: and after it is sown, it must be often
watered, and slightly, with a little Aqua vitae: and by and by after the
watering, to lay aloft it a piece of Cloth, that the heat thereof may not be
spent, and breath away, and by this means it will grow up within a few hours:
and then you must take off the Cloth covering it, and water it often, and by this
means it will have both a high stalk and great leaves.

A Cataplasme made of the leaves of Parsley, The virtues of Parsley.
with the crummes of White bread, does heal a Tettar or Ringworme, does
resolve the swellings of the Breasts, and makes Women that are brought in bed
to loose their Milk. Delivery of women in their travel.
The juice of Parsley, drawn ^ut with vinegar, and mixed with a little salt,
helps Women that are in travel to be delivered. The often use of Parsley
takes away the stinking of the breath, especially from such as have drunk
much Wine, A stinking breath.
or eaten Garlic: And therefore such as use to keep company much, and have
an ill breath, must not go unprovided of good store of fresh Parsley to chew
or hold in their mouths. The decoction of the roots or leaves of Parsley, To
make water.
helps down Women's terms, (...) Urine, casts out Gravel contained in the
Vrinarie vessels, takes away the pain of the Colicke The Colicke.
and of the Reins, applied in manner of a fomentation upon the pained parts:
Pain of the reins.
It serves also for the obstructions of the Liver; but better for such as are
flegmaticke, than for the choleric, or those that are of sanguine complexion.
The leaves of Parsley cast upon the water of Fish Ponds, do recreate and
rejoice the sick and diseased Fish.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of Rocket and Tarragon.
ROcket Rocket.
being an herb very usual in Salads, and good to temper the coldness of
Lettuces, may be sown as well in Winter as in Summe^ for it fears not cold,
nor other injury of the air; neither does it ^^quire any great labor: it
loves notwithstanding to be (...) and (...) in a grauellie ground. Rocket must
not be eaten by it self, by reason of the great heat that it makes in them
that eat it; The force of Rocket.
and for that cause it has commonly for his companion in Salads the leaves of
Lettuce, seeing that the one of these does notably temper the other. It is good
notwithstanding to provoke urine, applied in form of a Cataplasme upon the
share bone: And some say, that three leaves of Rocket gathered with the left
hand, and bruised in honied water, and taken in drink, (...) and hardness of
the spleen.
are sovereign against the Iaundise, and hardness of the Spleen: Also Rocket
being boiled and mixed with Sugar, does take away the Cough in little children.

Tarragon Tarragon.
is made of Linseed pricked in many places of the head of a red Onion, the
strongest and sharpest that may be found, and put into well manured earth: And
after it has shot up the height of a foot, or somewhat more, you must take the
slippes or branches and set them again in the same earth, and water them often.

Tarragon has the same force and virtue that Rocket has, and is not to be
eaten alone, but with Lettuces and such like herbs.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of Smallage, Cheruile, Costmarie, and Auens.
SMallage Smallage.
must be sown in a well toiled ground, and near some wall: for i^ loves the
shadow, and grows well in all manner of ground. And after that it is once
sown, if it be not all pulled up by the roots, but that there be but one
stalk left from year to year to seed, it will continue for ever: and it has
not any great need of being weeded. The good time to sow it, is from the end
of February unto the first day of September. It has the like virtue that
Parsley has, not to eat, but for Physic. It is good also for all blew
stroake^, and blood that is settled by reason of any kind of blow. The oil
thereof is likewise good for many diseases, and especially for the rawnesse
that comes in the throat, if the place that is sore be often anointed
therewith. It is true, that Smallage stirs up the Falling sicknessee, if we
may believe Pl^nie; although that Galen, in the curing of the Falling sickness,
do prescribe the roots of Smallage and Parsley. I have tried by experience
oftentimes, that the leaves of Smallage, chewed raw, do provoke the terms of
women.

Cheruile, Cheruile.
called in Latin Cerefolium, loves to be sown in a ground that is well
manured, and in the time of February, March, and April, and sometimes in
August and September, for to have it in Winter: and it would be often watered.
Cheruile does shirre up the stomach, The virtues of Cher^ile.
and is very good to provoke urine, and purge the blood.

Costmarie and Auens Costmarie and (...).
are very pleasant herbs to give a savor like Spice in Pottage and Salads:
They would be sown in May and April, and removed in November. Both of them
have the taste of Pepper and Cloves, and therefore cannot but be good to
comfort the stomach. Some, to provoke appetite, make a green sauce of Sorrel
for to eat with meat. Physicions do greatly esteem of the decoction of
Costmarie against the Swimming disease, Astonishments, falling Sickness,
obstructions of the Lungs, Dropsies, and Iaundise; as also for the Colicke,
Stone, difficulty to make Water, staying of the Terms, for quick delivery
in Childbirth, and to bring down the afterbirth.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of Asparagus.
THe herb Asparagus does grow big in a fat and spongie ground that is free
from stones, well dressed, plain, and smooth, demanding no help of watering,
except a little in (...). Some sow them in the Spring at the new of the Moon:
but it is better to set the roots, which spread and increase better and sooner
than the seeds: whether they be sown of seeds, or set of roots, it must be
done in furrows three inches deep, and a fathom over on every side,
standing one from another a good long foot: put into every furrow two or three
seeds, every one off from another some nine inches, about forty days after
the seeds do gather together, and join one with another, becoming one: after
you have set them thus low, you must cast upon them the third part of the earth
that you have taken out of the furrows, which must be ^ifted, before you put
it there, with an iron Sieue, that so the Sun may pierce the deeper, and draw
the Asparagus unto it: after this, you must weed them often, and help them in
October with some well rotted manure of Horse, Sheep, or Birds, or, which is
better, with the filth and ordure of Sinkes and Priuies, and the dust which
falls out of Wool when it is beaten: and again, upon this the ^eeds and
dross of the Vine-presse and Grapes. You must renew their ground oftentimes in
February, and cast new dung upon it: you must do the like also the second
year in Februar^^ or March, and likewise every year in October. It is true
that they must be removed the second or third year, and never to cut them
until the third year, and then in the month of May. In stead of removing
them, it were better to uncover their roots, and to take away those that are
supers^uons, for to set in some other place, and then to purge them of withered
and rotten or corrupted branches, (in as much as Asparagus would never be
removed out of their place, except it be when they grow too thick together:)
For doing so two or three years one after another, it will fall out, that all
the entangled and folded one within another will be taken away; and then you
may prune and trim those which you leave standing, which you must cover from
foot to foot, or from root to root, with well seasoned manure, being rotted and
mixed with as much sifted mould, sifting moreover the same which was above
before, and putting it into his old place from whence it was taken, and in such
manner as it was found there. Howsoever it be, the year after they be planted
there may well be taken from them some one of their stalks, and the other let
stand to seed. The stalk so taken away, must be cut away, not plucked away, The
way to have good ^^ore of Asparag^^.
for fear of doing hurt to the root. For to have Asparagus to grow fair and
abundantly, you must cover the earth of the trenches with beasts horns; or
else sow in the furrows where you shall set them, the powder of the horns of
Weathers, or wild Rams, or some others, and afterward you shall water them.
And this is the cause that makes them grow naturally in the Meadows. Asparag^^
may grow of a Sheep horn.
Others there are which say (though it be a wonderful thing) that there must
nothing be done to the horns, but only bored through, and to hide them in
good ground, and that of them will breed and grow Asparagus. And to cause
Asparagus to sprout and bring forth often, you must rake and weed and dig
about them often, opening their roots, after that you have gathered the fruit,
and straw upon th^^ the powder of beasts horns: for the plant being thus
handled, will bear his (...) otherwise.

Asparagus is a delicate fruit, (...).
and wholesome for every body, and especially when it is thick, tender,
sweet, and not very much boiled: it gives a good stomac^e unto the sick, if
it be used before meat: it provoke urine: it opens the obstructions of the
reins and the liver. The root thereof applied to the toothache, (...) the
pain: being dry, and thrust into the teeth, it rooteth them out: put (...)
decoction, and drunk oftentimes, it breaks the stone, it makes a good
color (...) the face, and a sweet smell in all the body, excepted only that
it makes the urine strong and stinking.

CHAP. XXX.
Of Garden and Watercresses.
GArden-Cresses, Garden Water-Cresse^.
so called because they grow at all times, and are of great nourishment, as
also Watercresses, do love moist places, and the little Brooks rising from
Springs and other little Rivers: wherefor^ they ask no other labor in
Gardens, but to be planted near to (...), that they may grow well, and to be
watered every day, having water (...) at their foot.

Both of them are very good in Salads of Lettuce, The virtues of Wate^ and
Garden-Cresses.
and have great force against the Stone and difficulty of Urine: And
furthermore, Cresses of the Garden, made in a Cataplasme, does resolve
Carbuncles, the Sciatica, Cat-haires, and all other sorts of Impostumes;
especially if it be mixed with Leaven, it kills the Worms. The juice
thereof, drunk with the juice of Mints and Wine, does the like. The juice of
Watercresses dropped into the ear, does heal the pai^^ of the teeth,
T^^th-ach.
coming of a cold cause. The seed of Cresses chewed and held (...) the mouth,
is good against the palsy Palsy.
of the Tongue. In the palsies of oth^ parts, there must be applied unto the
said parts bags full of the seed of the said Cresses, having boiled (...)
first in Wine. The same remedy is good also for the Colicke. Co^^cke.


Watercresses in a fomentation comfort a cold stomach, provoke the terms,
mundifie and cleanse the mother, and prepare it to conceive. They dissolve the
colicke of the mother, if you fry them with Mugwort upon a hot fire-(...)
sprinkling them with red wine, and applying them unto the belly. They are
very singular against the pains of the mother after Childbirth, if with the
flowers of Camomill, and the leaves of Mugwort, all chopped small and
incorporated with four yolks of eggs, you fry them all in a frying-panne
with the oil of Lillies, and apply it hot unto the belly and navel. The
juice thereof rubbed abo^^ the cods, stays the flux of the seed in the night
time. A Cataplasme made of the leaves of Watercresses, of the leaves and
roots of Turnips, and of the roots of Parsley, all chopped small, and fried
with pure wine and butter, and applied (...) the stomach and the groine,
causes the urine that has been long kept, to (...) away and avoid.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of Saffron.
AS concerning Saffron (as shall be said hereafter) it loves an indiffere^^
soil, not strong, not dunged, but yet well eared, lying upon the Sun, and
well dug: and it comes very well in the place where Onions have grown.
It loves not water, and stands in awe of the Moule and Mice: It grows
better, the head being set, than the seed being sown: for indeed it is not
used to be sown, but the heads of it only to be set, as the heads of Lillies,
Leekes, or Sea Onions are. They are planted and set by ridges in April and
May. The heads are let ripen on heaps in the shadow of the Sun, some eight
days before they be set: and this must be in such a place as is not moist.
They are set in a well-digged earth with their roots, and a good distance one
from another, as namely, about half a spanne, and three inches deep. It
grows the better, if it be a little footed upon. It flowreth every year in
Autumn, for one whole month together, and then lets the flower fall: but
it keeps his leaves green all Winter long unto the Spring, and then it
begins to wither, and makes no show at all in Summer. It may continue good,
being set and plant^d, for nine years: and then if it be removed into some
other place, it will be able to do further good. It is true that it springs
forth many cloves and kernels, which must be taken away every three year, or
else the root would be choked and smothered. Some do set it (as being the
best time) from after mid August unto mid September, and cast at the roots of
it the dross of Grapes as it comes from the Press, Good Saffron.
and leave it in the earth two or three years: and every year, in April and
May, the dried part of the herb is tied up and trodden into the earth some two
inches deep, without hurting of the root: and after you have cleansed the
grassie part and leaves thereof, and that the flower shall be ripe, as in
August, and toward Autumn, it shall be gathered in the morning at Sunne-rise,
and reserved in a close and dry place. Furthermore, the Saffron is known to
be good, if it be fat: if being holden in your hand, it make a noise: and if
being put into any liquor, it dissolve: if being handled and held up to the
face, it procure a certain kind of biting or pricking unto the eyes: if it be
of a golden color: if it dye the hand with his color, and have somewhat a
^harpe smell and pricking: and if it be not brittle and very readi^ to break.

Saffron taken in a very small quantity, is good for the weakness of the
stomach, and fainting of the heart: it keeps from being drunk, and heals
the bitings of Serpents and Spiders: if it be taken inwardly, or applied
outwardly, in great quantity, it procures swimming and pain in the head, and
brings a ^oggie mist over the eyes.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of Nauets great and small.
NApes and Nauets (called of the Latins Napi) are two diverse sorts of one
kind, but notwithstanding, differing in taste, color, and greatness: for the
Napes are greater and drawing toward a yellow color, less^ pleasing the taste:
Nauets are less, white, and a great deal more sauorie: both of them are sown
after one fashion in a well-digged ground, and withal well enriched, and made
very good, that so they may go down a good way, and work themselves deep
into the ground, or else in a ground which is intended to be made fert^e, or
upon Stubbles which have been newly plowed, or betwixt Mill^, and Pannicke:
The seed is used to be mingled with earth broken into small powder, that so it
may sow the more clearly, not falling many together it must not be abo^^
three years old; for if it be elder, it brings forth Coleworts. And if the
seed (...) been steeped and moistened in milk or sweet wine, or honied water,
two or three days before it be sown, it will be very much the better. And if
they come (...) thick, there is some part of them to be taken up and set in
other places. They (...) be well wed and dug, and the fairest and greatest
kept to have the s^^d of (...)* They are sown in August: When you go about to
sow them, you must look th^^ the earth have been newly watered with rain,
for so they will grow bette^* And above all things it must be looked unto, that
they be not sown in a (...) ground, for the shade is altogether contrary unto
them, though the earth be good and fertile. The g^thering and keeping of Napes.
They are gathered in November, and kept in Winter upon sand (...) under the
earth, for to eat in Winter and Lent time. I report my self unto them of
Meason and Vau-Girard near unto Paris, which gather great store of them (...)
ye^re to sell at Paris.

This fruit is windy, The virtues of Napes.
and begets worms in young children by their (...)* but they must be eaten
with Mustard. It is true that their seed does resist (...), and there it is put
into Treacle: it likewise kills the Worms, being mingled (...) the juice of
Oranges or Limons: and it drives forth the small Pocks and (...) with the
decoction of Maid^n-haire or of Lentils. It provoke urine mixed in eq^^ll
quantity with Linseed, and given to drink in wine: it brings up the
crudities of the stomach by vomit, being taken with honied vinegar and warm
water. The Egyptians make a very good Oil of it.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of Turnips.
TVrneps T^^neps.
(called in Latin Raepa) are of two sorts, the round and the long, and they
differ not much from Napes and Nauets, save only in gre^^nesse and taste: For
Turnips are a great deal bigger, and of a (...) pleasant taste, than the
Napes: for the truth whereof, I report my self to the inhabitants of Limosin
in Aquitaine, Turnips are the ^rdinarie ^eat of them of (...) and Sauoy.
and the people of Sauoy, who h^uing no store of Corn, have no more excellent
a meat than Turnips: and for the same cause they are so industrious in sowing
and dressing of them, as being that commodity and increase of the earth unto
them, which is as well, yea better beloved, and more necessary, than any
Corn or Grain: for they feed themselves and their Cattle with the leaves,
great and small stalks, tops and roots of Turnips; insomuch, as that they
complain of a Famine, when in their Country their Turnips are frozen in the
ground, or have received some overthrow by the injury of the heavens.

The manner of ordering and dressing of them to make them grow, is (as it were)
like unto that of the Napes. It is true, that they would be sown very thick,
and not thin, for else they will prove but very small and little, and it
would be r^^her in September than at (...) other time, in a moist ground, well
manured, and diligently corrected of such faults as it may have, because they
rejoice and (...)* great deal the fairer, and of a better taste, in cold,
snowie, and foggie weather, (...) they do in fair: which is the only cause
that in the Country of Sauoy and (...) they do grow more sweet, tender,
fair, and great, because of the Fogs, Snowe^, and cold Seasons that they
suffer much in those places. If they be sown in the Spring time, there must
care be had, that their leaves be not ^aten with worms and such other vermin:
and the better to free them from this pl^gue, it will be good to mingle of the
dust that is to be found upon floores with the seed (...) they before it be
sown, or else of the foot of the furnace or (...): or else to steep it in the
juice of housl^^ke, and afterward to sprinkle it over well with water (...) it
may receive some moisture: and then to ^ow it the day after it has been so
steeped.

It is one of the wonders of nature, Turnep seed is veri^ small. Fair turnips.
that of so small a ^eed there should grow so great a fruit, as should sometime
weigh thirty or forty poun^. There must sp^ciall car^ be had that the seed be
not above three years old: for if it be it will bring forth col^worts in steed
of turnips. To have them fair and great, after they become (...) great as a
finger, they must be removed a good distance one from another: afterward they
must be covered with earth, The keeping of turnips.
and trodden down veri^ hard: for by this (...) the juice which should have
been spent in putting forth of leaves and stalk, will turn to the making of
the root great. They must be gathered in November, and for to keep them all
the Winter, they must be buried in holes, or covered with leaves, or seed of
Mustard.

The use of turnips is not very good for health, The virtues of turnips.
notwithstanding their decoction is very excellent good for to wash the feet
of such as have the gout withal. The Cutlers and Armorers do constantly
affirm, that knives, daggers, and swords, quenched three or four times, when
they are in forging, in the juice of turnips, mixed with equal quantity of the
water or juice pressed out of earth worms bruised, does make their edge so
hard, as that therewith you may cut iron as easily as any Lead.

CHAP. XXXIIII.
Of Radishes.
RAdishes Radishes.
are properly the same which is called in Latin Raphanus, in Italy Ra^anels,
and at Paris Raues, they are used in manner of a salad^ with meat for to stir
up the appetite. They grow better when they are planted, than when they are
sown, and there are two seasons to set or sow them in, that is to say, in
February in the waine of the Moon, if we intend to have the benefit of them
in the Spring: and in August or September, if we would use them sooner: and
this season without doubt i^ the better, because the Radish in a cold and moist
time grows in the root, and is more tender, but in a hot and dry time it
grows in stalks and leaves. So soon as they are sown they take root, the
leaves whereof you must tread and trample down, that so the root may grow the
greater, which otherwise would run up all into leaves: likewise they must be
gather^d within two or three months (otherwise they will quickly go to seed)
and put them in the ground under sand or gravel after you have cut off their
leaves. The manner of ordring of them is to set them good and deep in earth
which is well husbanded, stirred up even from the bottom and dunged, and after
they be pretty great ones, to co^er them again with earth, and to take off
their leaves from them, for so they will become more sweet and pleasant. You
must not plant or sow them abo^^ vines or arbours: for they are great enemies
unto vines, as making them to run out their juice, when they are neighbors to
it, by reason of their acrimonie and (...). Some likewise say, Radishes (...)*
Sweet radishes.
that radishes do keep away drunkenness, because they greatly weaken the
force of Wine. To have sweet radishes, their seed must be watered oftentimes
with salt water, to have them the more tender, and not so sharp: for the salt
water does greatly diminish their bitterness: likewise we ordinarily (...)
that they are eaten with salt and vinegar. Good radishes.
Their goodness is known by their leaves, which by how much they are the
gentler in handling, by so much is the root the tenderer and more pleasant to
eat. The rind does likewise show the sa^e: for the thinner it is, so much the
more delightsome are the radishes.

Physicians do hold, that among other discommodities, the radish is an enemy
unto the teeth* and they make hard and stony places in the mouths of such as
use them: but this inconvenience may be amended, if presently after you eat
some certain slips of Hyssope or Thyme, or Organie: or if they be eaten with
oil: and again, in stead of this one discommoditie, they bring a thousand
profits for the health of mankind. The roots of radishes being new, chopped
small, and sprinkled with white wine that is neat and warmed in a frying-panne,
and applied unto the stomach, canseth a man to piss abundantly the water
which he could not avoid of a long time: the juice of the same root drunk to
the quantity of two ounces with Malmesey, works the like effect: take an
ounce of the rindes of radishes, as much of the lea^es of Mercury, four
grains of saffron, one dram of sweet Cassia, and two drams of the juice of
sauin, poune them all together in a mortar, and put them in a linen cloth,
which being put up into the matrix is a singular remedy to help them that
tra^ell of childbirth. Tr^^ell of child b^^th.
The juice of the root of radishes, mixed with oil of sweet or bitter almonds,
a little white wine, and a little coloquintida, all heated at the fire and
strained, and afterward dropped into the ears, N^ise of the ^ares.
does take away the windiness and noise of the ^ares: being drunk with honied
water, it cures the jaundise. The leaves boiled in pottage in stead of
coleworts, do take away the obstructions of the liver and spleen. Their seed
bruised and strayned with white Wine, is sovereign against all (...) of
poisons and other dangerous diseases. The roots eaten fasting do preserve and
keep^ a man from venime and poison. The ill (...) wine.
Some hold it for a certain truth, that turnips (...) in stinking and
ill-sauouring wine, does take away altogether the ill taste thereof. They wipe
away the spots Spots.
of the face, heal the places of the body raced with the twigs of rods, and
cover the places with hair which are bare and should not. But above all the
rest, the^e is no more certain a remedy for the grief of the reins, the
stone, Gravel and (...).
gravel, or difficulty to make water, than to drink evening and morning
going into bed, or coming out of it, a small draught of white Wine warm,
wherein have been sleeped the space of eight hours, the rindes of radishes,
with the fourth part of the kernels of medlars made in powder. For the same
matter there may be provided a Wine to use a long time, wherein has been
infused a certain time the powder of the roots of radish dried. I cannot
forget to set down, that the often using of radishes brings unto nurses
great store of milk. And that water how stinking soever it be, (...).
wherein radishes have been boiled, will become better, and the they may not
be eaten in the later end but at the beginning of meat, whatsoever (...),
pleases Dioscortdes to say, that so they may go presently out of the stomach,
and nothing hinder the digestion of the rest of the meat.

CHAP. XXXV.
Of Parsneps, Mypes, Carrets, and Skirworts.
PArsneps, Parsneps.
Mypes, Mypes.
Carrets, Carrets.
and Skirworts, Skirworts.
are sown all after one fashions, in a ground well dug, freed from stones,
cleansed and scoured from all weeds, and unprofitable roots, being also manured
and rilled well before: they may not be sown thick, that so they may grow the
longer and thicker* They must be watered as soon as they be sown, and if the
time prove dry, once a week, so long as till they be well sprung up. They are
set also after one and the same fashion: The time to sow or plant them, is in
Aut^mne, and in the Spring: but Autumn is the better, that so you may have
them in Lent time. He that desires to have their roots great, fair, and
thick, must often pluck away the^ leaves: they must be gathered half a year
after they be sown, and then their leaves taken from them, and they kept under
sandy gravel, especially in Winter: for (...) causes them to corrupt.

P^rs^eps may be kept a whole year or two in the earth, so as that one may
know by the falling of the flowers, both the old and the new and which are good
in Winter and Lent, whether they be fried or otherwise.

All of them have virtue to expel urine, The vert^^s.
to assuage the pain of the colicke, and to provoke women's terms: their
leaves stamped and laid upon wounds which happen in the legs, are very
profitable for them.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Of Mustard and Poppie.
SEnuie Mustard delights in a fat ground, The goodness of Mustard.
and is ^owen with mould^, before and after Winter, and it, must be often
weeded and watered, bu^ it would not be sown too thick: for it spreads very
easily, insomuch as it is hard to destroy it where it has been once sown:
the seed will keep (...) year, but the newer that it is, so much the better
it is, either to sow or ^at. It is discerned to be good, when being broken or
cracked with the teeth, it appears green within, but not white: for and if it
be white, it is old and not worth any thing, either to sow or eat. That which
is intended to be kept to eat, shall be good to be removed when it is growing:
for so it will yield a greater and fairer top: but that which is intended to
use for seed, must not be removed or have his place and habitation changed.

The seed of Mustard chawed, The ^ertues of Mustard.
and holden under the tongue, is of great force against the pal^ey of the
tongue, as also against all other manner of palsy, if upon the grieved part
there be applied a bag full of the said seed, having been first boiled in
Wine. The powder thereof cast into the nosthrils causes ne^sing, and purges
the brain from superfluities. The decoction of Senuie or Mustard does assuage
the toothache coming of a cold cause, and being drunk breaks the stone, and
provoke the terms of women. It keeps the hair clean, and from falling.
The oyl^ of Mustard is sovereign against the ach of the hips, and weakness of
the sinews. Mustard seed brayed and put into sweet wine, preserves the same in
his sweetness, so that it shall not loose it, the reason is, because it keeps
it from taking of a heat* the same made in powder and mixed with vinegar, does
heal the stingings of serpents and scorpions: being drunk, it overcomes the
venime of Mushromes that have (...) eaten: mingled with the urine of a young
child, and rubbed upon the bellies of such as have the dropsy, it causes them
to avoid water: of you temper it with water, and rub your hand or any other
part that has need to be made clean therewith: you shall perceive the benefit
thereof. The white poppie, which is sometimes used in pottage and cleansed
barley, carts, and other confections for to quench the thirst, provoke sleep,
and cool the great heat of agues, never grows of his old root, but will be
sown every year in September, in hot and dry countries: and in other plac^^
from January until March, and it is sown commonly with colewor^s. It
prosp^et^ best when it is sown in places where the crops of vines have been
burned. I ha^^ seen at Vandeuer, a small village in Burgundy, young children
and other folk to eat the seed of white poppie, for lickorishnes, without
being any thing moved to heaviness of sleep, but made more stirring and
lively, which has made me to (...) that the seed of Poppie is not so much to
be feared, as some would bear in hand.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Of Cucumbers.
CVcumbers are sown upon a bed, in the month of March: and for fear of srost
they are covered with straw until mid-May, which is the time when they would
be removed unto such ground as is well manured and thick laid with dung, fat,
and soft, to the end they may be suffered to creep and ripen upon the ground:
or else upon beds, filled with fat and well (...) earth, being a foot high. For
to sow them there must be planted four or five seeds, the one from the other
some two foot, they must not be weeded at all, because they thrive the better
when they be ouer-growne with weeds. Notwithstanding (...) Spain they use to
weed them as carefully as they can, as also lighten and raise the^^ earth, and
there grow very fair Cucumbers thereupon. It is good to water the^^ often,
until they put forth their buds, and bring forth fruit, yea and after also, if
the time fall out somewhat dry: for the Cucumber of his own nature does love
moisture, insomuch as if there be set a vessel full of water under a Cucumber,
it will be found the next day to be shrunk three fingers, and it must be
provided that the water go directly down unto the root of the Cucumber,
without touching the fruit, because otherwise it would make it worse. It is
true, that when it begins to ripen, the rain, and ^uerie other manner of
watering is enemy unto it, for thereby it becomes but more withered, without
any taste, and altogether discontenting. It fears the thunder and lightning,
and for that cause you must not pla^^ them in any such time, neither yet hope
for any great increase thereof, in such years, as wherein such storms and
tempests fall out: for thereupon they wither and fall quite away to nothing. If
a man desire to have them fair ones, he must gather them in the full of the
Moon, for at this time they grow big, and at other times they fade and grow
less. (...)
Furthermore, there may not come near unto their bed, any vessel full of
oil, because the cucumber of all other things hates oil, and cannot thrive
if he which does till them, have handled oil.

The use of Cucumbers is altogether hurtful, because the nourishment and juice
coming of them is easily corrupted in the veins, The virtues of the cucumber.
whereupon there grow in (...) bodies Burning-Agues, and such as are very hard
to c^re: wherefore it is better to appoint them for meat for Mules and Asses,
to which kind of beasts this fruit is very pleasant and profitable, than to
ordain them for men's food and sustenance. It is very true that their seed
boiled with Barley-water does provoke urine, assuage the heat of the reins,
and also diminish the heat and thirst that is in Agues. A decoction made with
the seed of Cucumbers, Winter-Cherries, Mallows, and the seeds of white
Poppie, adding thereto the juice of Licorice, a little Mummia, Gum-arabecke,
and Tragacanth, is a singular remedy for them which are in consumptions, which
cough continually, and have their urine burning them. So^^ likewise say, that a
Cucumber placed long-wise, near unto a child which has an Ague, being of the
same greatness that the child is, does deliver it altogether from the Ague.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Of Gourdes.
GOurdes Gourdes.
do crave the like earth, and ordering, or tillage that Cucumbers do,
foreseen that they have the Sun at command: it is true, that they must be
sown with greater distances, and in such sort as they may climb stakes,
heaps of stone, and arbours, thereby to give some pleasure in the beholding of
the fruit hanging, rather than the lying upon beds: for they delight not so
much in creeping upon the earth as the Cucumber does, but rather to climb on
high.

Before you set them, you must steep their seeds one night in water, The
goodness of the seed.
that so you may learn to make the better choice of them, and to know which
are good. And in that respect it will be good to take those which sink down
to the bottom, and let alone those which shall swim upon the top of the water,
as being unprofitable and worth nothing to sow. The seeds shall be put into the
earth two together, the sharp end upward, in holes wide and deep, to the
quantity of two foot, and three or four foot every one from another, filled
with old dung, that is very small: or else to make them spring out of the
earth the sooner, with horse dung as it comes all hot from the stable: for
other matters they crave no great attendance, provided that they be served with
water to their contentment: and yet those which are least wa^ered, will have
the most pleasant savor and taste: wherefore if they be sown in a dry ground,
you must set hard by them, pots of water with lists of cloth or straw hanging
at them, which will be continually dropping of water upon them, which thing
will be great advantage to them during the great heat. It is certain that the
goodness and fairness of Gourds does consist altogether in the good choice
and well setting of the seed: for the seeds which are next to the neck of the
gourd, do bring forth long ones, those which are in the midst, round ones:
and those which are by the sides, short and thick ones: in which consideration
if you would have gross and thick gourds, which may serve to make vessels
and bottles of, when they shall be dry, you must take the seed that is in the
midst of the gourd, and set it with the head downward: but when you desire to
have them to sell and to eat, you must take of the seed next unto the neck,
and set them after the right and common manner: for so the fruit will grow
long, and more tender, and of a greater price. The gourds intended to gather
seed of for to sow, must not be gathered before Winter, and when they are
gathered, they must be put in the Sun to dry, or else hung up in the smoke,
or else hung (as the manner is in France) under some chamber-floore, or else
set them in rows voon boards, for otherwise the seeds would rot: or else to put
them in heaps of corn, which will not only keep them from rotting, but will
also ripen them if they be gathered being yet unripe: but those which are
intended to be eaten, must be gathered at their due time when as they be ripe.

The use of Gourds The virtues of Gourd^s.
is not so dangerous as those of Cucumbers: so that their waterishnes^e be
tempered with things meet and sit for the same, as with saffron, pepper, and
other such aromaticall powders: and for the dish, those which are long and
white are better, and to be preferred before either of the other two sorts.
Physicians are of opinion, that there is nothing better to assuage the heat of
hot burning agues, to take away the thirst, and to loosen the belly, then to
use oftentimes the strayned juice of Gourds stewed without liquor, in a new
earthen pot, set in an oven. There is nothing better for the dryness of the
tongue, for sharp and burning humors, and for lea^e agueish persons, than the
use of the pulpe of Gourds, or the Syrope made of their juice.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Of Melons and Pompions.
MElons and Pompions Melons and P^^pions.
do not so easily grow in this Country, because they delight in a Country
and Air that is hot: but by force of labor, and cunning skill, they are
drawn unto it, by ordering their beds, and removing of them, where they may be
shielded from the Cold, and rece^^e the benefit of the South Sun, and reflexe
of the heat of the same from some wall. And again, it is a special
furtherance and helping of them forward, to forecast, that they may grow in
such seasons as are very hot: for now and then Summer falls out (...)
variable, and mixed with cold or drought, or moisture, as that thereupon they be
(...) ripe till Autumn, and toward the time of Vintage. Wherefore it stands
you upon to hasten them and help them forward with dung, and with the heat of
their beds; though this course, in the mean time, stand not so well with the
health of the parties that shall eat them, or with the goodness and pleasant
smell of the Pempions: and thereupon it comes, that there are more grounds
planted with Cresses than with Melons amongst us. Wherefore it were better to
reserve for such use* quarter of ground, or thereabouts, in some place of your
Garden where the South Sun lies, and is beaten back by some wall, the same
also keeping away the North wind, having no shadow either of Trees, or of any
other thing, to keep^ back the Sun from it, but being withal a good, fat,
and substantial ground, well weeded, well tilled, and the green swarth well
broken, and withal made very le^ell and even. And this your quarter would be
again divided into four small quarters: and to set your Melon seeds which you
intend to plant that year but in one of the said little quarters, letting the
other three r^st, and so succ^ssiuely, in succeeding years, to low the said
little quarters one after another: for then the Melons wi^ grow in their
natural goodness and perfection; it being their nature to crave a new,
rested, and well manured ground. And if it be requisite to help such ground
wi^^ some sweetness, you must burn upon it in Winter some Straw, or dry
Dung, (...) some Elder tree amongst other wood, and mix the ashes with the
earth, to the end, that during the time of Winter it may grow in season. And if
the said ground (...) need of more help, it must be dunged with Sheep dung,
or else with Goats dung well rotted; and this to be done a long time before you
intend to sow your Melo^ seed: for as for Horse or Cow dung, it must not be
used, except it be when no other thing can be gotten; and when it is used, it
must be spread and mixed with the earth long before Seed-time, as has been
said: whereby we may judge, how vnf^^ the beds, now ada^es used, are for to
yield good Melons: and they that would have them grow upon beds, as lesle
damnifying, must make their beds in the said place of the Garden, compassed
about and hemmed in with a Mat: and upon the bed must be cast a layer of the
best and fattest earth that you can find, or of earth the thickness of three
fingers, and in this earth to set your seeds; for the Melon will not be so much
spotted with the dung, when there is a mixture of the one and the other* You
must take the seed of the Melon, which has a thick and hard husk, and
looking very green within, which is of the first grown, and of those which
grow nearest unto the root, which you shall have reserved in your Melon plot,
until the full ^ipenesse thereof, that so you might have others grow of it;
for the seed is better when it is now taken out of the Melon, having been all
that while, from the gathering time, kept in the body and substance thereof.
And if you would have it to grow very quickly, sleep it in warm water six
or seven hours: afterward, abo^^ the tenth day of March, make your pits upon
your beds, some three or four foot one from another, and two foot in depth and
wideness: and if you may make yo^^ choice of dung, then fill them up with
Sheep or Goats dung that is old, well rotted, and crumbly, and with very fine
black earth together, and herewith to fill them up within two ^ingers. Some
put therein the dung of horses coming hot from the stable, to make them put
forth the sooner, but the savor and goodness of the Melon is greatly hindered
thereby: and thereupon prick six or ten seeds of your pompions, the sharp end
downward (although some put not in above four or five) and cover them again
gently without much beating or treading of the earth down upon them.
Afterward, for to avoid danger of frosts, cover them with straw or mats borne
up with sticks pricked up one way: or if you have the benefit of great boards,
or tables of boards, borne up with stones or rubbish by the way, that so they
may not presle upon them, and that so you may take them up when the Sun
shines hot, and lay them down again when the cold wind blows and when
frosts come. And as soon as the Melons shall have put forth leaves big
enough, you must water them with a shred of cloth hanging continually in a pot
of water, without wetting of the Melon any whit at all, and this watering must
be continued in a very dry ground, though you have removed your Melons, till
the fruit become of the bigness of Oranges: and if you use beds, you shall
remove them after mid-May in this country, out of the danger of frosts, about
five or six foot one from another, upon a border well tilled and manured. And
from that time forward, you shall weed out diligenetly all the weeds from about
them, and shall lighten their earth at the trunk of the root, without doing any
hurt to it: and when the flower shall peep out, you must cut off the ends of
the arms of the hea^ be, to the end that the flower and the fruit may come
forth in greater store and abundance. And for your better choice of the said
seed, take that which is of the Melons first put fo^th (as I have already
said) i^ so be that your melon plot do bring forth the fruit somewhat late,
for otherwise it will be good to take them that come forth last: as also that
which grows betwixt the middle and head, or crown of the melon, and out of
it, not that which is on that side whereupon the Melon lies, the best seeded,
and most rising from the earth, being heavy and full; and you may make trial
of it in water, because that such seed will sink down to the bottom: and it
must not be above one year old, for if it be, it soon grows sick, and
casts his fruit in untimely sort.

Pompions and Melons The gathering of Melons.
must be gathered in the morning before Sun rise, and they must be gathered
when as they begin to cast their tail, and yield a pleasant smell at their
ends, and then you must beware of and look to Cats that go a catterwauling:
and if you would carry or send them far, you must gather them a little
before they be ripe, and with the hand only without any edge-toole, for they
will come so their just and perfect ripeness by this course, which the cutting
with an iron would keep them from: there must notwitstanding care be had that
those which are called Winter Pompions, be never suffered to ripen upon their
beds, but for to ripen them they must be gathered and hung up under the floor
of some higher room, and when they are once turned yellow to eat them.

Furthermore, that I may say something of their goodness, The goodness of
Melons.
you must understand that there are diverse sorts of Pompions, for there are
some female, and are called pompionets and they are more long than the other,
and have not their wrinkles standing up so high: the other be more thick and
greater bellied, and have their wrinkle^ more high and stretched out from the
tail unto the eye. Some of them are called Turquins, as those which have a
very green color, and drawing somewhat toward a black: some other of them
have the shape of a Quince, and they are properly called Melons, and have a
more fast and solid flesh than the pompions have, which likewise have not so
many wrinkles in their sides, nor so much moisture in their nollow parts,
neither ye are they so thick, but have a whitish flesh, and a great deal
more seed than the pompions. The other sort may be called citruls, as having
the fashion and color of a citron, and their leaves diue^sly drawn with many
small lines, like unto the feathers or wings of birds* The other are Winter
pompions, and these are not so thick or great as the common pompions: and yet
furthermore the one has a white meat, and the other a yellow, whereupon the
first do crave more water than the later, and the later are better in a
strange Country. But the Melons are best of all, as also the black coated
Pompion, and the Musk Melon, (...).
which become so by h^uing their seed steeped in water that is well sweetened
with sugar or honey. The sign of a good Melon is the bitterness of the tail,
the hardness of the crown, the hea^^nesse and good smell of the whole.

As concerning their use, The ^ertues of Melons.
they are somewhat more delicate and pleasant than C^cu^bers, so that they have
a fast meat, and their hollownesse dry: for otherwise they are fitter to make
meat for Cats that go a catterwauling, or for Mules and Asse^ to make them
fat, tha^ for to feed men withal: notwithstanding this is a thing well and
sufficiently proved, Melons cause (...) to (...).
that a slice of a melon or pompion put in a pot with flesh, causes it to
boil the sooner. Physicians likewise give it out for a truth, that the seed as
well of melons as of Pompions, cousred with sugar, or without sugar, is a
sovereign remedy to provoke urine, to asewage the heat of the reins, and to
break the stone.

CHAP. XL.
Of certain special observations for and about Cucumbers, Citrons, Gourds,
Melons, and such like fruits.
IF the border whereon you set your Melons be not so fat nor well dunged as
that of the Cucumber and Gourd, and if it be not watered so soon as it is put
forth and sprung, it becomes the faster meat, and more (...), and sooner ripe.

To cause Pompions, Cucumbers, and Gourds to grow without seed, Pompions,
Gourd^, and Cucumber* without seed.
you must steep your seeds in the oil of Sesamum, otherwise called Turkey
millet, three days before you sow them.

To have Cucumbers of such form and fashion as one would wish, they must be
put whiles they be yet young and small, together with their stalk, into
vessels or bottles that have some figure or shape drawn within them, and tie
them about them, for in time they will fill up the draughts and prints within
the same: likewise to make them long* you must put their flowers into reeds,
thoroughly emptied of their pi^h* for then the Cucumber will grow all along: or
else to set near unto them some v^^sell full of water, as namely about half a
foot off: for (as I have said) cucumbers (...) moisture so well, as that upon
the only standing by of water, they will grow the more, and become longer: in
like sort stands the case with the Gourd.

For their better and greater growth, For the helping forward of their growth.
you must sow them in cases or pots, or other great vessel^ full of sifted and
well manured earth, which may be carried and rolled or drawn from one place to
another into the Sun, that so it may have both the presence of the Sunshine
and absence of the cold winds and frosts, and when they begin to grow, break
off their ends.

To free them of vermin and lice, sow Organie round about them, or else pric^^
some boughs amongst their plants.

To make that a Cucumber or Melon shall have no water, A Cucumber without water.
fill the pit that yo^ have dug to plant your seeds, half full of straw, or
the shutes of vines cut (...) small and put upon the earth, and afterward your
seed: and do not water them (...) all, or else very little.

To make melons or cucumbers laxatiue, (...).
sprinkle them five days together, (...) five times ^uerie day with water,
wherein has been steeped and infused the (...) wild Cucumber for the space of
three days. Otherwise, uncover them so soon (...) they have put forth any
budd, and dung them at the foot with about two ounces of black Hellebor steept
in water, and afterward cover them again. Otherwi^^, steep the seed before
you sow it three days in the infusion off cammonie, or (...) or Agaricke, or
some other purging medicine.

To make Pompions sweet Sweet Pompions.
and smell well, so soon as you have taken out the core and wiped and dried
the seed, put it amongst dry Roses, or some grains of Musk, and there ke^pe
it until you must sow it, and if it so like you, sow them together: or else
steep the seed four days before you sow it in damask or sweet water: by
such means you may give them such taste and smell as you please, if you steep
their seed before you sow it in any such liquor, as in Honied-vvater, in
Rose-vvater, or in some other kind of water sweetened with Sugar or Musk:
notwithstanding watering of them does take from them a great deal of that
smell, as also of their savor and taste.

To make Cucumbers or Pompions sugared, Suger-Mel^^s.
you must steep the seed in water that is well sweetened with Sugar or Honey,
and to make them sweet in Sheep milk, or Honied water, and so sow them: and
when they be grown, you must sprinkle them over with the dust of some dry
earth, and water them a little.

To make Pompions to keep long, Lasting Po^pions.
and not to be spoiled or rotted, you must sprinkle them with the juice of
Housleeke.

A woman having her terms, A woman in her t^rmes makes Pompions dry and di^
To keep Cucumbers fresh a long time.
and walking by the borders of Pompions, Gourds, and Cucumbers, causes them to
dry and die: but and if any of the fruit e^cape it will be bitter.

Cucumbers endure fresh a long time, if they be put in the sweet lees of wine,
or else in brine, or if they hang in a vessel wherein there is a little
vinegar.

Pompions Pompions smeling like Roses*
will have the smell of Roses, if their seed be mingled with dry Roses, and
afterward sown together: and then also they are excellent good to quench the
thirst in burning agues.

CHAP. XLI.
Of Strawberries.
STrawberries Strawberries*
have no need of great toil or tilling, so that they be planted in some good
ground not manured, notwithstanding, but well shaded howsoever: because they
delight greatly in the shadow of other herbs, so also they are found growing
amongst great tall trees, without any manner of husbanding or tillage. It is
true that they grow well in the open Sun, so that they be watered once or twice
a week, especially when they begin to look red: they must be removed every
three years, to make them bear fair berries, and their earth raised about
them once every year, and that about Christ-tide, and to weed them by hand
when as weeds do ouergrow them: in the ground whither you remove them, you
must first put horse-dung well rotted, or cowes dung, a scuttle full to every
border that is three foot broad: dress this ground in a dry time, and let it
lie afterward, and in a moist time, but not rainie, you shall set the
Strawberries half a foot every way, thrusting the earth close to the root
with a dibble. In these you may observe a certain kind of wonderful
harmelesnesse and innocence: which although they creep upon the earth, and be
continually trodden upon by Adders, Lizards, Snakes, and other venomous beasts,
are notwithstanding never infected with them, neither get they any venomous
savor, which shows that they have no ^ffinitie with ven^me or poison.

Amongst other pleasures or commodities that they afford, the juice or wine
that (...) strained from strawberries, The ^ertues of Strawberries.
is good to take away the red pimples* and itching knobs, which grow in the
face by the heat of the liver, as also to take away the rednes^e of the eyes,
and to wipe out the spots and knobs of the Leprosy. Likewise the decoction of
the roots and leaves of Strawberries made with wine, is singular good for the
(...), if it be drunk for some time in the morning, as also to provoke the
terms in women; and this nevertheless does stay the white terms and bloody
(...) used in form of a Gargari^^e, it comfort the gums and teeth, and
(...) rheumes.

Of Physic Herbs.
CHAP. XLII.
Of Mallows.
WE have heretofore dedicated and appointed certain borders downe^^low the
Kitchen garden, (...).
near unto the wall of the orchard for Physic herbs, whereof we desire and
wish that the huswife may have (...) knowledge, thereby to help the
nec^ssities of her people. And in (...) respect it shall not be ^hought
strange, if we touch in a word the dressing and (...) of some few, such as are
most usual and familiar amongst women, leaving (...) and exact description of
them unto such as make profession thereof: for (...) drift of my purpose is, to
instruct the Farmer and his wife, or her that is the (...) and Dairie-woman, so
much as is needful for the maintenance of their house and f^milie But we will
begin with Mallows, as those that are most in use.

Mallows Mallows.
notwithstanding that they grow every where, yet if you be disposed (...) sow
them* you may do it most commodiously in Autumn, rather than at any other
time, to the end their growth on height may be repres^ed by the coming of
Wi^ter: for by how much the Mallow is the less, by so much it is the better.
They lo^ a fat and moist earth, and crave to be removed after they have put
forth four or (...) leaves: though indeed it would be much the better not to
remove them at all, (...) they will keep a better relish: but to the end they
should not grow up into high and great stalks, alter that they be come forth
of the earth, you must put some (...) brick in the mid^est of their leaves.
They would be often wed, and when they (...), if their leaves be t^ed together at
the end, they will bring forth a well (...) and thick set root.

The root of Mallows ste^pt in Wine a whole day, and afterward wrapped in a
(...), and roasted under the ashes and dried, is a fine medicine to rub the
teeth with^^ and to cleanse and scowre off from them the filth gathered thick
about them (...) juice drunk to the quantity of half a pound, o^ the
decoction of the (...) leaves coming to a certain thick con^^stence, is
exceeding good for w^men (...) are in travel of child birth. It is singular
also for many other things, and therefore is called of some Omnimorbia.

Hollihocks (...).
crave the like husbanding and tillage that the Mallows do, (...) they are of
the same kind, and in both of them, especially in the Mallows, we (...)
observe as a miraculous thing, that their leaves and flower do open at the
appro^d and coming of the Sun, and shut up themselves to go to bed when it
(...) do the Marigolds.

Both these have very great power and virtue to mollify, The (...).
they serve also to (...) the belly, especially the young and tender crops of
Mallows have virtue to (...) swage the pain of the reins, and do cause a
man to make water. The juice (...) with oil do heal^ the stinging of Waspes.
The juice mingled with (...) does help women travailing of child birth. Their
lea^es stamped with the (...) of willows do stay inflammations. A cataplasme
made of their leanes, does (...) way the hardnes^e of the mother and other
parts, especially if it be made of (...) with oil of Roses.

Gentian (...).
grows in high places and open to the air, being notwithstanding (...) and
somewhat ouershadowed. This herb through his bitterness draws down the
terms and the stayed urine: The water thereof, especially of the root, being
distilled through a Limbecke in Maries-bath, does maruailously heal the Agues
caused of the obstructions of any noble part: and which is more, it kills the
worms, and wipeth away all the spots of the face, it they be often washed
therewith. It is exceeding good against the inflammation of the eyes. It is
very sovereign against any infection or mortal sickness, if it be drunk
with Water and Honey it abateth the swelling of the body, and eases the
colicke, whether it be in the stomach or in the bowels, it also cures the
biting or stinging of venomous beasts, and it causes a woman to be delivered
of her dead birth.

The root is a present remedy against the Plague, not only in men, but also
in all ^orts of cattle: it is a special preservative against all poison, and
a means to withstand all putrefaction: in regard whereof, the Switzers mingle
it amongst their own meat, and the sodder or prouender of their cattle, that
so they may continue in good health.

Arsmart Arsmart.
(so called because the leaves applied to the fundament for to wipe it, do
cause great pain, and of the Latins Hydropiper) does require a marshie ground
full of water, or at the least very moist, or often watered, and it grows
rather being planted of a root then sown of seed.

It is very singular in ointments for old ulcers and fistulaes, as also in
clysters for bloody fluxes: the leaves thereof washed in cold water, and
applied unto wounds and ulcers either of man or beast, do take away by and by
the pain thereof, and does thoroughly heal them, as the swellings or gauls
under the saddles of horses that (...) hurt, if they be renewed every day, and
the horse needs not to be forborne for all that. Or else take the herb new,
steep it in water, and wash it, then rub therewith the swollen or gauled place,
then put the herb in some place where it may quickly rot, or else bury it in
some fat ground, and co^er it with a great stone; so soon as the ^hearbe is
rotted, so soon will the fore be healed.

If you spread it all green in the bed, it kills fleas, you shall keep
powdered proke from worms, if you wrap it in the leaves of this herb: the
juice thereof dropped into wormie ears, does kill the worms that is in them.

Eyebright Eyebright.
delights in a lean ground, and shadowed place, and yet where moi^ture is
not altogether wanting, such as are the meadows and little mountains; is
grows of roots, not of seed. It is singular good against the dimnesse,
waterishnesse, ^ataract, rheum, and weakness of the eyes, being either
applied and laid thereto, or taken inwardly by the mouth: there is a powder
made of ^he dried leaves, which being often taken by the mouth with the yolke of
an egg, or alone, or mixed with aloes* and swallowed down with Fennell-water,
or with water of veruai^e, does comfort and strengthen mightily the weak and
diseased eyes: some use much to take Win^ wherein eyebright has been infused
and steept a long time for the same purpose* or the powder used with wine, but
the powder alone, or the decoction without wine* (...) a remedy far more
certain, than the wine of eyebright, as I my self have proved ^y experience,
in as much as the Wine by his vapors does fill the brain* and pro^ureth
rheumes: and therefore if you would avoid these inconuenienees, you must ^elay
your Wine with the water of Fennel, or mix Sugar therewith. (...) de
^illa-no^a a^^irmeth, that by the continual use of this he^healed an old man
which ^^ad already wholly lost his sight; by the often use of the leaves of
this herb as well (...) as dry, as well in his drink as in his meat.

Veruaine, (...).
as well the male as the female* must be planted of roots in a moist soil, and
that it may grow the fairer, it requires to be removed, and that into a place
of ^he like nature and quality.

Besides the helps that this herb affords unto vveake eyes, it is also
good against the pain of the head, teeth, and ulcers of the mouth, and
principally in the ^^fections of the skin, as the itch, the tetter, the
flying-fire, the ring-worme, the ^prosie, the Gangrena, and Shba^lus, if it b^
used in manner of a bath (...) in manner of a fo^entation made with F^mitorie
in Water and Vinegar.

Elicampane (...).
must not be sown of seed, because the seed has no power to (...) but it must
rather be planted of the young sprouts pulled gently from the (...) that in a
very well tilled ground, and which has been manured, not very (...) yet
ouershadowed. It is good to plant it in the beginning of February, leaving
(...) foot distance betwixt plant and plant, for it has great leaves, and the
roots do (...) very much, as do the young sprouts or roots of Reed.

The Wine wherein the root of Elicampane The virtues of Elicampane.
has steept for the space of four^ (...) twenty hours, is singular good
against the colicke, as we have alread^e said in (...) first book: the juice
of the root is singular good to continue and keep the (...) and beautiful hew
of women. The decoction of the root is likewise good (...) ^^joyce the heart,
and to provoke urine, and the terms of women, as also to (...) to spit out,
but then it must be used inwardly, and whiles it is new and green: (...) when
it is old and dry, it is fit to be used outwardly, and not to be taken into
(...) body.

Dittander Dittander.
which has the taste of pepper and mustard (for which cause it is (...) of the
Latins Piperitis) must be planted before the first of March, cut as the (...),
but not so often, for fear it should die with cold. It will continue two (...),
provided that it be carefully weeded and dunged: it continues in many (...)
whole ten years* and it cannot easily be destroyed.

The root of Dittander The virtues of Dittander.
stamped with Hogs-g^ease, or with the root of (...), and applied in form of a
catapla^me unto the Sciatica, does cure it thoroughly. It takes away the great
spots, freckles, and scales, or pilling of the face by (...) the thin skin
wherein these are fixed, and as for the rawnesse left after the away of this
skin* it is healed easily with ointment of Roses.

Great Celandine grows in every ground, Celandine great and small.
so that there be any shadow (...)* and it would be sown in February, and may
so continue ten years, so that ^waies after it has cast his seed, the stalks
thereof be cut down within (...) of the root.

The juice of the flowers mixed with honey or woman's milk, The (...) of (...).
or some other (...) assuage the sharpness of it, does take away the spots in
the eyes, (...) scartes and vicers, heals the ring-wormes and itch of the
head, and the (...) the hair of little children. The Alchymistes do make
great account of it (...) their extractions of mettalls. Some say, that the old
Swallows do recover the (...) of their young ones being pore-blind, by
applying unto their eyes the leaves (...): some say likewise, that the lea^e of
this herb carried in the shoo^^ (...) unto the bare sole of the feet, does
heal the jaundi^e: being applied unto the (...) it takes away the abundance
of Milk: stamped together with the root in the (...) of Cammomile, and being
warmed or fried, and applied unto the navel or (...) it asswageth the
frettings of the belly, and pains of the mother: the whole (...) being d^^ed
and made in powder, does heal wounds and ulcers: the juice (...) dropped into a
rotten or hollow tooth, mortifieth it, and causes it to fall out: (...) also
the (...) called Porrum, to fall away.

The small Celandine, Little Celand^^e.
otherwise called Pilewort, or the herb for the Kings (...) because it
heal^^h the same, does grow well in warrie, moist, and shadowie (...) grows
likewise in dry places, but not so well, though there it get a more (...) as
well in his leaves as in his root virtue to heal the Kings (...) to
exulc^ration, as also other virulent ulcers, hemorrhoides, cankers, hard (...)
whether (...) or porracious and other cold tumors, by a ^oollifying and (...)
quali^^e that they have.

Asarum bacchar (...).
craves a lean ground and dry, and where there is (...) to be set than
sown. The root of Asarum being dried (...) good to be taken the weight of a
French Crown in white (...), and by this it c^reth the quartane and ^ertian
ague: and this (...) days, the quantity of a good goblet full of the
decoction of this root, made in wine with honey, putting thereto some Cinnamon,
Mace, and other such Spices, by which they purge very much, as well upward as
downward: Likewise when they feel the fit coming, they chafe the back and
soles of the feet with oil, wherein they have caused to be infused this root
in the hot Sunshine, and after lying down in bed, the shiuerings and
shakings of the Ague is taken away, and a great sweat procured. The decoction
of Asarum is good against the Sciatica: the infusion thereof in wine does cure
the Dropsy and Iaundise: the juice dropped into the corner of the eyes, does
heal the Web in the eye, and dazeling of the eyes. Many good women do apply
Asarun unto the wrists of the hands, to drive away the heat of an Ague. You
must observe (as it were) diverse parts in this herb: For the root is a
prouoker of Vomit, and the leaves thereof are Aromaticall, and agree very well
with the stomach.

Valerian Valerian.
grows very well in a moist and well manured ground, and would be often
watered, that so it may put forth a tall stalk.

The good wives are wont to apply to the wrists, in burning Agues, the leaves
of Valerian, but without reason: for the Valerian does rather increase the Ague
by his heat, than diminish it. It will be better to use it in the pains of the
sides, and in the provoking of urine, and women's terms. If you wet lin in the
juice of Valerian, and put it into any wound, made either with Arrow, or
Sword, or otherwise, and the dross or gros^e part thereof laid upon it, you
shall cause the iron to come forth, if any such be stayed behind, and so also
heal the wound. Cats do delight much to eat this herb. The decoction is
good against Venime, and the Plague: It is good also against shortness of
breath, if there be mixed therewith Licorice and Damask Raisins.

Angelica Angelica.
would be sown in a well tilled ground, oftentimes wed, and reasonably watered.

The root is sovereign against the Plague, The virtues of Angelica.
and all sorts of Poison: Whosoever shall keep a little piece of it in his
mouth, or which shall drink only in a Winter morning a little draught of Wine
and Rosewater, wherein it has been steept, The Plague.
he ^^^not be infected of any evil air of all that day. Englishmen use the
l^aues and roots of this herb in sauce with their meats, because it
corrects gross humors, and a stinking breath, and surthereth digestion
very much. The leaves of Angelica stamped with other leaves of Rue and Honey,
and applied in form of a Ca^^plasme, do heal the bitings of mad Dogs,
Against the biting of a ^ad dog.
and the stinging of Serpents: Being laid upon the head of one that has an
Ague, it draws unto it all the burning heat of the Ague; and it is good
against Sorcerie and Inchan^ment. The distilled water of Angelica it singular
good against the fainting of the Heart, the bi^ings of mad Beasts, the
stingings of venomous creatures* especially against the Plauge, if with this
^^stilled water there be drunk half a dram of the root in powder, and a
dramm^ of Treacle, and that afterward the patient give himself to sweating,
for by this means many have been saved. The root put into a hollow tooth,
assuageth the pain: being ^^^wed, it makes the breath sweet and concea^eth
and small of Garlic, or any other (...) meat which causes an ill breath.

Blessed thistle Blessed Thistle.
would be ordered and dressed with such manner of ^illage as Angelica. It is
true, that it would be sown in the increase of the Moon, and not about three
fingers depth in the earth. It lo^eth the compaine of Wheat (...)* It will not
be prickly* it before that you sow it you put the Seed in the roo^ (...)* the
leaves broken off: or it you break the sharp point^d end of the Seed against
a stone, after the manner spoken of before in the Chapter of (...).

Blessed thistle has no less virtue against the Plague, The virtues of
Blessed thistle.
or any other sort of Poison, ^han has Angelica, whether you use it inward or
outward. This virtue is it which drives away Moules and other kinds of such
Cattle, being hu^^full unto Garde^^, from the place where it grows. Such
(...) troubled with a Quartan^ Ague, or other Agues, which have their fits
coming with a Cold, are cured if (...) take in the morning three ounces of
Blessed thistles water, or of the decoction, (...) weight of a French crown of
the seed in powder. The same remedy is good (...) Pleurisies, and for children
that have the Falling sickness. If it be boiled in (...) the decoction is good
to assuage the pains of the reins, and colicke, to kill (...), and to provoke
sweat. Blessed thistle, as well dry as green, taken inwardly, (...)
ourwardly, does heal malign ulcers. Physicians likewise command it (...)
^mingled in decoctions and drinks for the Pocks.

Mother-wort Mother-wort.
grows in untilled and rough places, and stands not in (...) of any
tilling: notwithstanding, it is singular against the beating and fainting of
the heart; for which reason it is called of some Cardiaca. It provoke also
Women's terms: it takes away obstructions, and provoke urine: it raises
(...), delivering the Lungs thereof, by making it easy to be spet forth: It
(...) Worms: dried and made in powder, and the quantity of a spoonefull (...)
in Wine, does mightily help forward the delivery of Women laboring of
Childbirth.

Golden-rod Golden-rod.
would be sown in a fat ground, which is not open unto the he^^ of the Sun,
but has the shadows of some Trees, the top of a Mountain, (...) other such
like thing. The virtues of Golden-rod.
It has a very astringent power, as also it is very (...) by which (after
the manner of Comfrey) it heals wounds, ulcers, and fistulaes, (...) well
inward as outward: it stays rheumes and bloody fluxes, heals the (...) the
mouth, and the inflammation thereof: Which is more, it is very singular to
provoke urine, and to break the stone.

Saxifrage, Saxifrage.
as well the great as the small, delights in a dry ground, chal^^^ clayie,
sandy, stony, and altogether barren: And it is sown of small seeds* which
are found hanging to the roots thereof. It provoke urine, and so drives
forth the gravel of the reins and bladder. If you boil the root and (...)
thereof in Wine, it procures Women also their terms, and brings ou^ (...)
afterbirth.

The great and small Burre The great and small Burre.
(otherwise called Bardana, and of the Greeke^ (...)) has not need of any
great tilling: for it will grow either of seed or (...) in a lean ground, that
is dry and untilled; as we may well see in ditches, (...) it grows without
any labor at all, and in the high ways and by-p^^h ^ (...) the fields.

The roots, seeds, and juice of the great and small Burre, are very (...)
provoke urine, to break the stone of the reins and bladder, and to stay the
(...) flux. The juice is drunk with white Wine, or alone, and the seed in like
manner* which is sometimes, for the more pleasantness sake, confected or
covered with S^gar. The leaves stamped with a little salt, and applied unto the
bitings or (...) Adders, mad Dogs, or other venomous Beasts, are very
sovereign. The roots (...) seeds of small Burre, stamped and laid on cold
swellings and rebellious (...) very profitable and good.

Star-thistle, Star-thistle.
so called, because it has little heads at the tops of his stakes ((...)
Thistles have) set round about with sharp pricks, after the manner of (...)
grows in unhusbanded grounds, as well of his root as of his seed. Some do
(...) esteem of the seed, made into powder, and drunk in wine, for to provoke
(...) and to avoid gravel: and herein it is of so great virtue, as that the
much use of it (...) cause one to piss blood sometimes. The decoction of the
root with honey, after (...) manner of a honied water, does the like, but more
gently, and without (...) party for to piss blood.

Mary's Thistle (otherwise called Spina alba, L^die-thistle.
or white and silver Thistle, or (...) Artichoke, or Asse-Thistle, because that
Asses delight much to eat it) does (...) fat and well tilled ground, and other
ordering, like to that of Beets: and it (...) that it lets not to grow in
untilled and unhusbanded grounds. The seed and (...) have (as it were) the like
power to take away obstructions, to provoke urine, and it break the stone,
that Star-thistle has. The Italians use the roots thereof in Salads, after the
manner of Artichokes; and good wines, to gather the milk of it, for to eat.
Some make a Ptisane with the root of this Thistle made in powder, the seed of
Fennel, and a little long Pepper, to give to Nurses to use which have small
store of milk. The distilled water of the leaves is good against pain in the
sides, being drunk with half a dram of the seed of the same herb.

Siluer-grasse Siluer-grasse.
(so called, because the leaves do resemble silver on the backe-side) does
delight in a moist and grassie ground, howsoever unhusbanded it be. It has one
excellent property above all other herbs, for to break the stone, to heal
ulcers and malignant wounds within the body, to stay the bloody flux, and to
dissolu^ cluttered blood, being taken in drink. Some say, that if you put it
in half a basin full of cold water, and cover that basin with another basin,
or vessel, or other covering, that there will gather great store of vapors in
the hollow of the thing covering it, and will turn into the form of distilled
water, and that this water thus gathered, is very good to take away the spots,
freckles, stains, and dye of the Su^ne out of the face.

Patience does willingly grow in cool and moist grounds: Patience, or Monks
(...).
and we see it ordinarily to grow near unto Rivers and little Brooks. The
root, by reason of the great bitterness and desiccatiue power, has singular
commendation against the Plague: for being dried and powdered, and afterward
drunk with wine, it drives away all venime from the heart, by the abundance
of sweat which it procures. Some for this purpose take away the rind and core
of this root, stamping it in vinegar, and after making a drink of the vinegar,
the juice of Rue, and Treacle, for to take in pestilent Agues. The powder of
this root drunk with wine, is excellent for the suffocations of the Matrix,
and the wringing throws of the belly. This powder also kills the Worms,
heals malign Ulcers, the falling of the hair, called Tinea, and the Kibes;
the Farcie in Horses, whether it be taken inwardly, or applied outwardly,
either in juice, or in the decoction thereof.

Scabious Scabi^^^:
grows in the same ground that Patience does, that is to say, in woods,
untilled places, and especially in sandy places.

It is very proper and appropriate unto the Cough, and diseases of the Lungs:
for the same purpose also the juice is sometime extracted, sometime the herb
it self made into powder, and sometime the decoction of it is made to endure
for a long time. Likewise there is sometime conserve made of the flowers. His
leaves or roots applied to itchie places, and the places bare of hair, or
mixed with oils and ointments, do great good unto the same, as also unto
plaguie carbuncles: for they being rubbed with the juice of Scabious, will be
found to vanish away within three hours. The juice of Scabious drunk in the
quantity of four ounces, with a dram of Treacle not yet one day old, is a
singular remedy against the Plague, so that afterward the party sweat in his
bed, and withal, continue the drink for many times. The same remedy serves
for the bitings of venomous beasts, if, besides the drink, you apply outwardly
unto the soar the leaves of the same herb bruised. A Liniment made of the
juice of Scabious, the powder of Borace, and a little Camphire, is singular
against tettars, itch, freckles, and other infections or desilements of the
skin. Above all other things, the decoction of Scabious being drunk the space
of forty days, does heal the tettar thoroughly, yea, though it came of the
Pocks, as I my self have oftentimes pro^ed by experience.

Scolopendrium, or rough Spleene-wort, (...).
called also Hart's-tongue, would be planted in a stony and grauellie ground,
which is moistened with some running Brook; and for want of this, it must be
often watered. The roots thereof must never be pulled up, but only the leaves
cut: for it cannot be sown, seeing it brings forth no seed. (...).
The decoction thereof made in white wine, is very good for such (...) have a
hard Spleen, and are subject to a quartane Ague.

B^^onie (...).
delights to be sown in a moist and cold ground, and near unto some wall,
by which it may be shadowed, for it is not (...) in love with the Sunbeams.
The root has contrary properties to the leaves and flowers: for the root
(...) the stomach, and is very unsavory unto the mouth; his leaves and
flowers and of (...) ver^e good smell, and a taste correspondent and answerable.

The decoction of Betonie made in white wine, The properties of (...).
assuageth the pains of the (...), breaks the stone, and heals the
Iaundise. The leaves stamped and applied (...) form of a Cataplasme, do
quickly join together the wounds of the head. A Cataplasme made of the leaves
with Porkes grease, does ripen the tumors called C^^haires, and all other sorts
of Impostumes. The leaves stamped with a little salt, do heal hollow and
cancrous vlc^rs. To be brief, this herb has so many and so gre^^ virtues,
as that the Italian, when he would highly commend a man for his gi^^, will say,
that he has more virtues than Betonie.

Bugle would be planted in a stony, (...), or Bugle.
dry, and hilly ground; in respect whereof, the Latins call it Casolida
petrosa: It craves no great pains to be taken with (...)* The leaves thereof
are good to conglutinate and soulder together both outward and inward wounds:
it is likewise put in drinks for wounds: and that is the cause why some do
commonly say, That he that has Bugle and Sanicle, will scarce vouchs^^^ the
Surgeon a Bugle.

Lions-paw Lyons-paw.
grows in a clayish ground, being withal fat, red, and somewhat moist,
commonly in meadows, situated in some high place. It has like properties with
Bugle and Sanicle: but moreover, it takes away all the pain and heat of
inflammations and ulcers. The same herb stamped and applied unto the teats of
women and young maids makes them hard and firm.

Great Comfrey Great Comfrey.
grows in moist places, and has the same property that Bugle has, that is
to say, to soulder wounds: and this is ^o great in both of them, as (...) that
you put Bugle or Comfrey into a pot wherein flesh is boiling, the pieces of
flesh will become no more many, but one. The root of great Comfrey, whiles it
is yet green, and newly plucked out of the earth, being spread upon Leather, or
upon Linen, and applied in form of a Cataplasme upon goutie Gout.
or rheumatike places, does presently appease the pain of the gout, being a
thing often proved and tried. The same root dried and made into powder, is good
to put in children^ pappe, Ruptur^.
which have their rimme broken; as also to stay the flux of the belly* A
Cataplasme made of the root of great Comfrey with Bean flower, and applied
unto the place where the child's guts fall down, is a sovereign remedy to
cu^^ the same.

Self-heale Self-heale.
craves a fat ground, and where the Sun beats not much: it grows of
se^des, and not of roots, and has like properties that Bugle and Co^frey
have, especially to stay the spitting of blood, the bloody flux, and to
conglutinate wounds within the body (where no man can come to apply tent or
ointment) if there be made a drink of the juice of the roots and leaves
thereof, which being chafed in your fingers, or put under your tongue, does
smell and taste like Myrrh.

Water Germander Water Germander.
(called of the Latins Scordium) grows very easily, and without great pain
or toil, so that it be planted by little slippes taken from the old stalk,
and set in a moist ground: for it specially requires (to grow well) to be
pl^^ted in a moist ground, and to be often watered. It has the like qualities
that Angelica has against Poison and the Plague: The virtues of Germander.
and furthermore, the decoction thereof taken as a drink for certain days,
does heal the tertian Agues, and puts away (...) obstructions of the
Spleen, and provoke urine.

Fole-foot Fole-foot.
must be planted in a very moist place, and craves to be often watered: for
so it appears, when as it is seen to flourish and like best in marish
grounds, and about currents of waters. There grows a whirish moss^ about the
root of it, which if you gather and pick very clean, and afterward wrap it
in a Linen Cloth with a little Sal nitrum, and so boil it a little in Lee,
and afterward lay it to dry in the Sun, you shall have an excellent match to
take fire at a flint and fire-steele; for it takes fire so easily, that it
will light at the first stroke of the (...). Amongst other virtues, it is
singular good to comfort the lungs and parts above the breast, whether you take
it in a decoction, or in a syrrup, or in manner of a fume at the mouth, or
otherwise; especially if you mingle some slippes of Hysope, and some figs, or
syrrup, with the said decoction. The great Coltsfoot, especially the root
thereof, dried, powdered, and taken in the weight of two drammes with wine, is
singular against the Plague, if so the party sweat presently after. It is good
also to give unto Horses which have the bots, or are short-winded.

The great and small Carline (so called, as though it were Caroline, Carline
thistle..
because this Thistle was in a divine manner made known unto Charlemaigne by
an Angel, for the delivering of his host from the Plague, which did miserably
annoy them) does require to be sown and planted in a dry ground, and stony,
and where the Moon and Sun does shine pleasantly.

The root of the great Carline made into powder, and taken the weight of a
French crown, is singular good against the Plague, the feebleness and
faintness of the Heart, for the keeping of the Urine, the breaking of the
Stone, the pains of the Sides, and Conuulsions: applied outwardly after it
has been steept in vinegar, it helps the Sciatica.

Eringium grows in an untilled, Hundred headed thistle.
rough, and dry ground. The wine wherein the roots of Eringium Eringium.
have been boiled, provoke the Terms and restrained Urine, breaks the
Stone, and casts out it, and Gravel. It is good for such as have the falling
Sickness, Dropsy, or Iaundise. Sea-Holly
The decoction of the root is singular good to resist Drunkenness. The
distilled water of the young buds of the leaves being drunk every day, and
that so often as one can, is marvelous good for them which have their bodies
troubled with ulcers caused of the French Pocks, in as much as it comfort
the Liver. The same water is very profitable for the quartane and quotidian
Agues. The root thereof taken either in powder, or in a decoction, with the
broth of those Frogs which are used to be eaten, or for lack of Frogs, in
the decoction of a Goslin or green Goose, is a preservative against the poison
of the Toad, Hedgefrogge, and other venomous herbs. It does good also in the
diseases of the heart, being drunk with the decoction of Buglosse or Balm.

Beares-breech, Beares-breech.
called of the Latins Acanthus, grows in stony and moist places, although
it love to be diligently tended, or otherwise not to yield any profit.

The root and leaves are very mollifying: taken in drink, they provoke urine:
and applied in form of a Cataplasme, they are good against con^ulsions,
wrenches, and contractions of the ligaments: They are to good effect used in
the Clysters of them which have the Dropsy.

Diuels-bit Devils bit.
(so called, because it shows as though the middle, or the heart of the root,
were gnawed or bitten by some Devil, so soon as it is planted, or has put up
in any place; as though the Devil did envy the good which it brings unto
men by the incredible virtues that are therein) craves no great husbandry,
neither yet any fat earth, or very moist: for, as we see, it grows upon
mountains, in bushes, and places altogether barren. It is true, that it
grows also in meadows, but yet such as are not very moist. It is found in
great abundance in the meadows of Verriere, a borough near unto Paris.

The root and green leaves being stamped together, and applied unto Carbuncles
and pestilent Buboes, do heal them: The Wine wherein they have boiled, is
drunk with good success against the Plague, and against the griefs and
suffocation of the Mother. The powder of the root thereof is very good against
Worms.

Cinquefoile Cinquefoile.
(so called, because of the five leaves which it bears) craves a low,
waterish, and shadowed ground: it grows also in dry and grauellie places.

The decoction of the root used for a Gargle, does assuage the toothache, and
heal the ulcers of the mouth: in a Clyster, it slays all manner of flux of
the belly, as well the bloody flux as others: taken as a drink, it is
singular against the Iaundise, the stopping of the Liver, and against a
pestilent air, and poison.

Tormentill Tormentill.
(like in stalk unto Cinquefoile, but unlike in number of leaves (...) much as
it has seven) delights in the same ground that Cinquefoile does, (...) not
altogether so waterish, and called Tormentill, because the powder or (...) of
the root does appease the rage and torment of the teeth; is over and above
(...) ^ther remedies, most singular against the Plague, and against the fury
of all (...). and Venimes: it stays likewise all fluxes of blood, whether it
be spitting, (...) struous, or of the belly, all vomiting, and untimely birth,
whether it be taken (...) by the mouth, or applied outwardly, or whether it be
taken in substance, (...) the distilled water only.

Perwincle Perwincle.
delights in a shadowed and moist place: we see it grow likewise (...) Willow
grounds, Hedge-rowes, and outsides of Woods.

The leaves, as well in decoction, as otherwise, do stay all manner of flux of
the belly, or spitting of blood, or otherwise, as the monthly terms, and
whites, (...) purging having gone before, and bleeding at the nose, if you
brui^e the (...) and put them in the nose: or if you make a collar thereof to
put about your (...) a garland for your head: or if you put them under and
about the tongue: After the same manner you shall stay the monthly terms, as
also prevent untimely birth, (...) you apply them upon the groines.

Bistort, Bistort.
as well the great as the small, does delight in a moist, waterish, and
sh^dowie place: it grows also in high Mountains.

The root thereof does stay all manner of fluxes, as the terms and unwilling
(...) away of the urine, if it be drunk with the juice or distilled water of
(...) it stays the flux of blood coming of a wound, if the powder of it be
cast (...) the bleeding wound: it suppresseth choleric vomits, if is befried
with the (...) of eggs upon a red hot tyle, and be eaten by and by. It is
singular good, as well (...) the decoction and substance, as in the distilled
water, against all Venime; as also against the Plague, against Worms in little
children, against the Measels, Purple^* and small Pocks in young children;
against the bloody flux, and all manner of falls against the pain and rheumes
of the teeth, if you put it into the hollow tooth (...) little Allome and
Pellitorie of Spain.

Pionie, Pionie.
as well the male as the female, craves to be planted or set in dry ground,
where the Sun has his full force.

The seed or root gathered in the wane of the Moon, and hanged about the neck*
or applied unto the wrists alone, or with the Miss^ltoe of the Oak, is a very
sing^lar preservative against the Falling sickness: Whereunto notwithstanding
I would not have thee so much to trust, as that thou should not look after
some other ^^medie: assure thy self rather, that it is singular in bitings and
stingings that are ^^nimous, as well taken inward, as applied outward. Thirty
seeds of Pionie (...) and brayed, and the very kernel made into powder, and
drunk with wine, does fetch again the speech when it is lost.

Paul's Betonie, Paul's Betonie.
both male and female, would be either sown or planted in the very same
ground with Pionie.

This herb, especially the female, is very much commended for his virtues:
(...) the juice that is pressed out of his leaves, and the water that is
distilled thereof, (...) heal all sorts of wounds, as well new as old; all
sorts of ulcers, whether malign (...) cancrous; swellings, and hot tumors,
itch, and all the diseases of the skin: and which is more, the often use, as
well of the juice, as of the distilled water of Paul's (...), does perfectly
cure the Leprosy: whereof we have a notable and famous testimo^^^ of a French
King, who thereby was thoroughly cured thereof: And this is the (...) why this
herb is called the Leapers herb. Some do make a balm thereof ((...) we
will further speak in the Chapter of Balmes in the third Book) which is
sing^lar above all others for all sorts of wounds and malign ulcers, as also
for the Leprosy: and that it is so good, is proved; for that a certain
person, well known unto (...), having a virulent ulcer, in manner of a Polypus
in his nosthrils, of the cure (...), many, as well Physitio^s as Surgions,
being excellent men, and dwelling in (...) Town, did altogether despair, was
notwithstanding wonderfully cured by the application of this Balm, and often
use of potions made of the decoction of the leaves of the female Paul's
Betonie. This herb is singular also in Clysters for bloody Fluxes; and in
drinks, for pestilent Feauers, ulcers of the Lungs, and obstructions of the
Liver and Spleen.

Gromell Gromell.
is the same which we call in Latin Milium solis; and it grows better being
sown than pianted: it delights in a dry and untilled ground, being withal
stony, and having a good air.

The juice of the leaves and powder of the seed being drunk with Wine, has a
singular virtue against the Gravel and Stone, and procuring of the Urine to
pass away. There is nothing more singular for the burning of the Urine, than
to drink many mornings the seed of Gromell, to the quantity of two drammes,
Ceterach half a dram, and Amber two scruples, all being powdered with the
juice of Plantaine, or Purcelane, or Lettuce. In like manner, two drammes of
the seed of Gromell, with women's milk, does much comfort and strengthen a
woman in her childbirth.

Hyporicum loves the like entreatie that Gromell loves: Saint John's wort.
and yet withal it does refuse a fat and well tilled soil. The juice of the
leaves and flowers heals cuts and wounds. The seed drunk with white wine,
takes away the tertian Ague. The flowers and crops are principally in use to
make Balmes of for the curing of wounds, The Balm.
such like as this is: Take of the fruit of the Elm tree, the flowers of
Hypericum, and the buds of Roses, put them all together in a Glasse-bottle, and
set them in the Sun so long, as until you see them all so altered and
changed, as that they may seem to be rotted, then strain them all through a
linen cloth, and reserve it for your use. See further in the third Book of
the oil of Hypericum.

Ground Pine Ground Pine.
loves a dry, sandy, and stony soil, and grows better planted than
sown. The whole herb boiled in honied water, does heal the laundise,
provoke the terms in Women, provoke Urine, and is sovereign against the
Sciatica, either taken in drink* or applied upon the hippe in form of a
Cataplasme: for the whole herb, with the flowers and roots, made into powder,
and taken at the mouth forty days with half an ounce of Turpentine, does
thoroughly heal the Sciatica. The conserve made of the flowers is good for such
as are subject unto the Palsy. The whole herb boiled in vinegar, and taken
at the mouth, does minister insinit help to a travailing women, when the child
is dead in her body.

Agrimonie Agri^^^ie.
would be planted in a stony and dry place: and further, craves no great
help of hand, or husbandry. The decoction opens the obstructions of the
Liver, and strengthens it: and it being boiled and drunk, does help against
the bitings of venomous beasts. The juice of Agrimonie mixed with vinegar and
salt in a Liniment, does cure the Itch. Agrimonie is good against the cough of
Sheep, and for broken-winded Horses. The liquor of the decoction of Agrimonie,
with fumitorie made like Whay, does provoke Urine, expel the Terms, heal the
Itch and Scab of the whole body; whereupon it is singular in the beginning of
the Leprosy. The seed mixed with the juice of Agrimonie, and taken in manner of
pills, does kill the Worms. The Stagge being shot and wounded, is healed so
soon as he has eaten of this herb. If you gather good store of this herb,
and steep it in fair Spring water, in a large earthen pot, till the water
putrify, and then every morning wash the face therein, it will take away all
manner of Morphew, Sunne-burning, Farn-freckles, and other spots or dunnesse of
the skin whatsoever, making the same also clear and smooth, and filling up
every manner of wrinekle. Some likewise use in this case to use with Agrimonie
the like quantity of Goose-grasse: and sure it is not amiss; for they have
both one manner of force and working.

White Mullein White (...).
grows every where: but best, in a stony and sandy ground. The white
Mullein, both leaves, flowers, roots, and seed, is singular good against all
manner of venime: as also to contain in his place the falling Fundament. Good
wives, in like manner, for this consideration do make a fume of the seed and
flowers of Mullein, the flowers of Camomill and Masticke, all made into (...).
The juice pressed from the root before it put forth his stalk, and drunk
foure^^^^ in the quantity of an ounce, with Hippocras or Malmesey, in the
beginning of a (...) of a quartane Fever, does drive it quite away. The juice
pressed out of the flowe^^ or leaves, applied to Warts, does take them clean
away. Likewise, Gentlewom^n find no better remedy than the juice of white
Mullein flowers, to take away the wrinckles and other blemishes in their face.
The leaves bruised betwixt two stone^, and applied in form of a Cataplasme
upon the foot of a Horse that has been cloyed, does afford him a singular
and present relief. The water distilled of the flowers, quenches the
firinesse of the face, if there be a little Camphire added there^ unto. It does
in like manner with the tumor called Erisipelas, the itch, burnings, (...)
other diseases of the skin. The flowers of white Mullein, with the yolke of an
egg^, crummes of bread, and the leaves of Leeks, applied unto the Hemorrhoids,
do (...) them altogether. There grows about the leaves of white Mullein a
whitish (...), which is good to make match or tinder to take fire.

Mercury Mercury.
craves one and the same ground with the Vine, there to be sown, and grow in
great abundance, without any great care of husbanding: and yet th^^^ must
care and regard be had, not to sow it among Vines, because the wine which (...)
Vines should yield, amongst whom Mercury has been sown, would retain the
taste of Mercury, and become very unpleasant to drink.

The juice of Mercury being drunk, The virtues of Mercury.
helps conception, provoke wome^^ terms, and delivers them of their
afterbirth. The decoction of Mercury do^^ loose the belly, being drunk or
taken in a Clyster. Some make a honey of the (...) of Mercury, with a half
quantity of honey, and this is good for laxatiue Clyste^^. The juice of
Mercury takes away Warts: the seed of Mercury in a decoction with Wormwood
does cure the Iaundise: and the juice thereof, with vinegar, does rip^ up the
scab and scurffe.

Yarrow does grow in a ground that is indifferent fat and moist. Milfoile.
The decoction thereof does stay all manner of fluxes, and especially the red
terms of women, (...) also that which comes of a wound, especially the
leaves dried, made in powder, and drunk with the juice or water of Comfrey or
Plantaine. The leaf put into the nose, stays the bleeding: and put into a
Clyster, it stays the bloody flux. Milfoile bearing a white flower, being
powned with his flower, and drunk with (...) distilled from the same, and
Goats milk, does cure the burning of the urine in (...), and the whites in
women.

Danewort Danewort.
grows better plunted than sown, and craves a fat ground, well ^^nured, and
somewhat moist.

The juice pressed from the roots of Danewort, being drunk for a certain
time, preserves a man from the Gout. The seed of Danewort being well washed
and drunk in powder to the quantity of a dram, having been first steeped a
whole night in Wine, does help the Dropsy, because it procures stools
downward, and vomit upward, to the voiding of great store of water. Being
drunk also with the d^coction of ground Pine, it as^uageth the pain of the
Gout and Pocks. There is also made a sovereign Ointment of the same for the
appeasing of the said pains: Ta^^ the juice of the roots of Danewort, the
flowers of Rye, and fresh butter, of each alike, mix all, and let them work
together in an earthen pot set in the Oven; with this Ointment rub the aki^^g
parts: or else infuse the flowers in oil, with man's grease, set in the heat of
the Sun. Some also make an Oil of the seeds, pressing it (...) of them.

Orpin Orpin.
grows for the most part in moist and shadowie places. The Countr^y people
do, by their good wills, plant it upon Saint John's night in dishes, or upon
trenchers of wood, in some cleft of a wall, the foot being thrust into clay,
and the^^ they set it, where it abides a long time green, growing and
flourishing, if it be now and then watered. The liquor of the decoction of the
leaves is a sovereign remedy to heal wounds, and stay fluxes of blood, for
inward wounds and ulcers, and for burstings and ruptures.

Goats-beard Goats-beard.
grows very well in a moist ground and shadowed, and craves to be often
watered. The Latins call it Vlmaria, because the leaves are like to the leaves
of Elm. The root and leaves made in powder, do cure the flux of the belly,
and bleeding. The distilled water being drunk, is singular good for wounds
both inward and outward.

Ground-Iuie Ground-Iuie.
grows likewise in a moist and shadowed place. The decoction of the leaves
has great power to take away the obstructions of the liver and spleen, to
provoke urine, and the terms in women. There is made of it an excellent balm
for new cuts and wounds: also for the Collicke, ministered in Clysters, or taken
in drink, putting the small chopped leaves into a Glasse-violl well stopped with
gummie wax, and strong parchment, and setting the said violl in Horse dung for
the space of forty days. The juice thereof, with the rust of Brass is a fit
medicine for fistulaes and hollow ulcers: the decoction thereof, with Betonie,
Pimpernell, Mouse-eare, Bistort, Horse-taile, Tormentill, red Coleworts, and
Dittander, is singular for wounds in the principal and inward parts, if it be
often used. This ground-Iuie is otherwise called of some, Ale-hoofe, and it has
a most singular virtue for the curing of all manner of ^ore eyes, either in man
or beast, if you take it and beat it well in a mortar, and drop into it three
or four drops either of white Rose Water, or the water of Eyebright, and then
strain it into a clean Glasse-bottle, and keep it close, then wash the sore
eye therewith, when occasion is ministered, and the oftener in the day that you
do wash the sore eye therein, the better it is, and the sooner recovered.

Hounds-tongue Hounds-tongue.
grows easily in peblie and untilled ground. The leaves powned and applied
unto burnings, the wildfire, old ulcers, wounds, and inflammations, aches,
fluxes, and hemorrhoids, do very much good. There is made a singular Ointment
for wounds of the juice thereof, mixed with honey of Roses, and Turpentine.
There are also made thereof pills, to stay vehement and violent rhewmes.

Adders-tongue Adders-tongue.
does require above all other things a fat place, well tilled, and moist: it
grows also in meadows, but it is destroyed by and by and spoiled. The leaves
stamped and applied unto burnings, inflammations, burstings, and principally
unto wounds and malign ulcers, are of a marvelous effect. There is a balm
made of the leaves thereof for the same effects, whereunto some put Turpentine:
Red wine, wherein this whole herb has been steeped, is good to stay rhewmes
falling down upon the eyes.

Goose-grasse Goose-grasse.
does grow in any kind of ground, and has no need of great tillage. Some do
distill the water of it, which is singular good against the Pleurifie, and
other pains of the side, being taken in the beginning of the disease, as also
against the bitings and stingings of venomous beasts, and to cool the heat of
Cankers.

Corne-rose craves a fat ground, and well tilled, Of Corne-rose, or wild
Poppie.
such as are Corne-grounds, wherein we may see them grow fair and very well
blown. The flowers of Corne-rose, as well the great as the small, either in
decoctions, or the distilled water, or in sy^rups, or in powder, the weight of
half a French crown, are singular means to provoke spitting in Pleurisies,
and to cure the same.

Bastard Dittanie Bastard Dittanie.
in like manner requires a fat ground, and well tilled, and therewith a
diligent care to water it, and to keep it from the coldness of the air. The
seed, root, leaves, and flowers, as well in powder as in a decoction, do
provoke urine, break the stone, provoke the monthly terms, cast out the dead
conception and afterbirth: being eaten with Rubarbe, they kill and cast out
the worms: The juice applied outwardly, does draw forth thorns and thistles,
and stumpe^ of splints.

Knot-grasse Knot-grasse.
is called in Latin Polygonum, it grows by the edges of Vineyards and fields
that are badly tilled, especially when it is a moist year. Amongst the
principal virtues thereof, the distilled water is sovereign against the
difficulty of vri^^, as I have often proved by experience.

Salomons-seale Salomons-seale.
must be set in a dry ground, and raised high. The root whiles it is new,
being powned, or the juice of the same, wipeth out freckles, spots, blew marks
of blows, falls, or other such like thing, whether they be in the face, or in
any other part of the body. Some distill the water, which as very good for
the paintings of women.

Great Dragons Great and small Dragons.
must be planted in a shadowed place, and good earth. The small Dragons love a
moist ground and waterish, as near unto the Fountain in the Garden. Their
roots boiled, or roasted and mixed with honey, and afterward taken as (...)
Eclegme, do profit greatly for shortness of breath, difficult and hard
coughs, and painful getting up of the spittle: in such sort, as that they
cut, ripen, and wast the gross humors and slimie. Being powdered and mixed with
honey, they heal malign and corroding ulcers, especially the Polypus. Their
leaves spread upon Cheese, do keep them from spoiling and ^otting. If the
juice thereof be mixed with honey, and put into the eyes, they take away all
manner of pa^^e and aching thereof: Also who so batheth his hands in the juice
thereof, may handle any venime without danger: Also it is a great cooler of
lust, and maruellously abateth all lecherous cogitations.

As concerning the Nettle, Stinging and dead Nettle.
it has no need either of sowing or setting, for it comes up in Gardens more
than one would have it: yet notwithstanding it is not without his great
virtues, as well the Greek Nettle, as the Hungarian or dead Nettle.

The leaves, and especially the roots of dead Nettle, Dead Nettle.
stamped and put upon the nosthrils, do stay the bleeding of the nose: and
their juice rubbed upon the brow, does as much. The leaves of the stinging
Nettle stamped with a little Myrrh, and applied unto the navel in form of a
Cataplasme, have great power to provoke the terms of women. Their juice drunk
a certain time, provoke urine, and breaks the stone. A Liniment prepared
with the leaves of Nettle, Salt, and Oil, does defend the parts of the body
from all cold and staruing, how great soever it might prove to be, if so be
that you rub the ridge of the back, the soles of the feet, and the wrists of
the hands therewith. Likewise the juice of this Neule mixed with a little
Populeon, and applied unto the wrists, appeaseth the great heat of Agues. The
leaves beaten and mixed with oil of Violets and Poppies, and applied unto the
wrists, do alike. The vapor of the decoction of Nettle seed does take away
the stuffing of the nosthrils. Such as have the Cough, with a great rattling in
the throat, cannot meet with a better medicine to make them spit out lustily,
than to take with some p^ctorall syrrop, or decoction, the weight of half a
French crown of Nettle seed finely powdered. You must furthermore observe this
virtue in Nettles, (...) in boiling of flesh.
as that if it be put into a pot wherein is flesh boiling, it will cause the
flesh to be the sooner boiled.

Stauesacre Stauesacre.
must be sown in a place reasonably dry and shadowed. The seed chewed and
held in the mouth, draws unto it, by his heat, great quantity of moisture:
stamped and mingled with oil, it drives vermin out of the head and other
parts of the body; it cures scuruinesle and itch: sleeped in vinegar, and
held in the mouth, it assuageth the toothache.

There is not any need of great care to be taken in sowing the great, small,
or middle Plantaine, Plantaine.
for they grow every where, and yet they must be esteemed by reason of their
virtues. The juice of Plantaine leaves or roots pressed out, and (...) two
hours before the fit, to the quantity of two ounces, does assuage the (...)
Fever. The leaves of Plantaine, stamped with the whites of eggs, do (...)
burnings. An emplaister made of the juice of Plantaine, the white of an egg,
and Bole-Armoniacke, and applied unto the brewes, does stay the bleeding of the
nose.

Horse-taile, Horse-taile.
as well the great as the small, requires a very moist ground, as near to
some poole or shadowed place. The decoction thereof in wine or water does
stanch bleeding, and all other fluxes, whether it be the bloody, or any other
such. The juice put into the nosthrils, does stay the bleeding of them: and
with a Pessarie put up into the neck of the Matrix, it stays the flux
thereof.

Pellitorie craves no great care or tillage, Pellitorie of the wall.
for it grows naturally near unto walls. A Cataplasme made of Pellitorie and
the grease of a male or female Goat, is a singular remedy for the gowt, and
slidings or falls. The leaves of Pellitorie fried with fresh Butter or Capons
grease, and laid in form of a Cataplasme unto the belly, does assuage the
pain of the Colicke. The juice mingled in like quantity with white Wine and
oil of sweet Almonds newly drawn, does assuage the pain and torment of the
stone. A Cataplasme made of green Pellitorie, stamped with crumbs of Bread, and
oil of Lillies, Roses, or Camomile, does resolve Apostemes happening in the
breasts. It is good also for mollifying Clysters and Bathes that are deterging.

Shepherds Powch Shepherds powch.
grows in all ground, but principally upon the ruins of old walls, and near
unto walls. The decoction of this herb in rain water with Plantaine and Bole
Armoniacke, being drunk certain mornings, or taken in Clysters, does stay the
bloody flux, and the spitting of blood. A bath prepared with the decoction of
the leaves, stays the excessive flux of the terms. But if you take it and
boil it in red wine, with a little Cinnamon and Tanners bark, and so give it
the patient to drink, it will stay the most dangerous bloody flux that can be
possible. It is very good also for the same disease, if it be given in milk.
The juice does heal green wounds, and being dropped into the ears, does dry
up the ulcers of the same. The leaves stamped and applied in form of a
Cataplasme, does kill inflammations, and the wild fire. The leaves eaten do
stay all sorts of bleeding, being put into the nosthrils, as also holden in the
hand, they stay the nose from bleeding.

Sow-bread Sow-bread.
desires a shadowed ground, as under some tree or bush, which must
notwithstanding be fat and well tilled to feed the root thereof, which is full,
gross, solid, and as it were like unto the Turnep. The Forest of Orleance is
well stored and repl^nished with this herb.

This is a thing to be marvelled at, The virtues.
that the juice of the root of Sow-bread snuffed up into the nose, purges the
head: and the distilled water thereof snuffed up also into the nosthrils, does
presently stay their bleeding. The same water drunk to the quantity of six
ounces, with an ounce of Sugar, does presently stay the blood running down
from the breast, stomach, or liver, and knitteth together the vessels therein,
if any be broken: which I my self have proved and tried. Two drammes of the
juice drunk with honied water, do loosen the belly, and free the liver from
obstructions, as also the spleen; in respect whereof, it is singular good for
the Dropsy and Iaundise, but you must mix with it a little Mallicke, or
Nutmeg, or Rhubarbe, for to correct the vehemency thereof. It is incredible
what ease the juice thereof works in the Colicke, and other such like griping
pangs, if it be put into Clysters: how greatly also it profits in Ointments,
Liniments, and Cataplasmes, appointed for the hardness and swellings of the
spleen and liver. If you infuse the roots chopped small in the oil of Roses,
or Camomill, or sweet Almonds, and afterward boil them together, putting
thereto a little wine, in the end you shall press them out: This oil dropped
by two or three drops into the ears, does drive away the noise and
deafness of the ears, especially if upon the ears you apply the dross of
these roots at night at the parties going to bed: or else chop small the
roots, stamp them with Peaches and bitter Almonds, steep them all in Aqua
vitae, afterward strain them, and drop certain drops of that which shall be
pressed out, into the ears: this is very sovereign for deafness and the
noise of the ears.

Crowfoot, Crowfoot.
although there be six kinds of it, yet they all love a moist and marish
ground, and whereas the frogs delight to live, which also take pleasure in
and (...) themselves about this herb. It is true, that some of the sorts do
love these (...) places more than other some: for the Crowfoot that has a
double flower, not (...) yellow, but somewhat red, and which appears only in
Autumn, cannot grow in a very moist place, so as it does in the dry meadows,
and in places a little (...): contrariwise, that which bears a single flower,
of a yellow and golden color, cannot grow but in some watrie medow-plot, and
near unto standing water. The other, which bears a double flower, not very
yellow, has a bulbous and whitish root of a sharp taste. This same (as well
the leaves, but especially the root) being applied unto any part, is as
causticke as Pigeons dung, or the Causticke stone, or any oth^^ the most
violent cauterie that may be found: for though you put betwixt the (...) and
the herb a Linen cloth five or six double, yet it will not leave to (...)
and pierce deep even unto the flesh. This is the herb, which being steept in
D^^gons blood, the cursed rogues and wicked rouers up and down do rub their
(...), legs, and thighs withal, thereby to exulcerate them, that so they
may move the people with remorse, and so get the larger alms. This is the
herb which si^i^ calls Crowfoot, and which is so much esteemed for the
Plague, and Plague-(...), called a Carbuncle. Take, says he, Crowfoot (having
a root like unto a small (...) Onion:) this root, either alone, if it be big
enough, or two or three of them st^^ped and laid unto the thombe of the hand
that is on that side in the arm, whereof the Plague is broken out, or unto the
great toe of that foot that is on the same side th^^ the groine is that has
the Plague Sore, and there leave it four and twenty houre^, and it will make
blisters, which breaking of themselves, do let run out the (...) of the
Plague drawn thither by a vein common unto both parts: but because that this
root is very strong, you must put betwixt it and the thombe four or five
do^bles of new and strong cloth, or six or seven of thin and worn cloth, and
so (...) it and bind it up; and afterward you shall heal the ulcer of the
thombe with the yolks of eggs and fresh butter beat together, with a little
of the middle Con^f^^^ stamped with them, or a little washed Aloes: and if you
cannot have it new, the dries also good for the same purpose; but then you need
not so many doubles of cloth betwixt them. This operation and work is quickly
done, and certainly, without bloodletting, or other euacuation.

Petty whin Pettie-whin.
grows in every ground, whether it be meadow, plowed land, dry, scorched,
moist, tilled, or not tilled. The Husbandman does greatly abhor (...) herb,
whereof he cannot by any means rid his grounds. The root is singular, (...)
well in powder, as in a decoction, or in the water distilled from it (so that
before it be distilled, the root be steeped in Malmesey twice so much as it
weighs) for (...) provoke Urine, Women's terms, and to procure the opening of
the obstructions of the Spleen and Liver: but above all, to break into
powder, and dri^^ forth the Stone, as also to wast such ^arnosities as may be
begotten in the bladder and conduit of the yard. The powder must be taken with
white Wine. The^^ is also made a kind of Wine of this root during the Vintage
time, with new Wine and white Grapes put into a Vessel, adding thereto a
certain quantity of Winter Cherries.

The Dittanie Dittanie.
of this Country grows in a dry ground, being also stony, and open upon
the Sun. The root is much commended against Poisons and Veni^^^, Worms in
children, and cold diseases of the Matrix. Being taken inwardly by d^coction,
or in powder with Wine the weight of two drammes, or applied or ministered in a
fume, it moves the terms in women: it brings forth the afterbirth and dead
child: it also drives out the stone from the reins: but principally it is
good for the Pocks, taking it every morning a long time the weight of a dram
with (...) decoction of Guaiacum. It is profitable also against the Plague
every way that (...) can use it.

Germander Germander.
(called of the Latins Cham^drys, that is to say, a small Oak, because the
leaves are like to those of the Oak) requires no other ground or manner of
ordering than Dittanie. This herb is called the F^auers scourge, because the
decoction thereof being drunk in the morning for a certain space, does drive
away and make an end of the tertian agues: the leaves eaten in a sallade in the
morning fasting, it preserves from the air and pestilent contagion, no less
effectually than water Germander, of which we have spoken before. The decoction
thereof is singular good against the jaundi^e, and being used a long time, for
the Falling sickness, headache, and other diseases of the brain, and for the
worms.

Rupture-wort Rupture^wort.
grows in a grauelly or sandy ground which is dry and unhusbanded: there is
likewise great store of it found in the wood of Bo^^on, near unto Paris. This
herb made in powder and drunk with wine, provoke urine that has been
long detained, and breaks the stone of the reins and of the bladder, if for
some long time the party take the weight of a dram. Fallopius, ^ great and
famous Surgeon in Italy, affirms, That he had cured an infinite number of
persons of the rupture therewith, giving it them in drink for a very long
time together.

Mouse-^are Mouse-^are.
will grow in the same ground that Rupture-wort does: it has a very strong
astringent quality: and that is the cause why Shepherds have no great
affection to d^aw their sheep into such fields as have store of Mouse-eare in
them, because it binds them in their bodies, which for the most part works
in them unto death: likewise Physicians are wont to make their benefit of this
herb in the bloody fl^x, and abundance of terms: as also to heal up both
inward and outward wounds, the spitting of blood, and falling down of the
fundament.

Dogges-grasse, Dogs-grasse.
without setting or sowing, grows more than one would wish, both in gardens,
and also in corn grounds that are fat. It serves in physic to cool and
dry indifferently: and withal (notwithstanding this) to open and take away
obstructions, and to expel and break the stone: it is true that the seed
dries more, but it binds somewhat.

Water-Betonie Water betonie.
grows in moist, waterie, and marshie places. Of the r^ot thereof gathered in
Autumn, and made very clean, and stamped with fresh Butter, all being closed
up in an earthen vessel well leaded and stopped, and the same vessel set in
some mo^st place, and let stay there some fifteen or twenty days; after let
the butter be melted upon a soft fire, and in the end strained: is made an
ointment that is singular good to anoint the Kings-euill withal, and the
Hemorrhoides: this root is set about with many small knots, having the
resemblance of Hemorrhoids, or the swelling of the Kings evil.

It grows without any great pain in gardens, Palma christi.
and being sown, grows more abundantly than one would have it. The seed
purges those that have the dropsy very much, if they be given in Whay: it is
true that they may be used without annoyance done to the stomach, if it be
parched and dried, as also mixed with Annise and Fennell-seed* furthermore it is
very good to set in gardens, to kill and drive away Moules.

This herb is of two sorts, male and female: both of them will grow in all
manner of earth, Fern^.
but principally in that which is moist.

Neither the one nor yet the other does bear any seed, as Writers record:
notwithstanding it has been tried, The virtues.
that the male bears seed, and that it cleaves to the hindermost part of the
leaves, but yet so little, that hardly can a man see it, and which cannot be
acknowledged, or gathered, but in the end of Iulie, which is the time when it
is ripe: for to gather it, you must cut the leaf near unto the root, and then
hang them up in your house, spreading a linen cloth under them, or else some
fair clean white paper. I know well that the common sort do verily think
and auerre, that this seed cannot be gathered but on the night of the wakes of
S. John in Summer, and that more is, not without great ceremonies and mumbling
and muttering of many words between the teeth, which have power to drive away
Devils, which have the custody of the same seed: but all this is nothing but
fables.

The decoction thereof is good to provoke women's terms, to cast out the dead
child, to kill worms, and some do use it to heal the frettings or hurts that
may be in the fundament fallen down; but especially the female.

Herb Twopence Herb Twopence.
(so called because the leaves resemble small pieces of silver requires no
great piece of husbandry about it, save only that it would have a moist
ground. The whole herb either in decoction or powder, but especially the
water thereof distilled in a limbecke, is very singular good for the falling
down of the fundament.

Fleawort (being called of the Latins Psyllium) craves a very fat, Fleawort
or Flea^ane.
well manured and batled ground, for else there will no good come of it. The
seed prepared in form of a Mucilage, and applied in vinegar does kill the wild
fire and te^^er: applied unto the head or brows it takes away the pain
thereof: it takes away also the redness of the eyes being applied thereunto.
The distilled water is of infinite goodness serving in the pains of the eyes,
two or three drops thereof only being dropped into them.

This herb requires a very fat place, I^^itorie.
well manured and tilled: likewise we see it grow abundantly in vineyards and
grounds for Wheat and Barlie. The leaves are very singular good for the
opening of the liver, and cleansing away of adust humors, and this also is the
cause why physicians prescribe it with whay, in scuruie, scabbie, and itchie
cases, and where the leprosy is. The juice thereof is good to clear bleared
eyes.

Ground-swell Ground-swell.
grows in every ground, and without any great care: we see if grow likewise
near unto walls, and upon the towns walls: it is green all the year, and
flourishes as it were in every month, and this is the cause why the Italians
call it every months flower. Some think that Ground-swell distilled is very
singular good for the Whites in women: but believe it not before you find it
true by proof, for I have observed by often use, that this herb whether in
decoction or otherwise, provoke the terms that are stayed.

Birt-wort, as well the long as the round, Arist^l^chie or birth-wort.
must be planted in a fat and fertile soil, such as that where Wheat is sown,
and Olive trees planted. Their roots (amongst other al^^ost in^inite virtues)
cause women's courses, purge the lungs, cause spitting, cure the cough, and
provoke urine: which more is, if either of them be taken in drink, especially
the round one made in powder with Pepper and Myrrh, it drives forth the
afterbirth, the dead conception, and all other superfluities gathered in the
Matrix: it does the like being applied in form of a Mother suppositorie. It
purges all obstructions of the liver, and eases all manner of colicke or
other griefs which proceed from windy causes, it is sovereign against all
manner of poison or any other infection; it cleanses the blood, and by rubbing
the gummes therewith it preserves the teeth from rotting.

Centaurie, Centaurie.
or the gall of the earth, as well the great as the small, desires a fat ground
that is fruitful and well tilled, and yet in such a ground they thrive not
well without the great care and industry of the Gardener. Their root in
decoction, juice, or powder, moves women's terms, and provoke urine,
expels the dead child, purges ^legmaticke humors which cause the sciatica,
opens the obstructions of the liver and spleen, kills the worms,
profits and helps palsies, convulsions, and diseases of the sinews, it
clears the sight, and takes away all mistiness from them, especially the
juice dropped into the eyes does heal their fresh and new wounds, and
siccatriceth old and malign ulcers.

Woodbind craves no great tilling or husbanding, Woodbind or ^^nie-suckles.
for it grows every where and in what place soever it lists. It is true
that it desires greatly to be near broom hedges, and also the borders of
fields. The fruit of Woodbind drunk with Wine the space of forty days,
takes away the obstructions of a hard and indurat spleen, it purges out
urine with such force, as that the tenth day the urine becomes all bloody:
it helps women in their childbirth: the leaves in decoction or distilled do
heal wounds and filthy ulcers: wipe away the spots and scarres of the body
and of the face.

Pimpernel Pimpernell.
has red and blew flowers, and craves a moist and shadowed ground, so
likewise we see it grow in the shadows of hedges and bushes. Pimpernell with
the red flowers, stamp and applied unto the eyes, or the juice thereof dropped
within them, takes away the inflammations, dimnes^e, and ulcers of the eyes:
and heal^th the inflammations of the secret parts: Pimpernell with the blew
flower boiled with salt and water, is a very good and proper medicine to cure
the itch or scurfe, and the lice, or worms in the hands, if you wash them o^t
therewith.

Buckwheat is a very common herb, Backwheat or binacorne.
and yet but little known by his name: it is very ordinary in corn and
tilled grounds about harvest time. The Peasants of Champaigne do commonly call
it Veluote, because (in my judgment) the leaves are hairie: which name I mind
not to change, but rather to keep for the easier knowing of the herb. They
make use of it by applying it, if at any time in shearing they happen to cut
themselves with their sickles. For to know it better therefore (than only by
the name) it puts forth from the root, five, six, seven, or eight small
branches, for the most part laid along upon the earth, of the length of a
hand, and sometime of a foot, bearing leaves somewhat like unto the little
bindweed, but indeed they be less and more round, very hairie, and a little
fattie. The flower is small and of diverse colors, drawing very near unto a
pale yellow, but in greatness it comes ne^re unto the flower of eye^ bright,
but in shape and fashion unto the nettle slower.

The water of the leaves and branches distilled (whiles it is in force) in a
Limbeck in Maries-bath, The virtues of Buckwheat.
is singular and maruailous good to stay the spreading of the canker in the
breasts, and the creeping Polypus, howsoever some hold them as incur^ble. The
same applied to the brows takes away the hear, and asswageth the pain of the
head. In an injection it mundifieth first, and afterward conglutinateth wounds,
and dries up fistulaes very readily, and malign ulcers which are easily
provoked, and become worse by other remedies: being dropped into weeping eyes it
heals them, and stays such rheumes as fall down upon them, and cause
inflammation and dazeling of the same: being applied with a linen cloth upon
itchings, wheales, scabbes, poukes, the wild fire, S. Anthonies fire or
shingles, it cures and heals them in a very small time, as also all other
burning inflammations. Being drunk for certain days, it stays all rheumes,
vomitings, and fluxes of the belly, it dries up the water in those that have
the dropsy, appeaseth the pains of the colicke: it cures terti^n and quartan
agues, and I am verily of mind that it may be given to good and profitable
purpose to other agues, the temperature thereof considered and his infinite
other secret qualities, which every day are more and more manifested: being
drunk and applied a certain time, it re^uniteth the rupture and falling down
of the bowels, the falling down of the mother, and the excessive courses of
women by suppressing them and whatsoever other ^luxes of blood. Taken in a
gargarisme with a little Wine, it drives the ulcers of the mouth: and being
used for a gargarisme it self alone, it is singular against the distillations,
causing the swelling of the v^ula or the inflammation of the throat called the
squinancie: likewise taken in the same mann^r it is good against the blackness
and roughness of the tongue caused of a continual ague. The juice and
decoction of the leaves work the very same effects, if they be taken whiles
as yet the herb is not too much dried by the heat of the Sun.

Of this Buckwheat there is made a compound water to make the face fair and
beautiful, The compounding of the water of Burckwheat.
and undoubtedly to take away the freckles, and it is thus made: Take of the
leaves thereof bruised in a mortar two good handfulls, of the roots of Salomons
seal made clean with a linen cloth, and after brayed a quarter of a pound,
mingle all together, and infuse them for the space of twelve hours in wine,
this being done, put all into a limbecke, adding thereto the juice of three
Lymons or Oranges, then distill and draw out the water in Maries-bath, which
you shall keep very carefully for your use: but it is requisite that before
this you have made provision of the liquor of the Brionie root, which must be
gathered about the end of April, or in the beginning of May, whiles the dews
continue, and that in this manner. The head of (...) root must be cut a little,
uncovering the top, and not pulling it up by the root (...) it is thus pared at
the top, you must cut a hollow hole in it some two or three fing^^^ deep, and
then cover it again with the cap you have cut off from the head, and some few
of the leaves thereof, and so to leave it to the next morning before Sun^^
rise, not taking off this cap or covering: then there will be found in this
hole a liquor which must be gathered with a spoone, and put up and kept in a
violl glass, after which the covering must be put on again as it was the day
before, and this to be continued every day until mid-May, and longer if so be
that one be disposed. Now when you would use it, take an ounce of this liquor,
and mix it in a violl with two ounces of the abouenamed compounded water; and
at night when you go to bed, you must wet a linen cloth in this mixture, and
spread it all over the face, then letting it rest a good part of the night, but
in the morning you must avoid the b^^ning heat of the Sun: and this course
shall be continued for certain nights together.

But although the herb alone applied, his juice, water, and decoction having
great and excellent qualities, as it is easy to judge by that which has been
said before, yet forasmuch as that one simple, or one drugge, or many joined
together, and to good purpose and effect in that thing for which it was
compounded and made, is of much more efficacy by the help and assistance
afforded unto it, I am willing for that cause to impart unto you a maruailous
ointment made of the same Backe-wheat, An ointment of Bucke-wheat.
and the description of it, it in manner as follows. Take of the juice of the
leaves of Buck-wheat, laid in steep in a little white wine the space of four
and twenty hours, one pound of the juice of Vernaine (which is as yet but a
little (...) up into branches) in like manner steeped as before, and that by it
self a quarter of a pound of the juice of the leaves of yellow Henbane
(commonly called small Nicotian, or the Queenes-herbe) half a pound,
Oyle-Oliue a pound: mix all these together in a skellet, and boil them upon a
small ^ire, stirring it often with a spatule of wood, until the juices be
almost consumed: then add thereto of new wax, brok^n into pieces, and of
Perrosine, of each a quarter of a pound, and melt the whole by little and
little, still stirring it with a spatule, and keeping a low fire without
increasing of it: which being done, take the skellet from the fire, and put
into it at th^^ present instant of Venice Turpentine a quarter of a pound by
little threeds (...) were, and stirring it continually with a spatule: then
when the ointment shall begin to wax cold, put in Masticke and Frankincense
mixed together in powder, of each the weight two French Crowns, and cease not
to stir it as before, until it (...) all well incorporated. The mark to
know when the ointment is well made and fully finished, is, if a drop thereof
being put upon your nail do congeale and (...) together, or that it cleaves
unto the spatu^e stirring it. Then put you up this composition or mixture in
Gallipots, for to serve you as shall be declared hereafter.

This ointment above all other remedies is singular good in the curing of the
(...), as well of the dugs as of other parts, in the curing also of the
Polypus, N^li (...) tangere, the Kings-euill, bruised or squat ^^^les, wounds
old and new, fistulaes, and malign ulcers, be they never so rebellious It
quenches all sharp inflammation^, the shingles, and burnings either of water
or fire. It rooteth out all sorts ofringwormes, scabs, itches, pastules, the
wild scab, and the wild fire. It is good for (...) of sinews i^ there be added
to it pouned worms. It cures the moth, or falling of the hair, if before you
anoint the head, the hair be pulled and taken away. (...) away the swelling
and pains of the Hemorrhoides. Being applied with (...) grea^e and a little
oil of Roses, it likewise takes away the pains of the go^^ ^^^mundifieth and
draws out mightily the gunshot out of the body, and heals (...) wounds up
without any other thing applied: it takes away the blewnesse of (...) blows.
To be brief, it is a m^st ^ure and infallible remedy by reason of his
^^^^^rature in all impostumes either hot or cold, and resolves and discusseth
all (...) that need not to be suppurated and ripened. But this must be
observed, that before you apply it, you must discern of the offending humor,
to the end, that you may use some either general or particular euacuation,
according to good order, and that by the advice of some Physician.

CHAP. XLIIII.
A discourse of Nicotian, or the male Petum.
NIcotiana, though it have been but a while known in France, Nicotiana the
chief^ of Physic herbs.
yet it holds the first and principal place amongst Physic herbs, by
reason of his singular and almost divine virtues, such as you shall hear of
hereafter: whereof (because none, either of the old or new Writers that have
written of the nature of Plants, have said any thing) I am willing to lay open
the whole History, as I have come by it through a dear friend of mine, the
first Author, Inuentor, and Bringer of (...) herb into France: as also of
many, both Spaniards, Portugals, and others, wh^^h have traveled into
Florida, a Country of the Indians, from whence this herb came, to put the
same in writing, to quite such of grief and travel, as have heard of this
herb, but neither know it, nor the properties thereof.

This herb is called Nicotiana, of the name of an Ambassador, which brought
the first knowledge of it into this Realm, Why it was called Nicotiana.
in like manner as many Plants do as yet retain the names of certain
Greeks and Romans, who being strangers in diverse Countries for their
Commonwealths service, have from thence endowed their own Country with many
sorts of Plants, whereof there was no knowledge before.

Some call it the herb of Queene-mother, because the said Ambassador, The
herb of Queene-mother.
Lord Nicot, did first send the same unto the Queen Mother (as you shall
understand by and by) and for being afterward by her given to diverse others to
plant and make to grow in this Country. Others call it by the name of the
herb of the great Prior, The herb of the Great Priour.
because the said Lord a while after sailing into these Western Seas, and
happening to lodge near unto the said Lord Ambassador of Lisbone, gathered
diverse Plants thereof out of his Garden, and set them to increase here in
France, and that in greater quantity, and with more care, than any other
besides him, he did so highly esteem thereof for the exceeding good qualities
sake. The Spaniards call it Tobacco. Tobacco.
Some call it the Holy herb, The Holy herb.
because (as I think) of his holy and marvelous effects. Very many have
given it the name of Male Petum, to know it from the Female Petum; which is (in
truth) the proper name of the herb, used by them of the Country from whence
it was brought: Notwithstanding, it were better to call it Nicotiana, after the
name of the Lord which first sent the same into France, to the end, that we
may give him the honor which he has deserved of us, for having furnished our
Land with so rare and singular an herb. And thus much for the name: Now
listen unto the whole History.

Master John Nicot, one of the Kings Council, Mans^eur Nicot Ambassador for
the King in Portugal.
being Ambassador for his Majesty in the Realm of Portugal, in the years
of our Lord God, 1559, 1560, and 1561, went on a day to see the Monuments and
worthy Places of the said King of Portugal: at which time, a Gentleman,
keeper of the said Monuments, presented him with this herb, as a strange
Plant, brought from Florida. The Noble man, Sir Nicot, having procured it to
grow in his Garden, where it had put forth and maltiplied very greatly, was
advertised on a day by one of his Pages, that a young boy, kinsman of the said
Page, had laid (for trial sake) the said herb stamped, the substance and
juice and altogether, upon an ulcer which he had upon his cheek, near unto
his nose, next neighbor to a Noli me tangere, as having already seized upon
the cartilages, and that by the use thereof it was become maru^^^lous well:
upon this occasion the noble man Nicot called the boy to him, A matter of
experience in the (...) of a Noli me tangere.
and making him to continue the applying of this herb for eight or ten
days, the Noli me tangere became thoroughly killed. Now they had sent
oftentimes unto one of the Kings most famous Physicians the said boy, during
the time of this work and operation, to mark and see the proceeding and
working of the said Nicotiana: and having in charge to continue the same until
the end of ten days, the said Physician then beholding him, assured him
certainly, that the Noli me tangere was dead: as indeed the boy never felt
any thing of it at any time afterward.

Some certain time after, Proo^e of it in wounds.
one of the Cooks of the said Ambassador having almost all his thombe cut off
from his hand with a great Kitchen knife, the Stewa^^ running unto the said
Nicotiana, made him to use of it five or six dr^ssings, by the end of which,
the wound was healed. From that time forward this herb began (...) become
famous in Lisbone, The Ambassadors herb.
where the King of Portugals Court was at that time, and the virtues thereof
much spoken of, and the common people began to call it the Ambassadors herb.

Now, upon this occasion, there came certain days after a Gentleman out of
the fields, being father unto one of the Pages of the said Lord Ambassador,
who (...) troubled with an ulcer in his leg of two years continuance, and
craved of the said Lord Ambassador some of his herb, and using it in manner
before mentioned, he was healed by the end of ten or twelve days.

After this yet the herb grew still in greater reputation: insomuch, as that
mani^ hasted out of all corners to get some of this herb. Proof for Ring
worms.
And amongst the rest, there was one woman which had a great Ringworme,
covering all her face like a mask, and having taken deep root, unto whom the
said Lord Ambassador caused this P^tum to be given, and withal, the manner of
using of it to be told her: and at the end of eight or ten days this woman
being thoroughly cured thereby, came to show her self unto the said Lord
Ambassador, and how that she^ was cured.

There came likewise a Captain, Proof for the Kings evil.
bringing with him his son, diseased with the Kings ^uill, unto the said Lord
Ambassador, for to send him into France; v^^^ whom there was some trial made
of the said herb: whereupon, within few days, he began to show great signs
and tokens of healing, and in the end was thoroughly cured of his Kings evil.

The said Lord Ambassador seeing so great proof and traill of the said herb,
Madame of Montigny dead of a Noli me tangere in her breasts.
and having heard sa^, that the late deceased Madame of Montigny died at S.
Germans in Lay of an ulcer grown in her breasts, which was turned to a Noli me
tangere, for which never ^nie body could find any remedy: and likewise, that
the Countess of Ruff had sought for all the famous Physicians of the Realm
to cure her of a Ringwo^^^ which she had in her face, and that they could not
all heal it, he resolved with himself to send of it into France, How
Nicotiana was (...) brought into France.
and thereupon accordingly sent it unto king (...) the second, and unto Queen
mother, and many other Lords of the Court, together with the manner to order it
and apply it to the abouenamed diseases, as he himself had ^^und by
experience: as also unto the Lord of Iarnac, governor of Roche^^, with whom
the said Ambassador had intercourse of letters by reason of the king his
affairs: which Lord Iarnac also told him one day sitting at table with the
Queen^ mother, The distilled wate^ o^ (...) ^ good for a short breath.
that he had caused of the said Nicotiana to be distilled, and had caused (...)
water thereof to be drunk being mixed with the water of eyebright by one that
(...) stuffe^ in his lungs, and that he was cured thereby.



This herb resembles in figure, fashion, and qualities, the great Comfrey,
in such sort, The figure of Nicotiana.
as that a man would deem it to be a kind of great Comfrey, rather than a
yellow Henbane, as some have thought. It has an upright stalk, not bending
any way, The stalk.
thick, bearded or hairie, and slimie. The leaves Leaves.
are broad and long, green, drawing somewhat toward a yellow, not bearded or
hoarie, but smooth and slimie, having as it were tallons, but not either
notched or cut in the edges, a great deal bigger downward toward the root
than above: as you see the smooth Docke leaf is, which bears small red
seeds, and not burres; and the finer and clearer that such leaves are, the
better the Tobacco is esteemed. Whiles it is young, it is leaued, and as it
were lying upon the ground: but rising to a stalk, and growing further, it
cease to have such a number of leaves below, and puts forth branches
Branches.
from half foot to half, and storeth it self by that means with leaves, and
still rises higher, from the height of four or five foot, unto three or four
or five cubits, according as it is sown in a hot and fat ground, and carefully
tilled. The boughs and branches thereof put out at ioints, and divide the
stalk by distances of half a foot: the highest of which branches are bigger
than an arm. At the tops and ends of his branches and boughs, it puts forth
flowers Flower.
almost like unto those of Nigella, of a whitish and incarnate color, having
the fashion of a little bell, coming out of a swad or husk, being of the
fashion of a small goblet, which h^ske becomes round, having the fashion of a
little apple, or swords pummell: as soon as the flower is gone and vanished
away, it is filled with very small seeds Seed.
like unto those of yellow Henbane, and they are black when they be ripe, or
green, whiles they are not yet ripe. In a hot country it bears leaves,
flowers, and seeds at the same time, in the ninth (...) tenth month of the
year, it puts forth young sciences at the root, Roots.
and renews it self by this store and number of sciences, and great
quantity of sprouts, and yet not withstanding the roots are little, small,
fine, threddie strings, or if otherwise they grow a little thick, yet remain
they still very short, in respect of the height of the plant. The roots and
leaves do yield a glewish and rosinish kind of juice, somewhat yellow, of a
rosinlike smell, Smell.
not unpleasant, and of a sharp, eager, and biting taste, (...) or t^st.
which shows that it is by nature hot, Temperatiue.
more than in the second degree, and dry in the first, whereupon we must gather
that it is no kind of yellow Henbane as some have thought.

Nicotiana c^aueth a fat ground well stirred, and well manured also in this
cold country, that is to say an earth, wherein the manure is so well mingled
and inc^rporated, as that it becomes earthie, that is to say, all turned into
earth, and not making any show any more of dung: which is likewise moist and
shadowie, wide and roomie, for in a narrow and strait place, it would not grow
high, straight, great, and well branched. It desires the South Sun before
it, and a wall behind it, How to refresh and cheer^ up Nicotiana.
which may stand ^^stead of a broad pair of shoulders to keep away the
Northern wind, and to beat back again the heat of the Sun; it would also
be defended from the tossing and force of the wind, by reason of his weakness
and height: it is true that it will be out of the danger of the wind, if the
root be deep^ly taken in the ground. It grows the better if it be often
watered, To wa^er Nicotiana.
and makes it self spo^t and jolly good cheer with water when the time
becomes a little dry. It hates the cold, and therefore to keep it from
dying in Winter, How to handle Nic^tiana in Winter.
it must either be kept in cellars when it may have free benefit of air, or
else in some cave made of purpose within the same garden, or else to cover it as
with a cloak very well with a double mat, making a penthouse of wicker work
from the wall to cover the head thereof with straw laid thereupon: and when
the Southern Sun shines, to open the door of the cou^^ made for the said
herb right upon the said Sout^^Sunne.

For to sow it, you must make a hole in the earth with your finger, and that as
deep as your finger is long, To s^w Nicotiana.
then you must cast into the same hole ten or twelve seeds of the said
Nicotiana together, and fill up the hole again: for it is so small, (...) that
if you should put in but four or five seeds, the earth would choke it: and,
(...) the time be dry, you must water the place easily some five days after:
it may be sown also after the manner of Lettuses, and such other herbs,
mingling the mould very well with the seed, and afterward covering it most
carefully. Some mix with the said earth very clean ashes, being well si^ted
and made small, but in a (...) quantity. It is a long time in springing and
putting forth, and after that it is (...) forth, The way to remove Nicotiana.
you must keep it both from the cold and frost, covering it in the night time,
even whiles it is young and small: and so it will be preserved and kept
continually green and beautiful. And when the herb is grown out of the
earth, in as much as every seed will have put up his sprout and stalk, and
that the small threddi^ roots and entangled the one within the other, you must
with a great knife make (...) great circle or compass within the earth in the
places about this plot where they grow, and take up the earth and all together,
and cast them into a bucketfull of water, to the end that the earth may be
separated, and the small and tender impes swim above the water, and so you
shall sunder them one after another without breaking of them: and thus having
freed them one of another, you shall plant them along the said wall some three
foot from it, and four foot every one from another: and if the earth near
unto the wall be not so good as it ought, you shall help it by such (...) of
batteling as has been spoken of, and shall close up all your care about the
plants so removed with watering them o^t. The time to sow them is about (...)
April, At what time Nicoti^ana must (...).
or in the beginning: or else earlier, if the Springtime begin earlier: the
Indians and Spaniards sow it in Autumn.

As concerning his virtues seeing it is hot and dry in the second degree, as
his biting and sharp kind of taste does declare: we cannot doubt but that it is
good to cleanse and resolve, as also good for the effecting of the things which
^t has been tried to have wrought, that is to say, for the healing of the
Noli me tangere, all old wounds, and inueterate and cancred ulcers, hurts,
ring^ worms, and exulcerated seabs, what malign quality soever is in them,
Kings evil, clouds of the eyes, conlusions, impostumes, stingings of living
creatures, rednes^e of the face, and many other accidents which we will run
over hereafter particularly. But in respect of the ver^^es thereof, the best
and most to be esteemed part are the leaves, and for want of them, The l^aues
of Nicotiana are the best part of the same.
the seed, though it have no such virtue as the leaves: the leaves thereof are
used, either as they are green at the time of their ripeness, or being kept
dry in the time of Winter, or in powder, when they are dried and made in
powder: as for the way to keep them, we will speak thereof hereafter.

And to speak particularly of the effects of Nicotiana. The cold and windy
pain of the head, Ache of the head, arms, and l^gg^^.
arms, and legs will be helped, if you lay upon the grief oftentimes the
green leaves of Petum somewhat dried over the fire* the toothache is stayed by
rubbing the teeth with a linen cloth that has been dipped in the juice of the
said shearbe, and by putting into the tooth a pill of the leaves of the same
herb. The wounds of the arms, legs, and other parts of the body how old
soever they be, will be thoroughly siccatrized, if you wash them first with
white wine or urine, and afterward wipe them very clean with a linen cloth,
and by and by after put thereupon one or two green leaves well stamped with
the juice, or the juice alone, and upon it some fine white Lin^, or white
linen cloth, continuing the same daily unto the end of the cure: and, if you
have no green leaves, take dry ones, and powder them, and put of this powder
into the wounds, after you have washed them as has been said, and wiped them
with clean linen. The Indians use it to comfort the feeble and not digesting
stomach, A weak stomach not able to digest.
first rubbing it with oil olive, and then applying thereupon one or two
leaves somewhat dried and made pale over the fire: it is in use also among the
Indian Canibals against poison, wherewith they use to anoint their arrows when
they go to shoot, and this poison will kill by and by if blood be but drawn:
for when they go to war, they carry in one Hearts foot of that poison, and in
another of the juice of Petuum to remedy the mischief: and if they have no
green, they carry dry with them: and so soon as they have applied it to the
wound, they account themselves out of all danger of death, how great soever the
wound be. This remedy was tried by the Indian C^nibals, by reason of a battle
where they were hurt in a province called Sauinam, and as their custom was to
cure their poisoned wounds with sublimate, so they not finding store thereof
sufficient, were made to apply unto their wounds, the juice drawn out of the
leaves of this herb, which shortly after took away the pain and venime
thereof, and so they became whole: the proof of this thing has also been
made in Spain sundry times; and amongst others, by the Catholic King
himself, who to make trial of this herb, caused the wound of a dog to be
rubbed with sublimate, and then presently after to be applied the juice of
Petum, together with the substance and all. This same remedy may serve against
the bitings of mad dogs, so that it be used within a quarter of an hour
after. The decoction of the leaves boiled in water, and made into a syrope with
sugar, or into a ^uleb or Apozeme, and taking every morning the quantity of
two or three ounces, remedieth the difficulty of breath, old ^ough,
Difficulty of breathing.
An old cough: and causes to spit out gross and slimie humors,
so that the party before he use this decoction, have been universally
purged, by some purgative medicine: the ^uice and dross of the said leaves
stamped in a mortar, does open the obstructions of the spleen* and softeen the
hardness of the same, applied unto the region of the ^pleene in the morning:
The spleen ^^opt and hard.
for want of the leaves the powder may be applied, being (...) with some
ointment appropriat unto such diseases. The same remedy serves ^or the pain
of the stomach, Pain of the stomach.
the pain of the belly, and the colicke, Colicke.
as also such other griefs coming of coldness and windiness, being applied
warm, and used of^entimes, till at length the pains be assuaged. It is not of
the least service for the pains of the matrix, Paime of the matrix.
the said leaves applied unto the navel in manner aforesaid: as also if the
fume thereof be put into the nose of a woman grieved with the (...) of the
Mother. This is the reason why the women that are subject unto the disease of
the Mother, should have the same always ready. Some hold it for a ^^^gular
remedy against the gowt, to chaw every morning fasting the leaves of (...),
because it voydeth great quantity of phlegm out at the mouth, hindering the
(...) from falling upon the joints, which is the very cause of the gowt. If
you (...) the leaves amongst hot embers for some space, and alterward taking
them forth, (...) them (without shaking off the ashes from them) unto his
belly that has (...) drunk much, (...).
you shall as^w^ge his swelling fulnes^e, and keep him from (...). The juice
of the leaves of Nicotiana stamped, clarified, and mixed with (...) sugar of the
form of a syrope, To kill the (...).
being taken in the morning kills and casts (...) worms: but therewithal
you must lay upon the parties nau^ll some of the (...) bruised, stamped in a
mortar, and wrapped in a linen cloth, and let it be presently after he has
taken a clyster of milk and sugar. All aches of the joins (...) a cold cause,
all swellings, Swellings.
Rheumes*
Cold impo^^umes.
tumors, and impostumes coming likew^^e of cold and windy causes, all ki^es
on childrens heels, as also exceeding great itches are (...) led by applying
the leaves of Petum. The juice of Petum laid upon a (...) carbuncleo how
pestilent o^ venomous soever, does heal and cure the same presently: it (...)
the like in old ulcers though they pierce unto the bone, V^ers of the nose.
i^ you continue the use of it so long as there shall be any need: for it
makes the flesh to grow again, and consumes the filhinesse of the ulcers:
which I my self have proved in two (...) of the nose, caused of the French
disease, out of which the juice of this herb (...) great store of worms to
come. Green wounds
Green vvounds (provided that they be not (...) deep) are healed in a day, by
putting into them of this juice, and applying of the dross upon them: and if
it happen that they should be deep, then it is but the ^^^ther washing of them
with wine, and then to put this juice into them, and the (...) thereof above
and upon them with a linen cloth dipped into the juice: also for (...) more
brief and speed^^hr curing of them, it were good that they were washed (...)
and without with the same juice.

Nicotiana dried has the like operation in the diseases and accidents above
sp^ken of: Wherefore the dried (...) Nicotiana are good
the way to dry them is this: You must take the fairest leaves and those also
that are indifferent fair, and put them upon a file, and afterward dry (...)
the shadow, hanging under some chamber door, not in the Sun, Wind, or (...),
and so you may keep them whole, to use them afterward thus dried or else in
po^der. To dry Nicotiana.
And that I may particularly touch the diseases which the dried leaves are good
for. If you take of the best Tobacco or Nicotiana, I do not mean such as
gro^eth and is frequent with us, but that which is naturally good, as having
all his right both of Sun and soil, and is brought from the Indians, of
which there are (...) kinds according to the natures of the countries, and the
plantation of the herb, (...) in leaf, some in roll, and some in ball, and
twine it very hard as you can togeth^^ then with a knife shred it very small,
and spreading it upon a clean sheet of (...) dry it over a gentle fire made
of charcoale or other fuel that has no stink (...) smoke, then when it is
cold, you shall put it into a Tobacco pipe that is (...) clean or new (...)
(the figure whereof is needles^e to relate, because the world (...) so much
inchaunted therewith, that not any thing whatsoever is half so (...) this is
now a days) and having slopt it hard into the pipe, you shall with a (...)
candle, or other sweet flame, set it on fire, and then sucking and drawing the
(...) into your mouth, you shall force the fume forth at your nosthrills, which
fume (...) the head be well covered) make that you shall avoid at the mouth
such (...) s^^mie and flegmaticke water, as that your body thereby will become
lean, a^ if (...) had fasted long: by which one may conjecture that the
dropsy The dro^sie.
not confirmed (...) be helped by taking the same fume: the same fume taken at
the mouth is (...) good for them that have a short breath, old cough or
rheumes, in which (...) makes them to avoid infinite quantity of thick and
slimie phlegm. The suffocation of the mother.
The (...) of the Mother, otherwise called the Suffocation of the Mother, is
healed by (...) this fume into the secret parts. For the headache Headache.
coming of a cold or windy cause, if you cannot come by the green leaves,
then take the dry, moistening them first with a little wine, and after drying
them at live ashes, then afterward sprinkle upon them sweet water, and so
apply them unto your head, or any other such place where you feel any pain:
you may do as much with the powder of the leaves dried wingling therewithal
things appropriat unto the disease. Such as are subject unto swounings Sw^uning.
are by and by brought again, by taking at the mouth or nosthralls the fume of
the said leaves burnt, in respect whereof Indian women keep this herb very
carefully, because they be subject to swounings. Which is more, The fume of
Nicotiana asswageth hunger and thirst.
the inhabitance of Florida do feed themselves a certain space with the fume
of this herb (whatsoever a certain new Cosmographer say to the contrary,
who seeks by his ^yes to triumph over us in this respect) which they take at
the mouth, by the means of certain small horns, the picture whereof you may
see by the figure of the herb. And the truth hereof we gather from them which
have been in the countries of Florida, and by mariners coming daily from the
Indies, which hanging about their necks little pipes or horns made of the
leaves of the Date-tree, or of reeds, or of rushes, at the ends of which little
horns there are put and packt many dry leaves of this plant, writhen together
and broken. They put fire to this end of the pipe, receiving and drawing in
with their breath at their mouth wide open, so much of this fume as possibly
they can, and affirm thereupon that they find their hunger and chirst
satisfied, their strength recovered, their spirits rejoiced, and their brain
drencht with a delightsome drunkenness: as also to avoid out of the mouth an
infinite quantity of flegmaticke water. But in that the fume of this herb
makes men somewhat drunk, some men have thought it to be very cold, and by
that reason a kind of yellow Henbane, which it resembles much in his stalks,
leaves, cups, and seed, That Nicotiana does not make drunk.
as we have said before: but we must know that the fume of this herb does not
make drunken so quickly, and withal, that this kind of drunkenness does not
proceed of excessive cold, such as is found in Henbane, but rather in a
certain atomaticall vapor which does fill the ventricles of the brain. All
which virtues and properties, besides that we have proved and tried them in
many diseases here in the countries of France, to the great comfort of the
sick: they also which come from the Indies, and new world of Florida, have
confidently avouched unto us to have proved and tried the same in themselves,
having been wounded and hurt, when they made war in the country against the
rebellious and treacherous Indians: who likewise affirm, that much good is
spoken of this herb, even of all the priests of these barbarous nations,
whereof they make use in their Magical practices and diuinations, imagining
that by the virtue thereof the things which they desire to know are revealed
unto them. And that it is so, the savage and brutish Indians being accustomed
to ask of their Priests the success and events of things to come, is proved
by the Priests: for then they to fulfill the desires and requests of the
Indians, take the leaves of this plant and put them in a pipe, or hollow end of
a cane, and being mixed with Wine, they sup in and receive it all at the mouth,
and by and by after they f^ll in a trance, and become as men without life so
long as until the herb have ended his operation: and then they rise up half
giddie, and so make answer unto whatsoever any man has demanded of them: but
we must think that it is more probable, Divination by Nicotiana.
that such like diuinati^n does proceed of some devilish art, rather than by
virtue of this plant, seeing withal, that this barbarous and heathenish nation
is ordinarily given to call upon the wicked feend in all their necessities, and
he again does so dazzle their eyes, that he makes them to conceive an infinite
number of ambiguous and doubtful things, and false superstitions: representing
unto them a thousand devilish and dreadful visions and apparitions: thus is
the simplicity of this poor people deluded, by the company of the said
Priests, holding for a true and certain oracle their virtue proceeding from
this plant. Furthermore when they are thoroughly disposed to see strange and
fantastical visions, they burn the leaves of the said plant, and take the fume
at their mouth and nosthrils, and very presently after they become as it were
deprived of sense, falling to (...) ground in a trance. It is certain that
many Philosophers do deliver that there (...) certain plants which have the
like force and properties, making men to dream of (...) infinite sort of
things, and those well pleasing to the spirit and understanding of (...)
furthermore they assure us that if a man take of the juice of it in any
quantity, (...) shall become beside himself for the space of three days. Mad
nightshade.
Dioscorides likewise says, That there are diverse plants which have the same
virtue as Mad nightshade, a (...) of the root whereof, as he says, drunk
with Wine, does bring dreams of (...) things; but not altogether unpleasant:
but taken the double quantity it make^^ mad, Anise-seed.
Turnips.
and taken four, fold it kills: if any man eat Anise-seed going to bed, he
shall have pleasant dreams in his sleep: but and if he eat turnips, they will
procure hi^ noisome and troublesome dreams.

Furthermore, the use of the leaves of Nicotiana, as well green as dry and
(...) in powder, are distilled in a glass lembecke, the water whereof is not
less (...) than the juice in wounds, swellings, kibes, and the falling of the
nails of the ^^gers, if you power of this water upon the grief, and afterward
cover it with (...) clothes dipped in the same.

Some likewise draw an oil out of it by descension (to speak after the manner
of Chemists) in a glass retort: some also do make thereof a chymicall salt:
both the one and the other, are a great deal more excellent in the foresaid
diseases, (...) the leaves, juice, powder, or distilled water of Nicotiana,
forasmuch as quintessesces drawn out of simples, are the subtle spirits
thereof, wherein lies the pure (...) and sincere qualities of the matter from
whence it is drawn: we will not speak^ here of the manner of distilling of the
Chymicall oil, and salt of Nicotiana, but reserve the same for our book of
secret remedies.

The ointments of Nicotiana are made diverse ways, notwithstanding that this
(...) simple taken and applied as we have already spoken at large, be of
greater vert^^ and efficacy. I will only make mention of two which seem to
me the most artificially described. The first is: take of the fairest,
greatest, geenest, and most ro^^nish leaves of Nicotiana that can be chosen, a
pound, wipe them as clean as (...) possible with a linen cloth from all dust,
earth, and whatsoever other filth, not ^^^ting them any thing at all, bray them
in a mortar of wood or marble, with a wooden pestell: afterward melt half a
pound of sweet seame prepared (that is (...) from all manner of filmes and
skins) in a brazen vessel, putting to the said (...) the dross and juice of
Nicotiana stamped, as has been said, let it all boil together in a brazen
vessel at a small and soft fire, set upon a trivet, or in Mary's-(...) (that
is to say, a cauldron full of boiling water) until you see all the warrie part
of the juice euaporated, What is meant by Maries-bath.
and that the rest have got the consistence or just thickness of the form of
an unguent. The second ointment is such: melt and boil together perrosin, The
second ointment.
new wax, and turpentine upon a cool fire in a brass skellet, of each thre^
ounces, and when it is all melted and shall begin to froth, take a pound of the
dross^ and juice of the leaves of Nicotiana, so purged, chosen, and stamped, as
has been^ said: set them to boil with the wax, perrosin, and turpentine, the
space of five or six hours more or less, at a small and gentle fire of
coals, upon a treuet, or in a double vessel (that is to say, in a cauldron
full of boiling water) stir the same continually until the watrie parts of
the juice be consumed and spent, and the rest boiled thick like an ointment:
after that, strain it through a thick canuasse, and p^^ it again into the
skellet, with half a pound of Venice turpentine, not suffering it (...) boil,
but stirring it very well: let it cool, and put it into pots for your use.
(...) in dispensing the first and second ointment, put not in the dros^e of the
stamped herb, but strayning it through a thick strainer, reserve only the
juice, which seems (...) me to be the better. As concerning the properties of
these two ointments, the (...) is better for wounds only, canerous ulcers,
ringwormes, skurfes, and fire faces, because it has more force to cleanse and
resolve, which is the principal and chief property of Nicoriana, not being
hindered or restrained by the mixture of other ingredients. The other Ointment
is better to incarnate and consolidate all sorts of wounds, to resolve
impostumes and swellings, to mitigate pains, and other effects.

Besides these two sorts of Ointments, An excellent Balm made of Nicotiana.
there may be made a very excellent Balm of Nicotiana: Distill the leaves of
Nicotiana with the juice pressed out (the dross being cast away) put it into a
Glasse-violl, with like quantity of common Oil: set this Violl, well stopped
with gummie Wax, in the Sun a long time, and tie upon the top of it a strong
parchment; or else set this Violl in a Cauldron full of boiling water, or bury
it in Horse dung, and let it stand there full forty days, changing the dung
sometimes: the forty days expired, you shall find a Balm in the Violl, which
is of no less efficacy than the quintes^ence of Nicotiana above mentioned, as
concerning all the properties that may be desired in this Plant.

Lastly, you shall understand that the ashes of this Nicotiana is of no less
sovereignty and medicinal use than the leaf before rehearsed: for after you
have taken the fume of the Tobacco, and that the powder is burnt into ashes,
you shall save those ashes in a close box, for they will cure any green
wound whatsoever. They are also most excellent for the skinning of any soar
or ulcer: and if you steep them in white Wine or Urine, and make a lee
thereof, (but Urine is the better, because it has a certain s^ewt oily
substance in it, which comfort and suppleth soars) and with this ice if you
bath any old and inueterate ulcer, it will take away the itch, cleanse it, and
heal it. If with these ashes also you rub your teeth, it will make them white,
smooth, and preserve them a long time from rotting.

See here (friendly Reader) the History of Nicotiana, every where so much
spoken of and esteemed, and that according unto the very truth, so far as
possibly I could find it out, following the report and intelligences which I
have received of the Portugals, Spaniards, and our own Countrymen, which have
come hither these last years past from out of Florida (which is the natural
soil of the same) as also such experiments as have been made here in France
of the faculties and virtues thereof, altogether like unto those which that
Plant which Florida (as the natural Country thereof) does bring forth and
nourish: Which if you have not always found in every point correspondent and
answering unto such effects as we attribute and give unto it, yet you must not
therefore condemn the Plant, as though those were but fained and counterfeited
properties and virtues which we have delivered and reported of it; but rather
accuse the small care which is had in the planting of it here amongst us:
assuring your selves, that if you provide for it such a soil, and other
comforts, as it has where it naturally grows, or somewhat near thereunto
(for such in all respects cannot possibly be procured here in France, by reason
of the coldness and inequality of the a^re) and that you husband it likewise
as carefully as the Indians do, that then you shall perceive, that what I have
here set down of in, is very faithful and true.

CHAP. XLV.
Of female Petum.
THe experience (which is the Mistress of Arts and Sciences) which has been
had of the faculties and virtues of this herb, which are almost like unto
those of male Petum; the shape of the root, stalk, leaves, flowers, and seed
of the same, which is but a very little one, and in lit^^^nesse only
differing from the figure and color of male Petum, do give us some light and
reason why we should call this hear be by the name of female Petum; and yet
the more boldly, Female Petum growth of the seed of the male
for that of the seed of the male Petum this female does oftentime spring and
grow: For it when the male Petum is in seed, it happen to shed the same upon
the ground where it is planted and has put forth, then this ground the year
following will not fail to bring forth the female Petum. And which more (...),
if you sow the seed of male Petum in a ground that is not hot, fat, well
turned, and well manured, but rather which is lean and ^andie, in stead of
bringing forth male Petum, it will bring forth the female Petum, and that in
such abundance, as that you shall hardly rid the ground of it, but that it
will grow every year without being either sown or planted. Which must be an
argument unto us, that there is in Petum two sexes, a male and a female: like
as we are accustomed to do in many (...) Herbs and Plants, having betwixt
them some resemblance and affinity, as well (...) their virtues, as in their
figure, proportion, and color. It is true, that the femal^ Petum has a less
slemme, and lower; the leaves not so great, and shorter, not so rosinie, nor so
many; the flowers not so much upon carnation, nor so large spread; the seed
more red; the branches not so long, nor so high, neither yet so many, as the
male Petum puts forth. And to utter my judgment, and make a particular
scripli^^ this small female Nicotiana has his stem or stalk of two foot
height, or then ^ about, cornered, slimie, and woollie, set by distances with
long leaves, large, pointed, and sharp, soft, unctuous, hoarie, not notched,
and of a brown color. It bring^^ forth, as it were, a nosegay at the top of
the stalk, and upon the branches, from betwixt the leaves, two flowers of a
pale yellow, which are like unto the Cowsl^p flowers: and when they be fallen,
there remain and stay behind cups, and, as it we^^ green pots, enclosed in
small hoarie skins, open above, and having five or (...) points, but such as
prick not. Within the cup is contained a seed, which is very little, of a
brown tawnie color: the root is tender and fibrous. Where the seed (...)
been once sown, it sows it self again, and increases and multiplieth
mightily. This shows manifestly, how greatly they are deceived, which call
this hear be Pr^^peia, Female Petum as not Priapeia.
as though it were a kind of Satyrion, which comes near to that which is
called male royal Satyrion: for this herb, which we call female Petum, does
nothing resemble Satyrion, neither in root, color, figure, disposition, nor
properties. For female Petum has many small roots, a ^ointed stalk, many
branches, man (...) long and large leaves, being hot and dry, as is the male
Petum: but Satyrion (...) fewer roots, but grosler, a stalk without any
joint, no branches, fewer leaves, flowers only at the top of the stalk,
without cods and seed, hot and moist in the third degree, and good for nothing
but to stir up carnal heat. Monsieur Go^pill and Dodonaeus have spoken more
wisely, saying, that it is a kind of Henbane, bearing ^ yellow flower.

As concerning the use and remedies which female Petum affoordeth, The virtues
of female Petum.
they are, as it were, like unto the virtues of male Petum: for it serves in
stead of the oth^^ when the other cannot be gotten, and that in such sort as we
have declared; that is to say, in his leaves, green or dry, powder, seed,
juice, dross, and distilled water, in ointments and balm, prepared after the
manner that we have spoken of. But you must observe, The leaves of female
Petum for the bloody flux.
that the female Petum has his particular properties; as that the leaves put
in a decoction for Clysters, are singular for bloody Fluxes; and that the
balm made thereof, according to the manner aforesaid, is a remedy not second
(...) any other in the curing of the Cankers of the breasts, and other parts;
and that the juice thereof applied, is singular against the falling of the
hair, called Tinea, the head being first shaven; and that the juice, mingled
with man's grease, and applied, assuageth the pain and inflammation of the
Gout; and that taken inwardly, it purges vehemently: and that therefore it is
to be avoided and shunned, until such time as his correctiue be known, and
the use thereof in Purgations received.

CHAP. XLVI.
A brief discourse of the root Mechoacan.
WIthin certain years past, the Indians, Portugals, and Spaniards have sent
us the root of an herb, which they call Mechoacan which has virtue to purge
the humors in the same sort that our usual purging medicines. Our Country
men, given to admit of and easily receive new things, do greatly esteem of
it, even until this present: We will lay down the history thereof in brief,
and as truly as possibly we could come by it, to the end it may the better be
discerned whether it deserve to be had in such estimation as we have it in, or
no.

The root is called Mechoacan, The reason why it is so called.
of the name of the Region or Country where it grows, which is a Province of
New Spain (situate in the West Indies, or New World) called by the inhabitants
Chincicila, and by the commandment of the Ca^holike King, Mechoacan: Which
Province abounds with Gold, Silver, Cattle, Corn, Fruits, exquisite Plants,
mines of Metal and Stones, and all sorts of good things; where also the
people are well colored, full of vigor, strong of body, and of a perfect
health, and that by reason of the Air, which is more wholesome there than in
any other place of the Indies. The occasion of the name rose thus: The
Spaniards, Lords of this Province, and being desirous to plant it with
Christians, did erect and set up a Covent of Friars Cordeliers, living
Monastically; whose Provincial Father being extreme sick, was quickly cured
by an Indian Physician, who caused him to use oftentimes the powder of this
well-prospe^ing and happily-succeeding medicine: when as therefore they fell
sick^, they took, with good success, of this powder. And thus this root came
in great request throughout the whole Province: and from thence the praises
thereof were carried and published throughout all Spain and Portugal; and
thereupon it has kept the name of the Province of Mechoacan. The fame thereof
is likewise come into France by the means of Merchants, desirous of gain, who
have brought it us hither from thence. Some call it Rhamindick, Rhamindicke.
because it seems that it has the like property of attracting and purging
flegmaticke and serous humors, which the East Rhubarbe has to attract and
purge choleric humors.

This root is not brought unto us whole, The marks of Mechoacan.
but in pieces and round slices, whereinto it is divided with knives, or with
hands, so soon as it is drawn out of the earth, that so it may the better
dry in the shadow (although in drying it grow but little less) and that it
may keep better in these round slices, than either whole, or in powder: But
the powder which is brought from the Indies, is of less operation than that
which is made into powder amongst us: it is thick and of a weighty substance,
and the rind thereof of an Ash-like color: the inward substance white, and
marked with many circles, without any taste, except such as meal is wont to
have: for it is neither sharp, nor sweet, nor bitter; and smell it has none,
neither is it any thing pithie.

The best is that which is whitest, To choose the best Mechoacan.
most close in it self, well set and joined together, somewhat heavy, not
full of holes, or rotten: it becomes, in time, of white, somewhat grayish or
blackish, and thus by his color is discerned whether it be new or old: for the
new is white, but the old grayish, or blackish, and, as it were, wrought with
diverse colors.

This is the root of a Plant, which is a kind of great Bindweed, called in
French Lizeron, which windeth it self about Reeds or Stakes along up to the
top of them, helping it self, in this compassing sort, to climb without any
manner of aid: it has a stalk or trunk mix of diverse colors, as deep
yellow, greenish, reddish, somewhat of the color of Ashes and Medlay, commonly
called the Lions color: the leaves are somewhat moist (there being within the
flowers, as it were, clappers, with round knots at the upper end, the
sharpe-pointed end being toward the (...) of the foot) round, and of a dark
greenish color. It bears a fruit like a Grape, as big as a Coriander seed,
and it is ripe in the month of September, and in the Spring following. It
puts forth near unto the roots small siences and (...), which fall to
creeping upon the earth, if they be not borne up with some pol^, about which
they may wrythe and cast themselves round. The seed is like unto th^^ of
Bindweed. For your better assurance in all this that has (...) said, you (...)
visit and see the Physicke-Gardens of Master Nicholas R^se, that learned and
(...) experimented Chi^urgion, and of Master Peter Cuth, a skillful and
painful Ap^thecarie, both which dwelling at Paris, have enriched our Country
of (...) with an infinite number of rare, exquisite, and very singularly
qualified (...) This root is very like to the root of wild Vine, as well in
color, rind, and ^^^^^kles, as in thickness; in consideration whereof, some
have called this Plant (...) Vine: but and if you taste the one and the other
root, your shall find them somewhat differing: for Mechoacan, if you chew it,
is found without any taste, (...) it have a mealie taste, for it is nothing
sharp, but has some small as^ringe^^ and binding quality. Brionie, green or
dry, is biting, and leaves behind it, in (...) palate and roof of the mouth,
a sharp and displeasing taste: it agrees much better with the black Vine, or
with Turbith, at the least in faculty, and (...) they are both of them gummie.



And concerning the virtues and faculties thereof, The virtues of M^choacan.
they are of two sorts: the (...) proceeds of his manifest qualities, as for
that it is hot about the second degree, and dry about the third degree,
compounded of ayr^e, subtle, and somewhat (...) parts: and by this last, it
has some binding and astringent quality, from whenee it rises, that in
purging it comfort. Furthermore, it opens the obstructions of the inward
parts, chiefly when it is taken in infusion. The other virtues that it (...)
come of a secret and hidden property, by reason whereof it purges special
and choice humors: that is, it purges, by some similitude and familiarity of
substance* flegmatike and serous humors, but flegmatike especially; then
secondly, choleri^^^, and last, adust and melancholic humors: and those not
only from the (...), liver, spleen, and guts, but also from the head, parts
about the breast, and (...) in regard whereof, it is good against old Agues,
and long diseases, but especially the Iaundise, Dropsy, Gout, Kings evil,
Wolves, flegmatike tumors, head-^^^, obstruction of the Lungs, shortness of
breath, the suffocation of the Mother, C^licke, pain in the Flanks, retention
of Urine, Costiuenesse, Agues of diverse ^^mours, that is to say, proceeding of
flegmaticke and choleric causes mixed together, quotidian, tertian, and
bastard Agues: to be short, against all diseases coming of a cold humor.
Wherefore it is not meet to be used in hot burning Agues, nor yet in choleric
Agues, nor yet in any other such sicknesses, Mechoacan is not fit for
choleric diseases.
as are joined with great heat and inflammation, nor yet where adust humors
do offend: for although it purge them, yet it leaves behind it some notable
heat: but it is very true, that in continuance thereof it would do service,
as namely, when the thinnest part is purged, and nothing remains but the
thick and gros^e behind. This is the cause why this root is not fit for the
beginning of choleric diseases, if it be not first steept a ^ight in Endive
or Succorie water with a very little white wine, and in the morning ^straining
of it, to drink the liquor strained from it.

The way to prepare it is on this manner: You must take the weight of a dram,
The preparing of Mechoacan for to use.
or a dram and a half, or two drammes, more or les^e, according to the
disposition of the body, the aptness of it to purge, and the age and strength
of him to whom you give it: and afterward beat it in a mortar, and make it
into powder, neither too gross nor too fine: then afterward put this powder in
three ounces of white Wine, (when there is no Ague) or water, or the decoction,
or broth of Endive, or Succorie, or of a Chicken, or some other such liquor,
which is meet and fit for the present disease: as in the water of Betonie, for
the headache; or in the water of Mother-wort, for the diseases of the Matrix,
and so forth of others: afterward, the next morning, you must drink it, the
liquor and powder all together: there may further, at your pleasure, any
syrrup that you will, be mixed therewith, if so be you know it meet and
convenient for the disease in hand. It is true, that we have often proved,
namely, that it endures no mixture of syrrups, or such other things, no, nor
of Cinnamon (if the ill disposednesse of the stomach do not require it) for
in such mixtures it makes no operation, The infusion of Mechoacan.
and therefore it is better to take it altogether simple. It may be given also
in infusion, when we desire to take away the obstructions of the spleen or
^^iuer, in sleeping all night the powder thereof grossly beat (as we command
to be done with Rubarbe) in some wine or liquor fit and appropriate: afterward
straining it the next day in the morning, and giving the liquor only (wherein
it was infused) to drink: but in this case the quantity of the powder must be
increased, until it come to three or four drammes, for otherwise it will
work no effect; in as much as experience has taught us, that the purging
quality of this root lies not so much in the subtle parts thereof, as in the
substance. Which thing Mesues may seem to have ^ound likewise in Rubarbe of
the East, when he wishes us to take two drammes only of Rubarbe in substance,
and the double in infusion. This thing may happen unto this root, and to that
Rubarbe of the East, upon their longer staying in the stomach, being taken in
substance, than in infusion, and thereupon make a stronger and a longer
continuance of their purging. This powder may be also prepared in another
manner: Marchpanes of Mechoacan.
as namely, by making Marchpanes of the said powder with stamped Almonds and
Sugar, which will be very fit to purge young children after a gentle manner.
Pills of Mechoacan.
There may pills also be made of this powder, which may be as small as
Coriander seeds, to the end they may be the sooner dissolved within the
stomach, and not stay long there to heat it: or else they may be made greater,
when there is any purpose that the said powder should draw from the ioints and
outward places.

The commodities and benefits that rise of the use of this root, The
commodities of the use of Mechoacan.
are, that it may be taken at all times. It is not loathsome to the taste, nor
horrible to the smell, neither yet has it any displeasing color; unto all
which the other purgatiues, for the most part, (...) more or less subject. It
procures not any loathing unto the stomach: it causes not any wringings in
the belly; neither provoke it any vomit: It purges so gently, as that it
works not any weakness or relaxation, or any other such passion unto the
stomach: it resolves not or looseneth the natural power; neither does it
trouble or put the body to pain: but contrariwise, it makes it strong and
lusty, as though indeed it were no purgative or medicine, but a familiar and
acceptable thing to our nature; which thing falls not out ordinarily in other
medicines: so that young children, old folk, and all such as have taken any
great check and dislike at other medici^^, may safely, pleasantly, and
profitably take and use this.

It is true, That the body and humors must be prepared before the taking of
Mechoacan.
that before it be taken, it will be needful to prepare and digest the ^^mour
that is to be euacuated, attenuating and making thin and small the same,
because it is cold and clammie: and opening the passages, after the counsel of
Hi^^^crates, with Clysters and other convenient means; for otherwise the
powder pr^^^teth nothing: as we see it fall out every day in such as use it
rashly, and without p^^paration: and so also, with them, the thing that of it
self is very good, does (...) name, but against all right and equity, seeing
it works good and laudable effects, being taken the body first prepared. The
day of the taking of it.
When it is taken, the party must keep himself from cold, wind, much eating
or drinking, and other excess: he may sleep (...) hour presently after he
has taken it, but not after that it begins to work: th^^ is no need for
him to take any broth two or three hours after he has taken it: (...) is so
worthy a medicine, The day after the taking of it.
that it causes not any pain in the guts. The day following, Costiuenesse.
if the belly be bound, you must procure it to stool by Clysters, or
other^^^^* and put case it has not sufficiently purged, you must then go over
it again so (...), as till it has wrought your wished intent. Symptoms
happening upon the use of Mechoacan.
As concerning the symptoms or accidents which may follow the taking of it,
they are easily reformed, although (...) the greater part of them grow rather
of the qualities of the humors, or of the (...) dispositions of the bodies of
them that take it, than of any malign quality in the root it self. For as
for vomiting, that may come by reason of the stomach, being easy and inclined
to vomit, as having a very sensible orifice, or of the obounda^^^ of
superfluities and fretting humors contained in the same, rather than of the
pow^^der which does strengthen and comfort the stomach by his astringencie:
notwithstanding, it shall not be amiss to meet with this vomiting, to put into
the infusion^^ this powder a little Cinnamon. It is held for certain, that if
any be desirous to (...) the working excessine or not excessive of this
powder, that he needs but take (...) small quantity of broth, and the eating
of it will stay the attraction of the medicin^* although I have proved this not
to be always true. I further confess, that it lea^^^ some heat and dryness
behind it when it has wrought, which appears by (...) great alteration that
is remaining: but this is no other thing, than that which (...) purging
medicines likewise have; for they being all of them hot, do show themselves
therein: but this heat may easily be corrected by the mingling of cold things.
Suppose likewise, that such heat may as soon come of the hot and dry humor:
(...) happens in hot burning Agues and true Tertians, especially if the sick
party (...) of youthful and flourishing years, of a hot and dry
temperature, in Summer, (...) hot Region, and when the present constitution of
the air is hot, and being such^ one as has a lean and thin body: and
then, in this case, I could with such a party not to use this powder without
the devise of a learned and wise Physician, for (...) of running into a greater
mischief. I confes^e further, that it leaves a contiuene^^ behind it, in such
sort, as that some are six days before they can go to stool (...) but herein
it deserves no more blame than other like purging medicines, and especially
Rhubarbe: Notwithstanding, to meet with this, you must take a (...) the day
following, or eat some Broth, or Plumme pottage, which may (...) the belly.

Lo here (friendly Reader) what thou art to judge of the root of Mecho^^^^ and
what opinion thou art to have of the properties thereof, and how thou can
(...) fail therein, if first thou knowing the good by his tokens and marks,
do (...) thy self for thy use accordingly: as namely, if thou buy that
which is new, sliced (...) to round pieces, white, dustie, and which, quantity
for quantity, does over-(...) other roots: And if thou find any one to be
somewhat black and worm (...)* by that thou may know that it is old, and
that therefore thou ought not to (...) it. It is somewhat hard, and quickly
rotteth, for it will hard and scant endure (...) years, if it be not hidden in
Millet, or wrapped in a Linen Sere-cloth, or (...) over with Pitch or Rosin.
Diverse and sundry other herbs there are of rare and sovereign quality, for
the use of man, in medicines; but their order, sowing, nourishing, and
planting, differs nothing from them already rehearsed: only, according unto
the opinion of S^rres, there is another special regard to be taken to these
medicinal herbs; which is, to plant them in those coasts and corners of your
Garden which is most proper to their natures, giving them that Sun, that
Shade, and that Wind, which is most proper and behoofefull for them: for some
take delig^^ in the Easterly quarters, some in the West, some in the North, and
some in the South: as was most curiously observed by Master Richard de
Beleuall, Physician to the last King of France; who, at his Majesty's
commandment, planting a Physick-Garden in Montpelier, gave unto every herb
his due place so rarely and artificially, that never any was seen to flourish
or increase in more rare and abundant manner, neither to have greater strength
or operation in their working, to the great admiration of the learned, and his
high renown in the workmanship. To proceed then to the natural Clymats in
which many of these Physic herbs naturally delight, Herbs of the East.
you shall understand, that those herbs which delight in the East, and love
to behold the Sun at his first arising, is first Angelica, of which there are
two kinds, the one called Garden Angelica, the other Wild Angelica: both may be
sown either before or immediately after Winter. It is sovereign against all
Infection, and therefore much sought after in the time of Pestilence and
Mortality: it also heals the biting of Serpents, or mad Dogs, and dries
up those naughty humors which offend the stomach. Then Valerian, of which
we have written before: and also Argentine. Then Dogges-tooth, which must be
sown on good earth almost in any month: the decoction whereof taken, with
great reason helps Feauers, and kill the Worms in children. Then Sophya,
otherwise called Talietrum, which may be either sown or planted in the Spring,
or in Autumn: The seeds of it being beaten to powder, and drunk in Wine, is
excellent for all euacuations and clearings of the blood: also it helps women
in Childbearing. Then Oxe-eye, which would be sown at the Spring under the
eauings of houses, for it loves shelter. The herb is good to be drunk for
the Iaundise: and being made into a Cataplasme, it dissolueth all manner of
hardness: and the decoction thereof will occasion Urine. Then Centaurie, which
first took his name from Chiron the Centaure, when he was wounded with a
poisoned shaft. It requires a well-laboured earth, and very fruitful,
according to some opinions: yet it is oftest found in Wood-land Countries and
barren places; whence it seems, that a reasonable earth will bear it: and it
may be sown or planted either in the Spring, or in Autumn: it is a great
purifier of the Blood, and very sovereign against Worms: it heals old
Ulcers, especially the powder thereof: and the decoction thereof is excellent
against Rheumes and Fluxes. Then Millefoile, which desires rather a moist than
a dry earth, and must be planted thin, for it spreads much: it is
sovereign against the Dissenterra, and against all excessive euacuation of
blood, in what part soever it be. Then Brassula Mayor, or Minor, which is an
herb of quick and easy growth, especially if it be planted against a wall
or house side, and may be sown in the Spring, or planted in Autumn: it is
good for the stanching of Blood, and it cures most inward Ulcers. Then
Bedegaris, or white Thorn, which desires a good earth, and may be sown in
the Spring: the decoction of it is excellent for the Toothache, or for a weak
Stomach, for the Collicke, or Flux of the belly. Then Crespinet, or
Poligonon, which ever grows best in a moist ground. It is good for the Stone,
the Gout, Flux of the belly, or pain in the Ears. Then Ebulus, which may be
sown in the Spring, or in Autumn: it purges Choler and Phlegm, being eaten
in pottage: and the decoction thereof takes away the pain of the Gout, and
helps the French sickness. Mercury is of two sorts, male, and female: it
desires a ground that is well tilled: it may be sown in the Spring time: the
decoction thereof purges Choler and all superfluous humors: it also looseneth
the belly, chiefly if it be ministered in Glyster, and provoke the terms in
Women. Then Card^^^ Stellatu^, which is a very delicate Plant, and grows
very easily, either from the root, or from the seed, in the Spring time, or in
Autumn: The chiefest virtue of this Plant consists in the seed, which being
beaten to powder, and drunk with Wine, provoke Urine, and expels Gravel.
Lastly, Venus hair, which grows bes^ near unto Fountains and Springs in
Countries that are rather hot (...) cold, for it loves neither storms nor
wind: it is best to be planted in the Spring. This herb purges well: it
breaks the Stone, and auoideth Gravel: it is good against the bitings of
venomous Beasts, and provoke the terms in Women: it stauncheth Blood: and
the decoction thereof is excellent for the yellow Laundise.

Those herbs which delight in the West, Herbs of the West.
and love the declining of the Sun, are first the herb Scabious, which
delights in a reasonable tilled earth, (...) moist than dry, and having his
seat according to his nature, prospers very abo^^dantly. The best season
either to sow or plant it, is in the Spring time, and it endure^h many years
without aid or replanting: all parts of it is very medicinal, both the root,
stalk, leaves, and flowers: The water distilled of this herb, is good
against all Venimes or Poison taken into the stomach, and also against all
inward infection, Itch, Byles, or Ulcers. Then is Agrimonie, of which we have
spoken (...)* Then Serpentar, which is so called through the likelihood it
bears of a (...) and of it there are two kinds; one great, the other small.
It desires a very good earth, and somewhat moist, and may be sown or planted
in the Spring time. The roots of this herb is excellent for all malignant
Ulcers: a decoction of the (...) thereof is good for Women's terms, and the
leaves thereof keeps Cheese long from rotting. Then Onos, which will grow in
any earth, and rather in a barren (...) a fertile, and is best to be set of
the root, either in the Spring time, or in (...)* It is sovereign against the
Stone, and provoke Urine speedily: and a decoction of the roots thereof
takes away the pain in the teeth. Then Cinquefoile, which grows almost in
every place, and may be planted in any season: the decoction (...) it being
gargled, or held long in the mouth, takes away the pain of the teeth, and
heales any Ulcer in the mouth: it is also good against any Infection, or
pestil^^ Air. Then Sellodnie, of which we have spoken before. Then
Staphi^^^^, which desires a good ground, yet ever to be planted in the shadow,
and that pr^^cipally about the Spring time: It is good against pain in the
Teeth, (...), and other Obstructions, which grow from cold causes. Then Goats
leaf, which will grow every where, if it be not annoyed with wind, and may be
sown or planted either in the Spring, or in Autumn, and is exceeding good for
the stone. Then ground Iuie, of which we have spoken before. Then Tussilago, or
Colts foot, which grows best in watrie of moist places, and would ever be
planted in the Spring time, or (...) Autumn: it is very good against
infection, and against all straitness of breath* (...) the smoke or fume
thereof being taken through a small tunnell in at the mouth, (...) cures all
infirmities of the lungs. Then Salicaria, or Lifimachus, which received the
name from the King Lisimachus, who first made use of that herb: it loves to
be planted near unto Rivers, either in the Spring time, or in Winter: it is
good against the Dissenteria, or to staunch blood, either being used in the
leaf, or in powder. Lastly, Vlmaria, which loves to be planted in low and
shadowie valleys, a great (...) more moist than dry, and would be planted
chiefly in Autumn: The decoction (...) it purges and cleanses the body of
all phlegm, whether it be sharp or gross: it helps the Falling sickness:
the powder either of the roots, or the leaves, stays (...) flux of the
belly, or the issue of blood: and the distilled water eases all pains, both
inward and outward.

Those herbs which affect the North, Herbs of the North.
and delight to endure the blasts and ^^^pings of those colder airs, are first
Gentiana, of which we have spoken before. Th^^ Cabaret, or Asarum, which never
grows so well from the seed, as from the plant: (...) asks little cost in
tillage, and bears flowers twice a year, that is to say, both (...) the
Spring, and in Autumn: it cures the pain in the head, and assu^geth the
inflammation and anguish of sore eyes: it is good against Fistulaes, the Gout,
and Sci^^ticaes. The powder of the root provoke Urine, and stays the
menstruall Flux: (...) helps the Dropsy, and puts away both the Fever
tertian and quartane. Then the Golden rod, which only grows from the seed,
and would be planted in a good soil in the Spring time: it is good against the
Stone or Strangurie: it binds up Ulcers, and heals Fistulaes. Then the
herb which is called Deuils-bit, it desires but an indifferent, earth,
rather moist than dry, and where the Seed often say^eth, there the Plant never
does, if it be set in the Spring time. It is good against bit^er griefs, as
those which proceed from choler, and against pestilent tumors: against ^ice in
childrens heads, and such like. Then Betonie, of which we have spoken before.
Then Hart's-tongue, which only grows best from the root: it is to be plan^ed
in the months of March and April, in a fat earth, yet the moister, the
better: it helps all oppilations, and cures those which are troubled with a
quartane Fever. Then the herb Dogges-tongue, which desires a light black
mould, yet but rea^onably tilled: it may be sown or planted in the Spring
time: it is good to cure the Hemorrhoids, and eases all Ach in the limbs.
Then Serpents-tongue, which must ^uer be placed in a rich earth, cool and
moist, for it can by no means endure the heat of the Summer: it is best to be
planted from the root in the first beginning of the Spring: there is in it much
virtue for the resolving of Tumors, and helping of Scal^ings or Burnings, or
other malignant Ulcers, or any inflammations in the Eyes. Then water
Germander, which delights most in cold grounds, enclining more to ^oisture
than dryness, and rather fat than lean: it flourishes most in the months of
June and July, yet in such sort, that the flowers continue not above a day at
most; ^or as one falls away, another rises: it is best to be planted from the
root or slip (...) the months of February or March: it is sovereign
against all manner of Poy^ons, as Pestilence, or the Dissenteria: it provoke
Urine, and the terms of Women: it cleanses Ulcers, and reuiueth all benumbed
members. Then Tormen^ill, or Septifolium, which loves a dark, waterish, and
shadowed earth, yet that which is very fat and ^ertile: it is always to be
sown from the seed, either in the Spring time, or in Autumn: it is sovereign
against the Stone, but chiefly it cu^eth Fistulaes and old Ulcers: it
withstandeth Poison, and eases the pain of the Teeth. Then Enula Campane, of
which we have spoken before. Then Persicaria, which is oftest planted from the
root, in the Spring time, in grounds which are rather moist than dry. The
decoction of this herb cures all manner of bruises in Beasts, where the bone
is not broken, only by bathing them therein. Also the flesh of Mut^ons,
Beeues, Veales, and such like, is kept fresh many days by the virtue of this
herb ^nely, being wrapped about the same. Then Lions foot, which will not live
but in (...) good earth, fat, and fertile, yet somewhat moist, and is best to
be sown in the ^oneths of March or April: it has an excellent virtue for the
healing of ruptures (...) young children. Then Eringo, which craves a good and
well tilled ground, and ^ay be sown or planted either in the Spring or in
Autumn: it is good against the Collicke, against Gravel, or the difficulty
of Urine: it strengthens the Reins, and heals the bitings of venomous
beasts. The distilled water thereof is good against both quotidian and quartane
Feauers: it helps the French disease, and stop^eth salt humors. Then lastly
Feniculus Porcinus, which delights a great deal ^ore in the shade than in
the Sunshine: it would be sown or planted either in (...) Spring time, or
in Autumn: it comfort much the sinews, and strengthens ^eake backs.

To conclude, those herbs which affect the South, Herbs of the South.
is first the blessed Thistle, of which we have spoke before. Then Veruaine, of
which there be two sorts, the male, and the female: both desire to be planted
from the roots in good ground, either in the ^pring, or in Autumn. This herb
is of great reputation, especially amongst the ^omanes, who use if continually
amongst their Enchantments: it takes away the ^aine of the Teeth, and it
heals any old Ulcer: it is good against any Fea^er, eases the pain of the
Collicke, and expels Gravel. Then Saxifrage, which is of two sorts, the
great and the less: they may be sown or planted in any good ground which is
fat and light, in the month of March. The chiefest (...) of this herb is, to
break the Stone, provoke Urine, help women's Terms, and (...) drive away all
evil humors out of the Stomach. Then Pionie, of which we (...) spoken
before. Then Hermole, or the Turks herb, which loves a fat, black, and
dry mould: it may be either planted or sown. The virtue of this herb (...),
to make one to hold his Urine, the powder of it being taken either in Broth, or
(...) white Wine. Then Acanthus, or Brankvrsine, is an herb which the
ancient A^chitects were wont to carue, enfolding and embracing their Columns
or Pyllast^ ^ of the Corinthian fashion. Whence it came, that the Romans of
ancient (...) did call it Marmoralia, because such Pillars commonly were of
Marble. It is (...) be sown in the months of March, or April, in a well
tilled Garden: his (...) are good against the Stone, and stay the flux of the
belly. Then Aristolochia (...) both kinds, of which we have spoken before.
Then Perforatio, which is so called from the affection that it bears to the
Sun: it may be sown in the Spring (...) in any light earth. The seed of
this herb beaten to powder, and drunk in (...) Wine, cures a tertian
Fever, and eases those which are troubled with the (...), or Sciatica: if the
powder of it be cast upon Ulcers, it also heals them: and the decoction of
the leaves thereof provoke Urine exceedingly. Then Arum, (...) also
delights in a good Soil, rather moist than dry: it flourishes most in
June, and the leaves thereof are like the leaves of Millet; and when it is in
the prime, (...) has a yellow color, like unto Saffron: it is to be sown
only in the month of March. This herb is very sovereign against the Gout,
and drives away (...) flegmaticke humors: if it be bruised, it cures old
Ulcers, and all wounds or ^^tings given by the Wolf: the leaves boiled in
Wine, helps bruises and displaced members or bones out of joint: it helps
the Hemorrhoids also. Then (...) of which we have spoke before. Then Carline,
which took the name from Charl^^ the great, King of France, who by the use of
it only cured himself of the Plagu^ it loves a dry stony ground, and where
it may have the strength of the Sunn^ beams: it must be sown in the Spring
time, or else planted from the root. (...) powder of this herb being drunk,
chaseth away all infection, and prouok^^ Urine: it is good against all
Conuulsions: and being made into a Cataplasme, ^^^tifieth and strengthens the
heart: if it be steeped or mixed well with vinegar, (...) eases either the
Gout, or the Sciatica, being applied unto the place grieved. The little
Germander, which differs not much from water Germander, only it ^^ueth a
dry and stony earth, and rather a hot than a cold: it loves the (...)
beams, and is rather to be planted from the root, than sown from the seed,
(...) in the Spring time, or in Autumn: it is good against infection, and
helps (...) Feauers: it helps the Epilepsis, pain in the head, and any
other griefs of (...) brain: it cures Conuulsions, the Gout, and warmeth the
entrails. Then Nic^^^ana, or Tobacco, of which we have spoken before. Then
Peper, which must (...) planted immediately after Winter, in a well tilled
earth, and endures long in G^^dens, without any help of transplanting. Then
Camomill, which is of three (...) differing only in the colors of their
flowers: for the one is white, the other yell^^* and the third purple: It
loves an earth cold and dry: it is best planted from (...) root or slip,
either in Autumn, or the Spring time: it loves to be often trodden (...) or
pressed down, and therefore is most placed in Alleyes, Banks, or Seats in
(...) Garden. It is good against a tertian Fever: and the bath which is made
(...) strengthens much weak members, and comfort the sinews both of the
(...) and legs: it comfort also the reins: The water thereof also
distilled is (...) good for the same purposes: and the juice thereof mixed with
woman's (...)* Rosewater, and the juice of Housleeke warmed, and a Rose-cake
steeped (...)* with a Nutmeg grated on it, and so applied unto the temples of
the head, ^keth away all pain therein, how violent soever it be. Diverse other
herbs (...) be, which are of like natures to these already rehearsed: but
from the experience (...) these, a reasonable judgment may find how to plant,
nourish, and use any whatsoever. There be also diverse purgative Simples, as
Rhubarbe, Agaricke, and such like, which for as much as our Soyles will not
endure or bear them, I will here omit to speak of them; only a word or two
of the herb Seen, which is somewhat more frequent with us, and is of that
delicate, wholesome, and harmless nature in his working and operation, that it
may be termed the Prince, or Head of Simples. Then touching Seen, you shall
understand, that it bears little small thick leaves upon a high large
stalk: it has flowers of the color of gold, with diverse purple veins
running upon them. Some take the Herb which Theophrastus writes of, called
Colutea, to be Seen: but they are deceived therein: for the one is a Tree, and
no Herb, and the other is an Herb, and no Tree: besides diverse other
differences, needless here to repeat; all which are at large see down by
Anthony Mirauld, Doctor of Physic, and a Bourbonois, in his book entitled
Maison Champestre. It may be planted either from the stalk or root, like
Rosemarie, in any good, fertile, and dry soil, where it may have the full
reflection of the Sun: and the season best and fittest for the same
plantation, is at the later end of Autumn. As touching the choice of the best
Seen, that has ever the best reputation, which is brought from Alexandria in
Syria, as the best of our modern Physicians do report: but Jacques Siluius
says, That the Seen which comes out of India is not at all inferior to it;
neither that which grows in Tuscanie. True it is, that there is not any of
them but is passing good. As for the vertnes of Seen, according to the opinion
of Aetuarius, one of the best reputed Physicians amongst all the Grecians, he
writes, That Seen is very excellent for the purging and avoiding of choler
and phlegm, without any danger of disturbance unto the body and spirits: it
also purges most sweetly all melancholy and adust humors, being taken in the
broth of a Capon: it also takes away all inueterate and old pains in the
head, and eases all inward obstructions. According to the opinion of Master
John of Damascus, and excellent Arabian Physician, Seen being abstersive and
binding, purges excellently the brain, the sensitive, parts, and organs of
the heart, from all adust and melancholy humors: it also helps all long and
tedious Feauers: it also rejoices the spirits, and takes away all sadness
from the heart. A decoction made of the leaves thereof, together with Camomill,
strengthens the brain wonderfully, and comfort the sinews, being bathed
therein: also being taken any way, it confirms both the sight and hearing.
And if you find that the purgation be weak, you may then strengthen it, with
mingling therewith Simples of stronger nature, as Sal Gemma, Sal India, and
such like: but if you use it for any grief in the stomach, then you shall
mix strong cordials therewith, and administer it either in the broth of Veale,
Chickens, or Capons, or any other flesh. And Serapion, another Arabian
Physician, writes, That Seen is excellent for those which are dull of
understanding, for those which are subject to frenzy or madness, or any
decrepitnesse of body, proceeding from inward weakness. And to all these
former opinions, John Fernell, Jacques Siluius, Manard Ferrarois, and Andrew
Mathiol, the most excellent reputed Physicians of their times, are fully and
truly consenting, as may be found in each of their Writings.

The Garden of Pleasure, or Flower Garden.
CHAP. XLVII.
Of the profit, pleasure, situation, working, or tilling, and disposing of your
Garden of Pleasure.
THe most pleasant and delectable thing for recreation, The Flower Garden.
belonging (...) our French Farms, is our Flower Gardens, as well in respect
(...) serves for the chief Lord, whose the inheritance is, to solace (...)
therein, as also in respect of their service, for to set Bee-hiues in. It is
(...) commendable and seemly thing to behold out at a window many acres of
(...) well tilled and husbanded, whether it be Meadow, a Plot for planting of
(...), or arable Ground, as we have stood upon heretofore: but yet it is much
more to behold fair and comely Proportions, handsome and pleasant Arbors, and,
as it (...)* Closets, delightful borders of Lauender, Rosemarie, Box, and
other such (...) hear the rauishing music of an infinite number of pretty
small Birds, which continually, day and night, do chatter and chant their
proper and natural branch-(...) upon the Hedges and Trees of the Garden; and
to smell so sweet a Nose-(...) near at hand: seeing that this so fragrant a
smell cannot but refresh the Lord of the Farm exceedingly, when going out of
his bedchamber in the morning after (...) Sunne-rise, and whiles as yet the
clear and pearle-like dew does perch unto the grass, he gives himself to
hear the melodious music of the Bee^; which busying themselves in gathering
of the same, do also fill the air with a most acceptab^^* sweet, and pleasant
harmony: besides, the Borders and continued Rows of sou^raigne Thyme, Balm,
Rosemarie, Marierome, Cypers, Soothernwood, and (...) fragrant hearbe^, the
sight and view whereof cannot but give great contentment (...) to the beholder.

And in this Garden of Pleasure you are very much to respect the form and
p^^portion of the same: wherein, according to the opinion of Serres and Vnie^^,
(...) must be much ruled by the nature of the Soil: which albeit you may, in
part, by your industry and cost help, as touching the leuelling, raising,
abating, or (...) of the same; yet, for the most part, and especially touching
the air, (...), and clyme, you must be governed by the Soil in which you
live. Now (...) the general proportions of Gardens, they may at your pleasure
carry any of (...) four shapes, that is to say, either Square, Round, Ouall,
or Diamond. As for that which is more long than broad, or more broad than long
(neither of which are uncomely) they are contained under the titles of Squares.
This is but the outward p^^portion, or the Verge and Girdle of your Garden. As
for the inward (...) and shapes of the Quarters, Beds, Banks, Mounts, and such
like, they are to be di^ided by Alleyes, Hedges, Borders, Rayles, Pillars, and
such like, and by these yo^ may draw your Garden into what form soever you
please, not respecting (...) shape soever the outward Verge carries: for you
may make that Garden which (...) square without, to be round within; and that
which is round, either square, or o^^ll; that which is ouall, either of the
former; and that which is diamond, any shape (...) all: and yet all exceeding
comely. You may also, if your ground be naturally so (...), or if your
industry please so to bring it to pass, make your Garden rise and (...) by
several degrees, one level ascending above another, in such sort, as if you
had diverse gardens one above another, which is exceeding beautiful to the eye,
and very beneficial to your flowers and fruit trees, especially is such
ascents have the benefit of the Sunrising upon them: and thus, if you please,
you may have in one level a square (...)* in another a round, in a third a
diamond, and in the fourth an ouall, then along the ascending banks which
are on either side the stairs, you mount into your several gardens, you shall
make your physic garden or places to plant your physic herbs upon,
according as the model is most bravely set forth by Oliver de Serres, and as
the late king of France caused his physic garden to be made in the
University of Montpellier, being all raised upon banks or heights one above
another, (...) round, some square in the manner of a goodly, large, and well
trimmed Theater, as may be seen at this day to the great admiration thereof.

The Garden of Pleasure (as has been said) must be cast and contrived close
to the one side of the Kitchen Garden, but yet so, as that they be sundred by
the intercourse of a great large alley, as also a hedge of quickset, having
three doors, whose ground must be of a like goodness, and vouchsafed the like
labor, tilling and husbanding, that the Kitchen Garden has bestowed upon it:
and as the Kitchen Garden is to be compassed and set about with Lattise work,
and young common bordering stuff to be made up afterward and continued into
arbours, or as it were into small chappells, or oratories and places to make a
speech out of, that many standing about and below may hear: in like sort shall
the Garden of Pleasure be set about and compassed in with arbours made of
Iesamin, Rosemarie, Box, Juniper, Cypres trees, Sauin, Cedars, Rose-trees, and
other dainties first planted and pruned according as the nature of every one
does require, but after brought into some form and order with Willow or
Juniper poles, such as may serve for the making of arbours. The ways and
alleys must be covered and ^owen with fine sand well bet, The alleys of the
Garden.
or with the powder of the sawing of Marble, or with the fine dust of
slate-stone and other hewn stone: or else paued handsomely with good
pit-stone, and tyles that are well burnt: or with fair pieces of stones, such
as stairs be made of, the whole laying of them being leuelled and made even
with a beater or mall made for the purpose: or where these are not to be
gotten, you shall take of fine yellow gravel well mixed with pyble or other
such like binding earth, and with it trim your alleys; others use to take coal
dust, or the ashes of Sea-coale well beaten and si^ted, and with it strew the
alleys, and although it be not fully so sightfull, yet it is profitable in this
respect, that it keeps them from grass and weeds, and other greenes, because
nothing will sprout through the same, albeit be not trodden or walked upon of a
long space.

This Garden, by means of a large path of the breadth of six foot, shall be
divided into two equal parts: the one shall contain the herbs and flowers
used to make nosegaies and garlands of, as March Violets, Prouence
Gillo-flowres, Purple Gillo-flowres, Indian Gillo-flowres, small Paunces,
Daisies, yellow and white Gillo-flowres, Marigolds, Lilly-conually, Daffodils,
Canterburie-bells, Purple Velvet flower, Anemones, Corne-flag, Mugwort,
Lillies, and other such like, as may be called the Nosegay Garden. Also in it
you shall plant all sorts of strange flowers, as is the Crown imperial, the
Dulippos of sundry kinds, Narcyssus, Hyacynthes, Emeryes, Hellitropians, and a
world of other of like nature, whose colors being glorious and different, make
such a brave checkerd mixture, that it is both wondrous pleasant, and
delactable to behold. The other part shall have all other sweet smelling
herbs, whether they be such as bear no flowers, or if they bear any, yet
they are not put in Nosegaies alone, but the whole herb with them, as
Soothernwood, Wormwood, Pellitorie, Rosemarie, Iesamin, Marierom, Balm,
Mints, Penniroyall, Costmarie, Hyssope, Lauander, Basil, Sage, Sauorie, Rue,
Tansey, Thy^^e, Cammomile, Mugwort, bastard Marierom, Nept, sweet Balm,
All-good, Anis Horehound, and others such like, and this may be called the
Garden for herbs of a good smell.

These sweet herbs, and flowers for Nosegaies, shall be set in order upon
beds and quarters, of such like length and breadth, as those of the Kitchen
Garden: and some of them upon seats, and others in mazes made for the pleasing
and recreating of the sight: other some are set in proportions made of beds
interla^ed and drawn one within another, or broken off, with borders, or
without borders: the greatest part of which sweet herbs, as also for Nose-gay
flowers, though they grow ^^^rally, and of their own accord, without any
labor or travel of the Gardener, especially herbs for Nose-gaies, yet such
of them as stand in need of dressing and ordering, shall be sown, planted,
removed, gathered, and kept, no otherwise than the pot-hearbes: but yet
notwithstanding, regard must be had of the nature of every particular one, as
shall be declared hereafter in the particular description of (...) of them.

CHAP. XLVIII.
Of herbs for Flowers or Nose-gaies.
MArch Violets, March Violets.
as well the single as the double, must be set of whole (...) in a well manured
ground, and dug the depth of a foot, before the ^^lends of March: if you
will ^ow them, you may do it in Autumn, and the Spring. But especially you
must beware, not to set Violets every (...) in one and the same place; for
otherwise it will bear a yellow flower, and have very little or no smell in
it. You may make, that one and the same Violet shall bear (...) the colors
that others do, that is to say, white, pale, yellow, and red, of you mix
together the seeds of all, and tying them in a Linen cloth, put them in that
sort (...) a well manured earth. The Violet must be gathered in the morning
before the (...) rise, and when it raineth not, if so be that you will have it
to keep his virtues and sweet smell.

The flowers of March Violets applied unto the brows, The virtues of Violets.
do assuage the heada^^ which comes of too much drinking, and procure
sleep. He that shall have taken a blow upon the head, A blow on the head.
so that it has astonished him, shall not have any greater (...), if
presently after such a blow he drink Violet flowers stamped, and continue the
(...) drink for a certain time. There is made of the flowers of Violets,
Syrrups and Conserues, good for the inflammation of the Lungs, the Pleurisy,
Cough, (...) Agues.

It is also most excellent to preserve these Violets for Salads, to serve all
the (...), as thus: When you have gathered your Violets, and picked them clean,
both (...) their stalks, and any other corruption that may hang over their
leaves, you (...) wash them clean, and strike the water through a dry cloth
so clear from them (...) may be: then take a Glasse-pot, of the fashion of a
Gally-pot, so large, as you (...) put in your hand, and being clean washed
also, first, in the bottom thereof, lay a layre of your Violets, of half a
fingers thickness, then take of the finest refined Sugar, beaten very small,
and therewith cover the Violets all over: then lay another layre of the
Violets, and cover them with Sugar as you did before, and so lay Violets upon
Sugar, and Sugar upon Violets, till you have filled the pot to the (...) take
of the strongest Wine-vineger that can be gotten, and pour it into the pot,
till the vinegar swim aloft: then let it rest an hour or two, to settle: and
if you (...), that the vinegar be shrunk below the flowers, you shall fill it
up again, not (...) thus to do, till the vinegar will shrink no more: then
cover the pot up very (...) with Parchment and Sheep leather, and set it so,
as it may receive some (...) air of the fire; and after one month use them,
as occasion shall serve: for they will last all the year, both Winter and
Summer, without loosing either their ^^lour, strength, sweetness, or
pleasantness, neither their growth nor fullness. And in this sort you may
preserve all sorts of flowers whatsoever, as Roses, Marigold^, Gilliflowers of
all kinds, Cowslips, Primroses, Broom flowers Paunfie^, (...) leaves, or any
other sweet and wholesome flower whatsoever. Wherein is to (...) noted, that if
the flower which you preserve, be of a pure white color, and that yo^ fear
the vinegar may somewhat abate the brightness of the color, in this case you
shall distill your vinegar either in a Limbecke, or other ordinary Still, and
with the water which comes from it (which will be of a most pure and
chrystaline color) and is indeed the spirit and sharpest part of the vinegar,
you shall preserve your flowers, and then without doubt they will not abate any
part at all of their own brightness and color.

White, yellow, and red Gillo-flowres, White, yellow, and red Gillo-flowres.
do crave the like ordering that the March Violet does, and grow better upon
walls, house tops, and old ruins of stone, than planted or tilled in gardens,
especially the yellow, which come nearer to the resemblance of a shrub than of
an herb, having hard and woody stalks, and set full of branches, commonly
called of Apothecaries Key^y. The seed of Gillo-flowres stamped and drunk with
white wine, is sovereign to provoke women's terms, and to further deliverance
in them that travel.

Daisies Daisies.
must not be sown but planted after the manner of violets, this is the least
kind of the (...), which is likewise found in the fields without being tilled,
it flourishes all the year long if it be well ordered. Kings-^uill
Palsy.
^owt.
Daisies stamped with Mugwort resolves the King-euill. A Catapla^me made of
Daisies is good for the palsy, and all manner distillations. For wounds in the
breast, whereinto tents may be put, it is good to d^inke by and by a drink made
of stamped Daisies: they heal the pastules of the tongue if they be chewed, as
also of the mouth: being braied they assuage the inflammation of the privy
members: eaten in sallades or broth of flesh, they loosen the belly.

Purple Velvet flower, Purple Velvet flower.
called in Latin Aramanthus, does recreate more with his color, than with any
smell that it has, for it smells nothing at all: notwithstanding who so will
have it in their gardens, must plant it in a dry and sandy place. The flower
supt in pottage, does stay the flux of the belly, The white flowers of women.
the terms and white flowers of women, the spitting of blood, especially if
there be any vein broken or bruised in the lungs of breast. The flower hereof
infused in water or white wine the space of an hour, makes the color of
the wine red, and thus one may help himself the more easily to beguile any
that are sick of some ague, and cannot abstain from Wine.

Canterburie-bells, Canterburi^-bells.
as well the simple as the double, require a fat ground and well enriched. The
Latins call it Viola Calathiana.

Their ^lowers mingled with Wheat flower, The virtues.
make a good Cataplasme against scuruinesse and other sorts of scabbes,
likewise their roots boiled in white Wine, to the consumption of the half, and
a linen cloth dipped therein, and applied to scabbes and scuruinesse does
heal them: the roots boiled in Wine and taken in a potion, do heal all the
ruptures of the inward parts of the bodies, do cleanse the exulcerated lungs,
and spitting of blood: brayed, and ground in manner of meal and drunk in Wine
the weight of a French Crown, with two or three grains of Saffron, are
singular good against the jaundise, if the party sweat thereupon presently:
the like virtue is in the distilled water of the flowers: the juice drawn out
of their root and flowers applied unto wounds does heal them presently: a
pessarie drencht in this juice, provoke women's terms, and draws out the
child dead in the mothers womb: being dropped into the ear, whereinto there
has some Flea, or such other vermin crept, it kills them.

Gillo-flowres of all sorts are seldom sown, Prouence, purple and Indian
Gillo-flowers.
but oftentimes planted of roots or branches plucked from the plants* the root
shall be planted in the beginning of Autumn, in a fat mould, and so put in
pots of earth, that it may be removed and set under some covert in Winter for
fear of the frosts: Summer being come before the great plant have cast forth
his sprouts, you may break off so many small branches from about the root, as
will almost serve to set and plant a whole bed withal, and so you may breed
new plants of them.

You may make Gillo-flowers smell like Cloves, To make Gillo-flowers to smell
like Cloves.
if you lay bruised Cloves round about their roots. In like manner you may make
them have fair flowers, large, pleasant, and sweet smelling, if you pluck
away their leaves often, and take pains to dig and water their earth:
furthermore such Gillo-flowers are commonly called Gillo-flowers of Prouence,
Gillo-flowers of Prouence.
of the place where Gillo-flowers so ordered do grow, large, tufted, and
ample: those which have not their flowers so large, nor so sweet, neither yet
are so carefully looked unto and dressed, Purple Gillo-flowres.
are properly called Purple Gillo-flowers.

The flowers of Gillo-flowers of Prouence, as also their root* are sovereign
against the Plague. And for this cause such as are well advised, in the time of
the Plague (...) make conserues or vinegar of the flowers of Gillo-flowers, to
keep themselves (...) the evil air.

Indian Gillo-flowers, Indian Gillo-flowres.
called of the Latins Flos petillius, and Ocellus (...), although it refuse no
ground, notwithstanding if you plant it, of the whole plant, or of the branches
thereof, or else sow it in a fat and well manured ground, especially in the
beginning of July, it will grow unto such a height, as that it will seem to be
a thing degenerated into the bigness of a tree, and will put forth of his
stalk many bough^, after the manner of a tree or shrub: and by the same means
there will put (...) flowers enduring until Winter.

Who will be counted careful of preserving his health, The Indian gillo-flower
does cause the headeth and an ill and unwholesome air.
must not smell unto the flower of the Gillo-flowers of India: for the smell
thereof does procure headache and giddiness, and is a means to breed the
Falling Sickness: further also, which is more dangerous, some have found it by
experience, that it ingendreth an infectious air: likewise Physicians give
special prohibition to smell unto the Indian Gillo-flower in the Plague time,
because the flower thereof is venomous, and of temperate much like to the
Hemlocke, which may easily be perceived by the unpleasant smell it yields,
being both most strong and stinking. That it is so, namely that (...) is
venomous, I have given thereof sometimes unto a Cat the flower the
Gillo-flowres of India beaten and mixed with cheese to eat: and she has
thereupon become very much swelled, and within a short time after dead: I saw
likewise a little young child, who after having put these flowers in his mouth,
his mouth and lips did swell, and within a day or two after became very
scabbed.

Wild Gillo-flowers Wild Gill^-flowers.
as well white as red, although they grow in the edges of field^ and along the
ways, may notwithstanding be planted and set in gardens, where (...) they be
often removed, they will grow to have a double flower. Their seed, flower, and
whole herb is good against the stinging of Scorpions: and indeed have so
gre^^ virtue this way, that the herb only cast among Scorpions, takes from
them all power to hurt: their seed taken to the quantity of two drams purges
hot and ch^lericke humors.

Dame Violets Dame Violets*
have great leaves, somewhat black, notcht round about, and broad: the flowers
are white and incarnate, and in shape like unto the Auens: they grow sometimes
so high, as that they degenerate into a tree.

Goats-bread, Goats-beard.
that it may have fair, double, and full flowers, does crave a fat and moist
ground. The leaves thereof open at the Sun rise, and they close at noone: the
root boiled in mudde does appease the pains and pricking of the side: taken in
form of a lohoch with syrope of Violets, it helps obstructed lungs, and the
ple^risie: boiled in water, and preserved with Sugar, it is a singular
preservative against the Plague, Poisons, Venime, and deadly Stinging: the
juice or distilled water of this herb does heal green vvounds, if you dip
linen clothes therein, and apply them to the wounds: some use the root of
this herb in sallades, where dainty and fine fare is: the same boiled in a
pot with Veale and Mutton, and afterward prepared and made ready betwixt two
dishes with butter and vinegar.

Marie, or Marians Violets, Marians Violets.
for the beautifulness of the flowers, deserve to b^ sown in a fat and well
labored ground: the flowers are good to make gargari^^^^, for the
inflammations and ulcers of the mouth.

Lillie-conually, Lilly-(...).
called of the Latins Lillium conuallium, notwithstanding that it grows in
shadowed Woodgrounds, yet it deserves to be tilled in gardens, as (...) in
regard of the fair little flowers, white as snow, which it bears, being also
of a most amiable smell, somewhat like unto the Lillies; as also in respect of
his virtues: because the distilled water of the flowers being taken with
strong and noble wine, does restore the speech unto them which have lost it
upon an apoplexy: it is good likewise for the palsy, distillations, and
fainting of the heart: yet these nor any other Lillies whatsoever can I commend
for any use of nosegaies, because the smell of them ^s lussious, gross, and
unwholesome, apt to make the head ache, and (as some hold of ^pinion) apt to in
engender infection, by reason of a certain putrefaction which it ^tirreth up
in the brain, whereby all the inward parts are distempered; therefore
whosoever planteth them shall preser^^ them more for show than smell, and make
^se of their medicinal quality, not o^ their order; and touching their
medicinal qualtitie, there is none better than this, that if the root be taken
and clean washed and boiled in milk, and so applied to any hard tumor,
swelling, byle, or impo^tumation, it will either dissolve it, or else ripen,
break, and heal it, so that it be applied pultus wise very hot.

Water lilly, Water lilly.
as well the white as the yellow, desires a waterish and marshie place: we
see it grow likewise in pooles and fish ponds. The root of white water lilly
^oyled with gross red wine and drunk, stays women's whites: the flowers,
roots, and seeds, as well in decoctio^s as in conserues, are very singular or
procure s^eepe, and to preserve chastity.

Hyacinth Hyacynth.
grows very well in a sandy ground. The root and seed boiled in wine and
drunk, does stay the flux of the belly.

Narcyssus Nar^yssus.
(so called of a Greek word, because the smell of it coming unto the (...)
does cause an inclination unto sleepiness and heaviness) would be sown in a
^at ground that is hot and moist: it grows also abundantly in Languedoe and
I^alie, and but a little in this country.

The root thereof boiled or roasted, and taken with meat of drink, does
greatly procure vomit: also, the same brayed with a little Honey and applied,
does heal burnings: takes away the freckles and spots of the face, being mixed
with the seed of nettles.

Corneflag (called in Latin Gladiolus) as well the blew as the white,
carneflag or (...).
would be planted of new plants in March and April: or else of slips, but such
as have roots, for they are never sown, neither do they require any great
tilling. Their flowers differ from the flowers of marigolds in this, in that
the flowers of the marigold do open at the Sunshine, but the flowers of
Corneflag do shut and close up themselves then, not opening again but when it
is cold and moist weather. The roots must be pulled out of the earth in the
beginning of the Spring, that thereby they may have a pleasant smell, and a
delectable kind of savor, and afterward they must be died in the shadow of the
Sun. Some people, to take away the superfluous moisture thereof, which
puts them in danger to be consumed with Worms, do wet them with Lee of
ashes, as well whiles they are in the earth, as when they are out, and so dry
them and keep them for to procure the linnens and woollen garments to smell
well.

The juice of the roots put in a clyster, The virtues of Corneflag.
does appease the pain of the Sciatica: Sci^tica.
the root dried and made in powder, does cleanse and consolidate hollow and
filthy ulcers: Ulcers.
being held in the mouth, it causes a good breath: laid amongst clothes, it
preserves them from all vermin, and makes them smell pleasantly. The juice
of the root taken at the mouth sundry times, purges water in such as have the
dropsy, Dropsy.
especially if it be taken mixed with the yolke of an egg half boiled. The
root mingled with the root of ellebor, and twice so much Honey, does wipe away
freckles, red pimples, and all spots of the face, if it be anointed thereupon.
The decoction of the root takes away the obstruct^ons caused of a gross
humor, provoke urine, kills worms, and casts out the stone. The
Italians make a preserve of this root whiles it is new with Sugar to Honey, and
use it in all the cases aforesaid: some make an oil of the flowers infused in
oil, which has power to resolve, soften, and appease the grief of cold
rheumes or distillations.

Lillies. Lillies
must be planted in the month of March and April in these (...) and in hot
countries in the months of October and November, Lillies of (...) colors.
as well the (...) the orange color, in a fat and well dug ground: you
shall make their flowe^ (...) what color you will, if before you set them, you
steep their roots in such (...) substance as shall best like you, and
afterward likewise to water the roots when they are set and planted in their
trench with the same liquor, and that after this (...)* Some say that the
flowers of Lillies become red and purple, if their roots before (...) be
planted be steept in the Lees of red Wine, or in dissolved Cinnabrium, and
(...) watered with the same in the little pit or trench wherein it is set. Or
else when (...) are in flower in the month of June, you must take ten or
twelve plants, and (...) them together, to hang them in the smoke, for so they
will put forth small roots (...) unto vvild Garleeke, and when the time of
setting is come, which is in the (...) of March and April, steep the same
plants in the lees of red Wine until they (...) prettily well colored, as
being become red when you take them out, afterward (...) them in pretty pits
contrived in good order and water them sufficiently with (...) said lees: for
by this means the flowers that will come of them will be purple ^^loured.
Purple colored Lillies.
You shall likewise have young and fresh Lillies all the year long, if (...)
they be open you gather them, and after close them up in some bottell or well
(...) vessel, that so they may come by no air. Or else close them up in some
oaken vessel well pitched, so that there can no water get in, and after sink
the vessel in (...) Well, Cesterne, or running water, for so they will keep
young and fresh (...) year. Lillies in flower at diverse and s^uerall times.
And if at any time during the whole year you would use them, set them in the
Sun, that so by the heat thereof they may open. And to the end that Lillies
(...) flower at many times, when you set their roots, you shall set some of
twelve (...) within the ground, others eight, and some four, for thus you
shall still have (...) Lillies for a long time.

A Cataplasme made with the Onion of the roots of Lillies, The virtues of
Lillies.
Hog's Grease, and (...) oil of Cammomile, does maturate and ripen Buboes. An
ointment made of (...) said roots, oil of bitter Almonds, and white Wax, has
singular virtue to (...) and smoth the face, and to take away the vvrincles
(...).
of vvomens faces. The water (...) Lillies distilled out of an Alembecke,
Water of Lilly.
does take away the vvrincles of women (...), and make them look very fair
and white. The root boiled or roasted in ^^embers, and stamped with oil Olive,
is a singular remedy against all sorts of burning, Burning of s^aldings.
as well of fire as water. Being boiled with Garleeke, and stamped in the
(...) of red Wine, clears vvomens faces and countenances, which have but ill
colo^^^ after their lying in bed, if they besmeare their faces therewith at
nights, Asmooth and glistering ^ew.
and in the morning wash them with Barlie water. This root roasted and stamped
with (...) Swines-grease, and applied to the corns of the feet, does wholly
spend them, (...) they be kept thereto but three whole days together: the
distilled water of the flowers with a little Saffron and sweet Zyloca^sia,
helps women in childbirth* and delivers them also of their afterbirth:
the oil that is made of the flowers by infusion, is good to soften all manner
of hardness in swellings or otherwise: if (...) chafe the privy parts with
oil of Linseed, and apply Wool wet in these (...) upon the belly: Women
which are in travel of childbirth will find great ease (...) the same.

Small Pa^^ces Small Paunces.
(otherwise called Autumn Violets) desire a dry and (...) place: they are to
be planted in the Spring time, and bear flowers continuing (...) Autumn, yea
to Winter, if so be they be often watered and carefully handled. The leaves or
juice of small Paunces taken at the mouth, or applied outwardly, are (...) good
to conglutinate wounds: the leaves of small Paunces boiled and (...) do stay
the Falling Sickness in children when they froth and some: the same flowers
boiled with their herbs and drunk, do cleanse the lungs and breast, and
(...) good for inward inflammations. The leaves dried and made in powder, and
(...) with red Wine to the quantity of half a spoonefull, have great force to
stay the (...) down of the fundament.

The Helitropian is a certain flower, which has such a love and sympathy
with (...) Sun, that as his beams rise and spread open in the morning like a
Curtain, (...) the herb also opens her leaves and glories, and (as it
were) attending upon (...) beams: her flower rises as he rises; and when the
Sun is in his Meridian or ^oone point, then the flower stands, and looks
straight upright; and as the ^unne declineth, so it likewise declineth: and in
the evening, as he shuts in his ^eames, so it also closes up her flowers,
and remains (as it were) hid and locked up (...) the next morning. This
Helitropian never bears on one stalk above one flow^^^, but it is exceeding
large and great, being ever at least half a foot in the diameter: (...) is
round and ^lat fashioned, and environed with yellow leaves of a bright golden
(...): it grows also upon a great thick stalk, straight upright, and high
from (...) ground: it bears also very many seeds, which as soon as they
are ripe, are like Marigold seeds, white, rough, and semici^cled. The best time
to sow it, is in the ^pring time, at the wane of the Moon, and it is very
quick and speedy in grow^^g. The greatest glory it has, is the beauty
thereof: yet it has all those virtues which the Marigold has, and cures the
same in^irmities.

Contrary to this, is the flower of the Night, Flower of the night.
which is very memorable for the (...) fair flowers which it bears: It is
therefore called the flower of the Night, (...) at the Suns rising it shuts
up her flowers, and at his setting spreads them open (...), and so flourishes
with great beauty all the night long: his flowers are of (...) colors, some
white, some red, some carnation, and some yellow, some inter^ixt, and some
entire: insomuch, that to behold it either in the morning, or in the (...), it
looks like a most fine piece of Arras or Tapistrie, to the great wonder of
(...) beholders, when they shall see so many several colors proceeding from
one (...), without any artificial labor, or other sophistication. It is to
be planted or (...) in the month of March, when the Moon is increasing, the
ground being (...) and rich, and well tilled and ordered before hand.

Tulipan Tulipan.
is a Plant which grows about two or three foot from the ground, and (...) a
very fair flower, yet commonly not before it be three years old: it
de^ighteth to grow near unto the Flower-de-luce, and would be planted soon
after Winter in the new of the Moon. The first year it puts forth but one
leaf, very ^arge, and of a green color: the second year it puts forth
two leaves: and the ^hird year, three leaves, together with the knob or
button, which bears the flower and all, long before the approaching of
Winter: as soon as the three leaves are ^prung up, which are ever near unto
the earth, the stem shoots upward a good ^eight without leaves as smooth as
a cudgel, till it be come to his full growth. Now of these Tulipans there are
diverse kinds, and are distinguished only by the different ^olours of their
flowers: for some are white, some red, some blew, some yellow, some Orange,
some of a Violet color, and indeed generally of any color whatsoever, ^xcept
green: yet it is to be noted, that these Tulipans which are thus of one en^^re
color, are but common and ordinary: for those which are most rare and
preci^^^, are of diverse colors mixed together, and in semblance like the flower
of the Night before spoken of. Again, there is another note of admiration in
this flower; which is, that it changes it color every year of it own
nature, for the which no Gardener is able to give any account: Also there be
some Tulipans which will not ^^ourish above four or five days in the year,
and then after it carries no flower (...) all.

The Martagon is a plant which puts forth very rare and excellent flowers,
The Mortagon of Constantinople.
^uch what is shape like the Flower-de-luce* and are infinitely desired for
their ex^ellencies: it is most commonly either of an Orange or red color, and
may be either sown or planted in a good ground in the Spring time, when the
Moon increases* It grows in height seldom above three foot, neither has
it any bran^hes: it garnisheth the earth with many green leaves, both long
and sharp, ^ending their points downward. At the top of the stem the
flowers put ^orth, upon seven or eight round buttons or cups, which after a
few days do open, and out of every button springs forth a flower, which will
continue (...) upon at least three or four days, and then they will fall
away, and the bowl is perceived in which the seed is retained, which is not
very great but of a little and (...) compass.

P^onie (...)
are flowers of diverse kinds, some being single, and some double, and are (...)
esteemed for the beauty of their flowers, they may be sown or planted on any
(...) earth; immediately after Winter the stalk of it is green, and being
ris^n (...) foot from the earth, it puts forth diverse large branches, upon
the tops whereof (...) many great buttons, out of which breaks forth the
flowers, being round, (...) and large, so that some have been measured from
the circumference to be the (...) part of a foot in the diameter, and these
flowers are ever of one color, as being all (...) all white, or all purple,
and not mixed or stripped as other flowers are.

Amongst all the flowers which beauitfie gardens, none may compare with this
other for odor, glory, or general delicacie, whence it comes that it is
(...) the Crown Imperial, Crown Imperial.
it may be sown from the seed in any well dressed (...) the Spring of the year,
and the new of the Moon, yet it is much better if it be (...) from the root,
which root is big and round like unto a great S. (...) Onion, about which in
the planting you shall ^ould a little fine mould (...) with cows dung, and then
set it a good depth into the earth, the stem of this (...) will spring out of
the ground three or four foot, garnished all along with fine (...)* yet
without any branches; at the top of all, it puts forth eight or nine (...)*
borne upon several little branches distinguished from the stalk, every one
of (...) being of equal height and length, the flowers thereof for the most
part show (...), because (like the Helitropian) they continually follow the
Sun, and (...) stand straight upright, but at hie noone only; the color of
them most (...) is a pale red, and they have within the inward part of them a
round liquid (...) like unto an Orient pearl, which whilst the flower is in
strength, being for the (...) part fifteen or twenty days, you can by no
means shake off, nor will it be (...) way with showers or tempests, but if
with your hand you wipe it away, a new (...) will arise again presently in the
same place: this pearl if you taste upon your (...) is sweet and pleasant as
Honey or Sugar. This flower must be carefully (...) from the frost, and the
slips of it would be seldom or never set, because they are (...) they bring
forth flowers as three or four years at the soonest.

CHAP. XLIX.
Of sweet smelling Herbs.
Basil, Basil.
as well the great as the small, is sown in April and May in a (...) ground,
and comes up quickly, if so be that by and by after it is (...) it be watered
with water somewhat heated: It may be sown (...) in Autumn, and the seed
would be watered with vinegar, for so ((...) it but a very little) it will
grow forth into branches. If you sow it in a dry ground (...) open upon the
Sun; it will by and by turn and become either mountain (...) or cresses. When
you have sown it, you must draw upon the ground some (...) fasten and set it
close together, for if it should lie light and hollow, the seed would (...)
corrupt. Basil never (...) better t^hen it is cursed Hat^ed betwixt Amber and
Basil.
It must be watered at noone-tide, clean contrary to other herbs (...) would
be watered at morning or evening. To cause it to grow great, it is (...) crop
it often with your fingers, and not with any iron thing. Some report a (...)
strange thing of Basil, as namely that it grows fairer and higher, if it
(...) sown with curses and injuries offered unto it: and further that there is
a deadly (...) betwixt ambe^ and basil: for whereas amber or black jet it
given to draw (...) unto it upon the touching of them, it drives and puts
far from it the leaves and (...) of Basil.

Such as are subject unto headache, The smelling of basil does cause great
pain and Scorpions in the head.
or fear to be troubled therewith, must shun the (...) of Basil altogether:
for the smell thereof begets pain and heaviness of the (...), ye^
sometimes it ingendreth in the head little small worms, like unto Scorpi^^s:
as we read to have happened to a certain Italian in our time (as Monsieur
^^oulier D. in physic does testify in the beginning of his Practica) in
whose ^^aine the often smelling of Basil did beget a scorpion, M. I. Hou^ier.
which caused him to endure ^^treame pain, and brought him to his death in the
end. To be delivered of childbirth without pain.
The greatest virtue that (...) herb can have, is that if a woman do hold
the roots of Basil in her hand, to^ether with a Swallows feather when she is
in travel, she shall be delivered by and (...) without any pain.

Rue, Rue.
as well that of the garden as the other which is wild, does not love either a
^oist or cold ground, neither yet a ground made very fat with dung: but rather
a (...) and dry ground free from vvind, and where the Sun shines much, in
respect ^hereof it must be covered with ashes during the Winter time: for the
natural heat (...) the ashes does cause it to resist the cold. It may be sown
in March, August, and ^^ptember, although in deed it grow better set of roots
or branches, than sown. ^hen it grows old, it degenerateth into a wooddie
substance, and therefore you ^ust cut the stalks twice every year even to
the root, to recover his youth again: (...) must not be suffered (if possibly
it may be let) to flower, for if it be suffered to put (...) any flowers, The
bewraier of women.
it grows so much the more dry. Some report, that this herb (...) a
maruailous property, as that if it be touched or come near unto, be it never
so (...), by a woman that has abused her body, or that has her terms, that
it dies (...) and by.

To cause that it may grow fair and have a more pleasant smell, it must be
planted under the shadow of a Fig Tree, or grafted in the rind of a
Fig Tree: for the (...) and sweetness of the Fig Tree does temper the
sharpness and acrimo^ie of the Rue. Some say likewise, that Rue will grow
fairer, if the branches thereof (...) set in a Bean or Onion, Rue thriuing
best when it i^ most curs^d.
and so put into the ground. It is likewise reported, that it ^^oweth fairer,
if one curse and hurt it when they set and plant it. But look how ^^iendly and
kind it is to the Fig Tree, so much it is enemy unto and hates the
^^emlocke; Rue and Hemlocke are enemies.
likewise Gardiners when they would pull up Rue, for fear of hurting ^^eir
hands, rub them with the juice of Hemlocke.

Wild Rue is of greater force than the garden Rue, and of a more unpleasant
^^ell, and also a more dangerous smell: furthermore of so sharp a vapor, as
that if (...) come near unto the face never so little, it will breed the wild
fire in it. The feed (...) of the one and the other by the hot and dry
temperature it has, dries up the (...) of man, and makes him barren: the
same seed in decoction is good for distil^^tions, and the moisture of the
matrix.

Rue has a singular virtue and force against all manner of venime. Likewise we
(...) that the king Mithridates was accustomed to use an opiate made of twenty
^^ues of Rue, Mithridates (...) opiate for the Plague.
two dry Figs, two old Walnuts, and a little Salt, to preserve his state
against all manner of poison. For this cause you must plant in your gardens,
and (...) your sheepecoats, houses for your foul and other cattle, great
quantity of ^ue: for Adders, Lizards, and other venomous beasts, R^e ^n enemy
to v^nimes and poisons.
will not come near unto (...), by the length of the shadow of it. Some also
hold it as a tried thing, that to (...) away Cats and Fulmers from hen-houses
and doue-houses, Rne ^n enemy to cats and fulmers.
there is nothing ^etter than to set Rue at the doors thereof, or round about
them. And that to free a ^ome of fleas and g^ats, it is good to water that same
with water sprinkled about with branch of rue. That rue should not come neer^
to the nose.
In the plague time it is not good to put rue near unto your nose ^ontrarie to
that which we see many men practice) because by the sharpness of the (...)
there is caused a heat and excoriation of the part which it touches:
notwith^^anding to draw out the venime that is in a bubo or pestilent
carbuncle, For a (...) or Plague (...).
there is no^^ing better than to apply thereto a cataplasme made of the leaves
of rue stamped with leaven, hog's grease, onions, figs, vnquencht lime, soap,
cantharides, and a (...) treacle. If a man have eaten of hemlocke, ceruse,
mandrakes, black poppie, (...) other herbs, which through their great
coldness have caused them to be (...) and blockish, they may profitably use
the juice of rue, to drink it for the (...) of them from such danger, or else
the wine wherein it has been boiled. The distilled water of rue powered into
wine and rose water of each as much, is good (...) the weakness of the
sight. It is very sovereign for the headache, and being (...) in wine with
fennel, and so drunk, it eases all obstructions of the spleen or (...)* and
takes away the pain of the strangurie, and also stops any flux, being (...)
with Cummin-seed, it eases all manner of aches, and being stamped with home,
(...) flower and the yolke of an egg it cures any impostumation whatsoever.

All sorts of mints Mints.
whether garden or wild, do nothing desire the ground (...) dunged, fat, or
lying open upon the Sun, but rather a moist ground near (...) water, for
want thereof they must be continually watered, for else they die: it is (...)
sown than set; but if it be set, then it may be either of roots or branches,
in (...) or in the Spring time, especially about the twelfth of March or
September. (...) wants the seed to sow it, may instead thereof sow the seed
of field mints, (...) the sharp point downward, thereby to tame and reclaim
the wildness of it. (...) it is grown it must not be touched with any edge
tool, because thereupon it (...) die. Neither need you take care to sow it
every year, for it will grow of itself (...) being sown of set in great
abundance.

Mints stamped and applied to breasts too hard and full of milk do
seften(...), and hinders the curding of the milk: The virtues of Mi^ts.
stamped with salt, it is good against the (...) of a mad dog: stamped and put
into a cataplasme it comfort a weak (...) and strengthens digestion: two
or three sprigs of mints taken with the juice of ^^pomegranat, stays the
hicket, vomiting, and surfets. It is good to help them (...) have lost their
smelling, by putting it often to the nose. Then leaves dried, made in (...), and
drunk with white wine, does kill the worms Worms.
in young children. Such as (...) milk, after they have eaten it, must by and
by chaw of the leaves of mints, (...) the qua^ling of the milk in their
stomachs: for mints have the special (...) keeping milk from curding, The
curding of Milk.
as also to keep chee^e To keep chees^.
from corruption and (...), if it be sprinkled with the juice or decoction of
mints: being ^pplied unto the (...)* it asswageth headache commming of cold.
The water of the whole herb distilled (...) Mary's bath, in a glass
Alembecke, and taken the quantity of four ounces, (...) stay bleeding at the
nose, which is very strange thing: they that would live (...)* must not smell
unto not eat any mints: and therefore in ancient time it was (...) captains
in war to eat any mints.

Calamint, Calamint.
(otherwise called Mentastrum) delights in the same ground (...) mints, we
see it likewise grow in untilled grounds near unto high ways and hedg^* It
provoke the terms in women, whether it be taken at the mouth or in (...),
and that with such violence, as that women may not in any case meddle with
(...)* if they take themselves to be with child: it is singular good used in
formentation (...) the pains of the stomach, for the colicke and
distillations: the juice thereof (...) the mouth kills worms in the belly,
and being dropped into the ear, it kills (...) there also. Of this Calamint
there are three kinds, as the stone Calamint, the (...) Calamint, and the water
Calamint, the water Calamint is excellent to make (...), the earth Calamint is
very good against leprosy, helps pain in the (...), and comfort the
stomach, lastly the stone Calamint is sovereign against (...)* and
strengthens the heart, if it be bruised and made into a plai^ter with (...)
sewet, it heals any venomous wounds, and to drink it three or four days
(...) either in ale or wine, it cures the jaundise.

Thyme Thy^^.
as well of Candie as the common, does grow better planted than (...) and
craves a place open upon the Sun, near unto the sea, and lean, and it
(...) be planted at mid-March in a well ^illed ground, that so it may the
sooner (...) also that it may grow the fairer and fuller leaf, it will be good
to water the (...) ^oft with water wherein has been steeped for the space of
one whole day dry thyme somewhat bruised. Goodly Thyme.
If you be disposed to gather the seed, you must gather also the flowers
wherein it is contained, seeing they cannot be sundred.

A Cataplasme made of thyme boiled in Wine, The virtues of Thyme.
appea^eth the pain of the Sciati^^ca, and the windiness of the body and
matrin. The smelling of thyme is sovereign to raise them that have the
Falling Sickness out of their fit, and also to keep them from their fit, by
decking their bed about with the leaves thereof. The often using of thyme with
wine or whay, is good for melancholicke persons.

Winter Sauourie Winter Sau^rie.
craves no fat, manured, or well tilled ground, but rather an ^pen, stony,
and light ground, lying so as the Sun may shine full upon it. Both Thyme and
Winter Sauourie are good for the nourishing of bees, and for the preser^ing and
seasoning of meats: they are also called fine, sebtill, or small and slender
herbs.

Organie, Organie.
otherwise called bastard Margerome, loves a rough, stony, peble, weak, and
yet well fu^nisht ground, and vvithall craves a manured ground, as also to be
watered, until it be grown up to his full bigness, notwithstanding it be
seen ^o grow in many places without watering or dunging. It may be removed of
little ^prouts or sciences, and the lower end set upward, to the end that it
may put forth new ^prings and shoots; and be sown of his seed, the which the
elder it is, so much the soo^er it will put forth of the earth, although that
organie do not ordinarily show it self before the 30 or 40 day after the
sowing of it: in many places it is sown near unto ^, because they willingly
load themselves from thence, and make singular honey.

Organie boiled in Wine, The virtues of Organie.
and laid upon the region of the raines, does take away and undo the
difficulty of making water: being boiled in wine and drunk, it is good
against venomous beasts, or the stingings of Scorpions and Spiders. A
Cataplasme made of Organie and Barley meal boiled together, resolves the
tumors under the ears. The decoction thereof is good to comfort the sinews,
and the relaxed and weak parts: the seed thereof drunk with Wine does
prepare and dispose a woman to conceive: the flowers and leaves of the said
Organie dried at the fire in an earthen test or melting pot, and being wrapped
up very hot in a cloth, and applied unto the head, and kept fast tied
thereunto, does cure the rheum coming of cold.

Hyssope Hyssope.
affects a place free from shadow, and lying open upon the Sun: it ^ay be
set or sown about the twelfth of March. It must be cut in the month of
August, and dried to put in pottage in Winter.

Amongst other principal virtues that it has, The virtues of Hyssope.
it is of great use for the affects of ^he lungs, and to provoke vvomens
terms; of there be a broth made thereof to sup ^asting in the morning. Some
say that the syrope of Hyssope, taken oftentimes with ^owerfold so much of the
water of Pellitorie of the wall, causes the stone and much gravel to avoid
from the reins: Hyssope with figs, rue, and honey boiled together ^n water and
drunk, is good for those that are short breathed, and for old and hard ^oughs:
stamped with salt, cummine, and honey, and applied, heals the stingings of
Scorpions: stamped with oil and rubbed, it kills lice: pills made of hyssope,
^orehound, and pionie roots, do heal the falling sickness.

Summer sauourie (...).
does delight in an open Sun shining place, and therefore must be set or
sown in such a one, not in a fat or manured ground: for it is often seen grow
of it self in lean grounds, and near unto the Sea. It grows more
delight^ully and of a better taste, if it be sown amongst onions. The virtues
of S^^^rie.
It is very good for sauce to ^eat. The leaves and flowers applied unto the
head in form of a cap or garland, does away the drowsily inclined. The drow^^^
disease.
A Cataplasme made of sauorie and wheat meal, ^oth cure distillations.

The Sciati^^^ Coriander Coriander.
^orteth well with any kind of ground, notwithstanding in a fat and ^ew ground,
it grows a great deal more abundantly, and it seeks for an hot ^ire:
again, that which grows in a sunnie place does ouerthriue that which
grows in a shadowed place: when you go about to sow it, choose the eldest
seed you can get; for by how much it is the elder, by so much it is the better,
so that it (...) not mouldie and foughtie. Sow it also in a fat and moist
ground, and yet (...) a lean ground: and to cause it to spring up the sooner,
you must steep the(...) water two days before you sow it. If you must dung
the ground where it is to be sown, it must be with Sheep or Goats dung rather
than any other.

The excessive heat thereof brings Headache, The virtues of C^riander.
and the trembling of the (...) being eaten after meat, it comfort
digestion, Digestion.
and dispelleth windiness, Windiness.
so that (...) be prepared. The way to prepare it, is as follows* You must,
having dried it (...), cast upon it very good wine and vinegar mixed together,
and leave it thus sprinkl^^ and wet the space of four and twenty hours, then
dry it up, and keep it for Physic use: being stamped in vinegar, and cast
upon flesh, To keep flesh.
it keeps it from (...): it provoke women's terms: It provoke the terms.
and some say, that look how many seeds a woman drinks with white wine, so
many days shall her terms continue. (...) drunk with the juice of
Pomegranats, kills the Worms Worms.
in children. The (...) thereof, with Ceruse, Litharge of Silver, Vinegar, and
Oil of Roses, (...) Wild fire, Wild fire.
and all Redness. The seed stamped in Vinegar, does keep the (...) from
corrupting in Summer. Also to drink the juice thereof with Honey (...) Wine,
kills Worms: and adding the seeds bruised thereto, it helps a (...) Fever.

Sage, Sage.
as well the little as the great, it planted of branches wrythen at the foot,
(...) also of roots, in the Spring, and Autumn. It is sown also at the same
time. The (...) delights to be laid about with Lee ashes. It must be set
near unto Rue, to (...) from Adders and Lizards, which use to take up their
lodging near unto Sage (...) may be known by the leaves, which have their
tops oftentimes withered and dried, the same coming of having been touched by
Serpents. Sage refuses neither (...) nor cold air: how beit, naturally it
grows in a barren, sto^^e, and ill-(...) ground; and that in such sort, as
that in some places of Spain the mountaine^ (...) ouer-growne therewith, and
the Country inhabitants burn no other wood. No^withstanding, to grow fair,
it would be well dug about, and kept clean^ (...) leaves and stalks that
are dead.

It has a singular virtue to comfort the ^inewes that are hurt by being (...),
The virtues of Sage.
or otherwise become weak: Weakness of the sinews.
And for this cause, some make Sage Wine for (...) drink, and a fomentation
with the decoction of Sage for the trembling of the (...), and other parts. The
trembling of the parts.
It comfort the mother, being taken in a fume at the secret (...) by such
fume it also stays the whites. Such as cannot bear their conception (...)
their time, but miscarrie upon slight causes, must oftentimes in the morningeat
(...) Sage leaves, for they strengthen the retentiue faculty, keep alive and
strengthen (...) child, and make women very fruitful. And this is the cause
why the Egyptian^, (...) a great mortality, constrained their wives to drink
the juice of Sage with a little (...), keeping themselves four days from
having to do with their husbands, and then (...) to lie with them, that so
they might conceive and bring forth many children. To stir up appetite, and
cleanse the stomach full of ill humors, To cleanse the stomach.
Sage (...) be used oftentimes in pottage, and otherwise: it assuageth the
pain of the head, (...) cleanses the teeth and gummes: it makes a sweet
breath, being boiled in wine: (...) distilled water thereof does clear the
sight: the conserve of the flowers of Sage (...) the like virtues.

Oak of Jerusalem Oak of Jerusalem.
(called of the Latins Botrys) craves a dry and sandi^ (...) or else a
watrie ground, but such a one as is sandy or grauellie. We behold it also
(...) and then to grow in swift running Brooks. Being once sown, it needs
not (...) sown again afterward: for it grows again every year, and that
as it were in (...) of a shrub. It has virtues much like unto Thyme, that is
to say, it is good^^gainst the suppression of the terms, The (...).
and urine. Being dried and laid in (...), it gives a very good smell unto
the garments, and keeps them from (...) decoction thereof with Licorice, is
wonderful good for such as have a short(...) and are ^^uffed in their lungs,
if you put thereto a little Sugar, or syrrup of (...) ^ea, and furthermore to
such as spit matter, upon no other penalty; but that it be v^ed a long time.
The herb parched upon a hot tyle, and besprinkled with Malme^ey and applied
unto the bsllie asswageth the pains of the matrix, yea and more too, ^f you
add thereunto the leaves of Mugwort, and the flowers of Cammomile, all fri^^d
with oil of Lillies, and the yolke of an egg.

Horehound Horehound.
(called in Latin Marrubium, or Prassium) as well the black (...) the white
grows in every ground, but rather in an untilled than in a tilled ground*
you may also see it grow near unto walls, hedges, ways, and borders of
fields* (...) is ^rue that the wild de^ireth wattie places, as ditches, little
rivers, moist and low pla^es. It is very good in decoction for the cough and
difficulty of breath, because it cleanses the lungs, and causes spitting: it
provoke women's terms and bring^th ^orth the afterbirth.

Sea, Roman, and common Wormwood, (...).
is not so much sown or set because of his smell, as for the profit that it
brings unto the health. The Roman grows in a sandy ground: the
Sea-Wormewood grows in a salt and ashi^ ground* ^he common in hilly, stony,
dry, and untilled grounds; for to set them, you must writhe the roots.

Wormwood, The virtues of Wormwood.
amongst other his virtues almost infinite and admirable, does especially
comfort the stomach laden with choleric humors, but not the stomach
oppressed with flegmaticke humors, A weak stomach.
and for that cause there is a Wine made of Wormwood, and called by the same
name. The decoction of dogs-grasse his roots, and the crops of Wormwood, do
heal the Iaundise. Iaundise.
The conserve of the crops made of a pound thereof, and three pounds of Sugar,
does cure the old, in^eterate, and desperate dropsy, Dropsy.
if it be oftentimes used after purging: it does preserve likewise from
drunkenness. It is an antidote in case a man have ^aten venomous Mushromes, or
taken down any other venime, especially the Hemlocke, as also in bitings and
stingings of Spide^s and other venomous beasts. The juice mingled with the
kernells of Peaches, does kill the Worms. Worms.
The leaves made into ashes, and mingled with oil of Roses, does make the
hair black. To make the hair black.
The leaves laid in Wardrobes, do keep the garments, and do drive away
Flies and Gnats.

Southernewood grows best being planted of roots or shoots, (...) and his
vertu^^.
for it does not so well being sown of seed. It cannot abide much cold, nor
much heat, and therefore it must be planted in some such place of the garden as
is temperate. The seed the weight of a French Crown stamped with some of the
leaves in white Wine, adding thereto an old Nut, and a little Bole-Armoniacke,
all being st^ayned and drunk, is a singular drink against the Plague* The
Plague.
and all manner of poison. Poison.
The crops of the tops of the leaves, and the flowers being beaten and stamped
in oil, and made into the form of a liniment, do serve to shift off the
shiuerings of agues, Shiuerings of Agues.
if so be that the soles of the feet and verebres of the back o^ him that has
the ague be rubbed therewith. Southernwood taken inward, or applied outward,
does kill worms Worms.
in young children. It is true that Galen for bids the taking of it at the
mouth, because it is an enemy to the stomach.

Rosemarie Rosemarie.
loves chiefly a reasonable sat ground: it grows in any air, but best by
the Sea sides, and thereupon it bea^eth his name. It must be planted in the
Spring and Autumn, of roots on branches writhen and see fast in the earth,
and that in a warm place, or at the least lying open upon the Sun, and not
such a place as is very moist or subject unto the Northern^ vvind, because
this plane can hardly endure the cold, and therefore it must be planted upon
the South vader some wall, and the good time of planting or it is, when it will
prick, and then you must take off the small young sprigs, and set them three
inches within the earth, making the earth fast and close unto them above: or
else of some part of the most leauie branches thereof, which being afterward
helped by making the ground light, does spread and continue fresh, having no
need to be watered, except at the very time of setting of it, if the ground be
(...) and yet notwithstanding if it be watered, it will prosper the better, and
flourish the more. So long as it is young, it would be diligently weeded and
picked: it requires no dung, but only a good mould, and to be compassed (...)
the root with good earth. The lees of Wine, and the scraps broken off from
(...), laid at the foot thereof, do cause it to grow maruellously. There are
two (...) Rosemarie: the one bearing seed, and the other not. Some plant it for
food (...) unto Hiues, because it flowreth betimes, and for that the Bees do
greatly deligh^^ (...) it, and by it do better continue in health, as also
make better honey than th^se which feed not upon it at all. The flowers of it
will keep a year or two, without being spoiled, if you gather them clean,
and not mixed with any filthy things, having (...) dried them a little in the
Sun, until they have lost their newness and freshness^^ afterward dry them
up thoroughly in the shadow, and put them not up to keep (...) they be
perfectly dried.

It is good in the Plague time to perfume the house with Rosemarie, The vert^es
of Rosem^ri^.
for the (...) thereof drives away the ill air. An evil air.
The leaves and flowers are good against headache, He^da^h.
especially to stay the whites, if a woman do use them long time every
morning* (...) more specially, to make the sight better, if the party that
has the weak sight (...) eat fasting both the leaves and the flowers of
Rosemarie joint together, with (...) and salt every morning. The flowers
thereof made in conserve do comfort (...) Stomach, and are good in
melancholic Passions, the Falling sickness, (...), and Palsies. The seed
drunk with Pepper and white Wine, does heal the Iaundise, Iaundise.
and take away the obstructions of the Liver. The decoction of the (...)
thereof in white Wine do comfort weak and oppressed Sinews: Weak sinews.
If you (...) your head therewith, it will make a hard skin, and comfort the
little (...), and also keep the hair from falling so quickly. Some do make
Tooth-pi^^^ of the wooddie parts thereof, and those very good; as also Coals
to draw (...) first Lineaments and Groundwork of Pictures, and such other
things, to be painted.

The ordering of lesamine Iesamine.
is like unto that of Rosemarie, save that Iesamine do^^ continue always
gre^ne, and not so subject to frost as Rosemarie, and is much in (...) quest
for Arbors and Shelters, and for the setting forth of a Quarter. There may
(...) made an Oil of his flowers, infused a long time in Oil of sweet
Almonds, (...) in a bag from betwixt a Press, which will be sovereign to
comfort the (...) ^inewes and other parts of the body troubled with cold
distillations, (...).
and to (...) the frets of young children.

Mountain or wild Thyme delights to be planted or sown in grounds (...)
some Fountain, Mountain Thyme.
small Rundle, or Well, and such as is ill tilled, being dry in (...), and
full of water in Winter: and thus placed, it yields a great deal the (...)
leaves. It requires notwithstanding a ground that is neither fat nor dunged,
(...) open to the Sun, and would be often transplanted. Sometimes it comes of
(...) that is ill husbanded.

Mountain Thyme boiled in vinegar and oil of Rose, assuageth the headache,
Headache.
if the temples be rubbed therewith: boiled in Wine, and drunk, it provoke
Women's terms, brings forth the afterbirth, and dead child: with Honey i^
cleanses the Lungs, and helps the Falling sickness. The decoction is good
(...) the windiness, swellings, and hardness of the Matrix. The perfume of
(...) Thyme kills Serpents and other venomous Beasts, To kill Serpents* (...).
and drives away Fleas. (...) weight of a French crown of the powder of
Mountain Thyme, drunk with (...), D^fficultie or painful making of water.
assuageth the belly ach, and delivers the party which is troubled with
(...) of urine.

Penyryall Penyryall.
grows well either sown or planted: wherein this must be marked, that if it
be planted of the root or branches in Autumn, it will bring forth (...) and
flowers in mid November. It being once planted, continues always, so (...) it
be well wed and picked every year: it must be watered very diligently.
Penyryall^^ excellent good against the Dropsy, for the Spleen, Iaundise, and
furthering of women's deliverance in travel, To provoke women's terms.
as also to bring forth the afterbirth, and to (...) the terms, being drunk
with white Wine. To kill (...).
The perfume of Penyryall kills (...) and venomous Beasts. A Cataplasme made
of Penyryall boiled in Wine, does assuage the pain of the Sciatica. The
Sciatica.


Dill Dill.
loves better to be planted than sown, and craves chiefly a ground somewhat
warm, but more enclining to cold. If you would have it to grow fair, you must
water it oftentimes. When it is sown, it is not needful that the seed should
be covered with earth, because it is not subject to be eaten of Birds. Dill
has power to take away Belchings, Belchings.
and inward Gripes, Gripes.
Vomit, and Hicket, and that only with smelling to it, to provoke Urine, and
help the digestion of the Stomach: it causes a spring of milk in Nurses,
Difficulty of making water.
heals the suffocation of the Matrix, and ripeneth all manner of tumors.

Annise Annise.
craves a well batled, tilled, fat, and manured ground. It must be sown in
March, and often watered. Every man knows how good and profitable the seed
thereof is, eaten in the morning, for such as are subject to the gripes of the
Stomach and Guts, to the Hicke^, Belchings, stinking Breath, A stinking breath.
and which desire to have a beautiful and comely countenance: after meat, A
fair face.
it also helps digestion: it is good for Nurses to cause them to have much
milk. It also taken away the stopping of the Stomach or Spleen: it helps
Collickes, provoke Urine, makes a man apt to sweet: and lastly, keeps the
body soluble.

Bishops-weed Bishops-weed.
craves such ground and such tillage as Annise, which being once sown, does
lightly grow there every year by the seed falling from it: it grows
chiefly in rested grounds. The seed is excellent good against Wringings and
Gripes, to provoke Women's terms, and Urine, if it be drunk with Wine, so that
it be used but seldom, for otherwise it causes a pale color. The perfume
does mundifie and cleanse the Matrix, and makes barren women fruitful, if
together with this suffumigation the barren woman do take every second
morning the weight of a dram of the powder of this seed, three hours before
she eat any thing, continuing it for four of five times: but in the mean
time, the husband must lie with his wife upon such days as she shall use this
powder: a thing proved diverse times.

Caraway Caraway.
is sown in the month of May, in a good, clean, and manured ground, in such
sort as we have said in the Kitchen Garden. The seed helps Digestion,
provoke Urine, expels Windiness, and has the same virtues that Annise
has: being made into powder, it is with good success mixed amongst such
remedies as are used to be given for dry blows.

Cummin Cummin.
does grow fairest, when it is sown in a fat and hot ground, or in a ground
lying open to the Eastern Sun amongst the pothearbes (for so it grows
better) in the beginning of May. Some likewise say, that for to make it grow
fair and well, it must be cursed and rayled upon. It must not be watered so
presently after it is sown; but after it is put forth of the earth, it must be
oftentimes watered.

The seed taken at the mouth, Windiness.
scatters the winds which break upward, it mendeth the inward gripes, Gripes.
and takes away the difficulty to make water; as also the blackness of dry
blows, Difficulty in making water.
the powder thereof being presently applied after it has been beat very
small and fine, Dry blows.
and heated at the fire. Being taken in a Suffumigation, or put up into the
secret places, it helps conception. The fume of this seed taken upon the
face, does make it pale and deadly. And this do they very well know, which
are given over to counterfeit holiness, sincere and upright dealing, or the
subduing or bringing under of the body. Also the seed thereof bruised and
boiled in Oil, is good against any Impost^^ation, and assuageth any great
swelling.

Fennel Fennel.
finds not it self agrieued with any air or soil: howbeit, naturally it
is more enclining unto a hot than unto a cold air, and unto a grauellie ground
rather than unto a better: only it flies and refuses a sandy and altogether
barren ground, as not thriuing any whit therein. It is sown in the Spring and
(...), and it is planted likewise at the same times, the stalks are romoued
having put forth a (...), every one from another, or else the whole tuft
only; notwithstanding* the sweet Fennel loves rather to be sown than
planted, and that rather in the Spring than in Autumn, for so it grows more
sweet, and bears the greater seed. It must be sown in and removed unto a
ground open upon the Sun, and reasonably dry, and seldom sown, as not
above one year. It must be kept very clean so long as it is in growing, and
until it be come unto his full growth, for otherwise bad weeds would choke it.

To have very sweet Fennel, Sweet F^^nell.
put your seed in a Marsellis fig, and so sow it, or else mix honey with the
earth wherein you sow it, or else steep the seed in honey one or two nights
before you sow it, or else in the water of honey, or in milk, changing the
same, and putting new instead, in such sort as we have said in the handling of
Melons.

Fennel, Clear sight.
as well the leaf as the seed, is wholly dedicated to the clearing of the
eyes: and for this cause, some draw the juice of the leaves and stalks while
they are yet tender, and drying it, keep it for the same effect. Sometimes the
water of Fennel is distilled all alone, and by it self, or else mixed with
honey. The seed of Fennel, is good to restrain wind, w^^dinesse.
taken after meat, notwithstanding that it is hard of digestion, and brings
but little nourishment unto the body. It may be eaten green after the
beginning of August: as also the buds and tender stalks may be preserved, and
likewise the branches as they bear their seed, with salt and vinegar, in
earthen pots, to use at all times, and especially whiles there is reigning any
excessive heat. The use of Fennel also causes women to have great store of
milk. Ab^undance of milk.


Marierome Marierome.
grows of seed, roots, or shoots, as Sage does. It desires shadowed places,
and that fat, well manured, and often watered. It will be the fairer, if it be
removed in the beginning of Summer. The roots must be defended from Rats and
Mice; for this kind of vermin does it more injury than any other: which you
shall find and prove true, if it please you but to make trial thereof. The
juice pressed out of the leaves, To p^rge the bra^e.
and drawn up into the nos^hrils, does purge the head: made into a lee, it
dries the rheumes, and scoureth away the filthiness of the head. The broth
wherein it has boiled, is good against the beginning of Dropsy, Dropsy.
as also for them that cannot make water well, and which are subject unto
Gripings.

Mugwort, Mugwort.
whether it be set or sown, craves a dry and stony ground, contrary to
another herb resembling it, and called herb S. John, and grows in
marshes, and it indeed the male Sothernwood.

Mugwort has singular force against the bitings of Serpents, The virtues.
used as well inward as outward, as also against the Plague: That it is so, the
Almaines do sufficiently prove, who account not themselves to have any more
sovereign remedy against the Plague, than Mugwort made into ashes, and
afterward boiled into a chymicall salt, to use so soon as they perceive
themselves stricken with the Plague, with four or five ounces of good Wine, or
Malmesey, and afterward to go lay themselves down in bed, to cause themselves
to sweat two or three hours. It has singular virtues against the diseases of
the Matrix: for the leaves put into a bag, or made in form of a Cataplasme,
and applied warm from under the navel unto the flanks, do procure the
terms, The Matrix out of order, and (...).
and do appease in like manner the Matrix relaxed, or out of order and place.
The leaves stamped with oil of bitter Almonds, and applied unto the stomach,
do stay the pain thereof. There is made a singular Pes^arie (...) bring down
women's terms, with the leaves of Mugwort, Myrrh, and Figs, all being brayed
with oil of Ireos. The root powdered and drunk with white wine, does so purge
the Matrix, as that it casts forth the mole and afterbirth. The juice is
with good success drunk against Opium: the powder of the dried leaves drunk
with wine the weight of three drammes, is exceedingly good for the Sciatica.
Some say, that the traveler which carries Mugwort the whole herb, tied unto
his legs, or thighs, shall not find himself weary at all: and that hanged
at the entries of houses, it withholds all Incantations and Witch-crafts.
When awoman labors of child, and cannot avoid her afterbirth, Afterbirth.
there is nothing better than to apply unto her, under her navel, upon her
thighs and flanks, a Cataplasme made of Mogwort leaves, boiled with Barley
meal: but presently after the child or afterbirth is come ^orth, you must
take away this Cataplasme, otherwise it would draw down the Matrix also. If
you stamp the juice of Mugwort with the yolks of eggs boiled, adding thereto
Hogs grease and the seed of Cummin, and apply it all in manner of a
Cataplasme upon the Matrix, Pains of the Matrix.
you shall remedy all the pain that ordinarily does follow after childbirth.

Tansie, Tansie.
as well the great as the small, grows in most places, as upon the brinkes of
Rivers and small Brooks, and sometimes in dry places, as we ^ee it grow in
Ways, and in the edges of high Ways. The seed or flowers drunk with milk or
wine, does (...) the Worms: Worms.
and that is the cause why some call it Worme-ba^e. It serves also to provoke
Urine, and to break the Stone Stone.
and Gravel Gravel.
of the reins, especially in men, as Fether^ew does the same in women.

Fetherfew Fetherfew.
does require the like ordering and ground that Mugwort does, and they are also
(as it were) of the like virtues, both of them appropriate unto the affects of
the Matrix: but Fether^ew surpasses in this, that the flowers, but principally
the leaves, stamped and applied unto the teeth or ear of the side that aketh,
it wholly assuageth the pain of the teeth: And this is the cause why the
Parisia^s do call it Espargo^tte, because the leaves thus stamped and applied,
do cause to distill out of the mouth, drop after drop, the flegmaticke humor,
which causes the said toothache. It is good also for them which have the
swimming of the head, as also for them which are troubled with Melancholy, or
with the Stone.

Ca^s-mint, or Nept, Nept, or Cats-mint.
is a kind of Calamint, whereof we have spoken before: so called, because that
Cats do exceedingly delight in the smell thereof, and do tumble themselves
round upon the leaves and stalks: it grows without any great husbanding in
marshie and waterish places, as may easily be seen and tried. It is reported
to have a singular virtue in helping women to conceive. Conception.
In like manner Physicians are wont to prescribe Bathes and Fomentations made
of this herb, for women that cannot conceive and have children. Also it is
very delicately purgative, and opens the body very gently, without
offense, or danger afterco^^i^enesse.

French Lauander French Lauander.
being and herb of a very good smell, and very usual in Langu^do^ and
Prouence, does crave to be diligently tilled, in a fat ground, and lying open
to the Sun. The decoction* syrrup, or distilled water does comfort the brain
and memory, takes away the obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, Lungs, and
Matrix: but such as are choleric, must not use it, because it disquieteth
them mightily, in causing them to vomit, and altering them much, by bringing a
heat upon all the body.

The dry, stony, and Sunne-shining place is very fit for Lauander, Lauander.
whether male or female. Before it flower, it must be cut and picked very
carefully. It is of a sweet smell, and good, when it is dried, to put amongst
Linnens and Woollen Clothes, ^mparting of his sweetness unto them, and keeping
of them from vermin. It is very excellent to comfort weak and wearied
sinews, Weak sinews.
or otherwise ill affected, through some cold cause: and by reason hereof,
Baths and Fomentations made of Lauander for Palsies, Palsies.
Conuulsions, Conuulsions.
Apoplexies, Apoplexies.
and other such like affects, are very sovereign. The flowers, with Cinnamon,
Nutmeg, and Cloves, do heal the beating of the heart. The distilled water of
the flowers, taken in the quantity of two spoonefuls, restores the lost
speech, and heals the swownings and disease of the heart. The cons^rue and
distilled water thereof do the like. The Oil thereof dries up Rheumes also:
and being anointed upon the nape of the neck, it is singular good against
conuulsions and benummednesse of sinews.

All-good (otherwise called in French Orualle, All-good, otherwise Cla^y.
because it is as much worth as gold) grows in any ground, without seed, and
with seed: it delights notwithstanding to be often watered. The leaves
stamped and applied, do draw forth thorns and pricks that are fastened and
run into any part of the body whatsoever: It does, in like manner, bring
the child out of the mothers body, being in travel. The wine wherein it has
been steeped in small quantity, does make men pleasant and cheerful,
Cheerfulness.
and apt to carnal copulation. The seed thereof put into the eye, and turned
many times round about the eye, To clear the sight.
does cleanse and clear it, in wiping away the ^^egmaticke humor, wherewith
you shall well perceive the seed to be laden, and (a^ it were) wrapped in small
filmes after that it is taken out of the eyes. The flower^ and seed put in a
vessel full of sweet Wine, whiles it yet purges, gives it the taste of
Malmesey. It is true, that such Wine will quickly make one drunk, and cause
the headache, as we see that Beer does, wherein Brewers boil Clarie in stead
of Hoppes.

Nigella Nigella.
of the Garden must be sown in a ground that is fat and well tilled. The fume
of the seed taken, does stay the rheum, dry the brain, and causes the
smelling that is lost to come again: boiled with water and vinegar, and holden
in the mouth, it assuageth toothache.

Sweet Balm Balm.
grows rather in Woods and Forests than in Gardens: notwithstanding, he that
will have it in his Garden, must sow it in a fat and well battild ground, where
the heat of the Sun comes not very strongly.

It serves to rejoice the heart, Cheerfulness.
and delivers the spirit from melancholic imaginations and fancies: it is
good not only against bitings and stingings of venimon^ beasts, but also
against the Plague, in whatsoever manner it be used. And further, if any man
doubt himself to have eaten any venomous or poisoned meat, as it falls out
often in them which have eaten Mushromes and such like things, then this
serves for a singular remedy against the same. To keep be^s from flying from
their hiues.
Such as esteem it a fine thing to keep Bees, to the end he may prevent their
flying away, and forsaking of their Hiues, as also to cause them to come
again, if they be gone away, do rub the Hiues with the flowers of sweet
Balm: as on the contrary, to drive them, To d^iue them from them.
and to cause them to forsake them, they rub them with the flowers of Fetherfew.

Camomile, Camomile.
as well the white as the yellow, has no need of great tilling: it is
sufficient to plant it in a dry, lean, and stony ground.

Camomile is singular good to mollify, To mollify, (...) resolve, ^erifie.
resolve, ra^ifie, and loosen: and in this respect there is no remedy better
for la^^itudes or wearisomenesse, without just outward causes, than bathes made
with the leaves and flowers thereof. The leaves of Camomile stamped with white
wine, make a very good drink to cure all sorts of Agues, but especially
Tertians: for which reason, the Priests of Egypt did consecrate it unto the
Sun. Also the water of Camomile drunk warm in the beginning of the fit,
does thoroughly heal the Tertian by vomit. The leaves of Camomile yet green,
being dried upon a Tyle, or hot Fire-panne, do by and by appease the headache.
Being also fried with sweet Sewet and unset Leekes in a Frying-pa^^e, and put
hot into a Linen bag, and so applied to the navel, it kills Worms either
in old, middle age, or young infants, and takes away all manner of pain in
the belly.

Melilot Me^^^ot.
refuses no ground, be it fat, or be it dry, and yet it loves to be watered.
Melilot does mollify, resolve, and rarifie, as does Camomile, and yields a
very good smell, especially when it is new, or when it raineth, in Summer* it
also assuageth the ach of any part or member, whatsoever it be. Also the ^uice
thereof, mixed with Turpentine, Wax, and Oil, ripeneth, breaks, and heals
any Impostume whatsoever: it takes away all hard swelling, and cleanses
wounds.

Many men being very desirous to adorn and set forth their Garden with all
sorts of Plants, Apples of love.
do amongst the rest provide to furnish it with Apples of Love (which the
Latins call Mala insana) by reason of the beauty of their fruit, which which
is as thick as a Cucumber drawing toward a red color. They must be sown in
the Spring, in a fat and well battild soil, and where the Sun has great
power, because they cannot abide any cold: they crave the like ordering and
husbandry that the Cucumber does.

Many licorish mouths let not to be eating of these, no more than of
mushroomes: they take away their pilling, they cut them in slices, boil them
in water, and after fry them in the flower of meal and butter or oil, and
then cast upon them pepper and salt: this kind of meat is good for such men as
are inclined to dally with common dames, and short-heeld huswiues, because it
is windy, and withal ingendreth choleric humors, in^inite obstructions and
headache, sadness, melancholicke dreams, and in the end long continuing
agues: and therefore it were better to forbear them.

Mandrakes Mandrakes.
as well the male as the female is more acceptable and to be commended, for the
beauty of his leaves, fruit, and whole plant, than for the smell it has: it
must be sown or planted in some shadowed place, a fat and well battild ground,
and be kept from the cold which it altogether detesteth and cannot abide.

The Apples of Mandrakes procure sleep, The virtues.
if you put but one of them under your ear when you are laid in bed: it is
all but fables which is spoken of the root which is not so cooling as the
apple, and has virtue on the contrary to dry, soften, and resolve all the
hardness of the liver, spleen, kings evil, and such other tumors, how hard
and rebellious soever that they be. Which is more, Dioscorides reports, that
if one boil the roots of Mandrakes, with Iuorie for the space of six
hours, it makes the Iuorie so tractable, and softeneth it in such sort as
that you may set what impression upon Iuorie that you please: peradventure such
as bring us unicorns horn from thence, do use such deceitful and wily
dealing with us, seeing by such their cunning skill, they are able in such sort
to soften Iuorie or the Harts-horne, and thereby likewise able to work it to
the same form which we receive the vnicornes-horne in at this day.

Within this small time there has been seen a plant somewhat like unto
apples of love, Golden-apples.
bearing a round fruit like an apple, divided upon the outside as the melon is
with furrows, in the beginning it is green, but afterward when it comes to
ripeness, it becomes somewhat golden, and sometimes reddish. This plant is
more pleasant to the sight, than either to the taste or smell, because the
fruit being eaten, it provoke loathing and vomiting.

CHAP. L.
Of the form of setting Herbs in order, by proportion of diverse fashions.
We have already delivered the form of setting Herbs in order, as well
such as are of a sweet smell, as those which are for nosegaies, and that either
upon particular beds or quarters: now we will speak of the manner of bestowing
of them in proportions of diverse fashions, and in labyrinthes or mazes. But in
this course I cannot set thee down an universal, and as it were inviolable
prescript and ordinance, seeing the fashions of proportions do depend partly
upon the spirit and invention of the Gardener, and partly upon the pleasure of
the master and Lord unto whom the ground and garden appertains: the one
whereof is lead by the hops and skips, turnings and windings of his brain; the
other by the pleasing of his eye according to his best fantasy.
Notwithstanding that there may not any thing be here omitted, which might work
your better contentment and greater pleasure, by looking upon the beauty and
comeliness of this your garden-plot: I intend to set before you diverse figures
of proportions, and the manner of drawing of them cunningly, to the end you may
have the means to choose those which shall most delight you, and best agree
with your good liking. In which I desire you to give great thanks, and
acknowledge your self greatly beholden and bound unto Monsieur Porcher, Prior
of Crecie in Brie, the most excellent man in this art, not only in France, but
also in all Europe: and not unto me, who shall be but his mouth in delivering
what he has said, written, and communicated unto me in precepts, yet extant,
and to be seen with the eye. And touching these proportions, you shall
understand that they are of two kinds, inward and outward, the inward are those
beauties and proportions which are bestowed upon the inward parts or quarters
of your garden, as are knots, mazes, arms, branches, or any other curious
figures whatsoever, and these are divided by slender rows, or lines of
herbs, flowers, turfes, or such like; the outward beauties or proportions are
those which are bestowed in the outward and general parts of the whole or
entire model of the garden, drawn into what figure, knot, or devise your
fancy can create, or the ground retain, and are divided by alleyes, hedges,
deep borders, and such like, as shall be at large showed unto you hereafter.

To come therefore unto the matter, all the sweet smelling herbs and others
for ^osegaies, which we have mentioned before, are not fit and good to make
proportions of. The most fit and meet are, penniroyall, lauander, hys^ope, wild
thyme, rosemarie, thyme, ^age, marierom, cammomile, violets, daisies, basil,
and other such herbs, as well those that are of sweet smell, as those which
are for nosegayes: as for example, lauander and rosemarie of a year old to
make borders about the proportions or knots; and as for box in as much as it
is of a naughty smell, it is to be left off, and not dealt withal. All the
rest of the herbs, as penniroyall, hyssope, wild thyme, thyme, sage,
ma^ierom, and such like, are ^ittest to be used about the quarters, or else in
some such pre^tie little devises as are made in the midst of borders, or
whereof proportions of quarters without borders, as well whole as broken, are
made. Germander also is an excellent herb for the setting forth of any inward
proportion, for it grows even and comely, thick and upright, so is also
mother of thyme, winter-^auorie and pinkes, provided that with your sheares you
keep them from too much spreading.

The herbs whereof borders shall be made, must be more high and thicke^ set
of leaves, than those whereof proportions of quarters either whole or broken
are made, or yet the other which are in the midst of the borders, that so the
beauty and good proportion of the knot or quarter may be seen and discerned
more easily.

I call in these places that the border which compasses the proportion or
quarter about, as also the alleys of the garden: I call broken quarters, those
many small parcels which are sundred and separate one from another. The
proportions either without borders or borders, are either equally square in
wideness and length, or else unequally squared, that is to say, longer than
they are wide, or wider than they are long: Or else of the form and shape of
an egg: or of a form and fashion that is mixed of a round and a square, or of
some such other form, as shall please the gardener: as for example, the
fashion of a flower-deluce, of a true loves knot, of a lion rampant, and other
such like portraitures.

That which shall be in the midst of the proportions with borders, or without
borders, shall be of a square form, or of the fashion of an egg, or round, or
mixed of a square and a round, or some other such like form.

If you be disposed to plant any herb in the midst of broken quarters, it
must not be over high, but less and shorter than those wherewith the
proportions are set, that so it may not hide or hinder the sight of any part of
the quarter. It is true indeed that in this middlemost part, you may set an
herb of a mean and middle height, yea, or some such as for his bigness may
resemble a shrub or little tree, but it may not be thick set with leaves, not
spreading far abroad, but rather putting forth his stalk upright, as does the
Bay and Cypres tree.

But in respect of the beauty and comeliness of the quarter, you must not
plant any thing in it, or if you do plant any herb, you must see, that it be
of a shorter stalk than that which compasses it about: the knot that is made
of borders, must consist but of two sorts of herbs: as for example, of
Lauander or Rosemarie, or Box for the border, and of Penny-royall of Hissope
within. It is true, that in the midst, and four corners thereof, there may
be set some Cypres, or Rose-marie, or some such other herb, or little tree,
which is not thick set with leaves, not spreading far abroad, but rising in
height upright.

But the knot made of broken quarters, may be made of diverse, and differing
herbs, which notwithstanding may not grow great and tall, because they would
hinder the view of the garden, but they must be short, and thin set with
leaves, as Sage, Penny-royall, Margerom, Cammomill, Da^sies, Violets, Basil,
Rue, and such others, which herbs shall be planted in diverse quarters, to the
setting forth of greater variety in the knot, and to give grace unto the
little quarters. It is true, that within some round quarters, or squares of
broken quarters, you may work some small birds, men, or other such pourtraites
made of Rose-marie, according to your pleasure, and invention of your Gardener.

The herbs wherewith proportions are set out and decked, must be planted of
roots or slippes: the time to plant them is January, Frebruarie, March and
April.

It is true, that if you plant herbs, especially Penny-royall and Lauander
upon sl^ps. The time of gathering of good plants, will be at the end of
January, and in the month of February, and not later, because this kind of
slip will not be frozen by any frost that may happen, and withal, in the
mean time, it does not stand in need of watring, because it has taken root
before the hot times of the year come in.

Again, if you set herbs of the root, you must stay till March and April,
and look well unto it, that your herbs have ^ound, living, and every way
sufficient roots, for otherwise, they will not be able to prosper, spread,
and grow in the earth, but will die for the most part. It is meet also, that
when they are planted, you should water them very often, because of the heat
then growing more and more every day, for otherwise they will wither, or grow
small and dwarfish, or die right out.

Wherefore for the greater assuredness, I could wish you to plant your herbs
rather of slippes than of roots: for besides that, it will be more easy, and
of less ^harge and cost to purchaseslips, than to purchase the whole herbs
with the roots. I^ will be also less labor and travel for to preserve and
make to grow the one than the other: for the slips will assuredly grow without
watering, and notwithstanding any frost, and they will show fair and thick
leaued, by such time as Summer shall begin. To plant within the earth, whether
it be root, or slip, you must cast trenches, rather with some short handled
hand-forke, or hand-spade, than with a dibble, which you shall find a great
deal more easy.

Behold here the greatest part of the things which you are diligently to look
unto before you put your hand to the work of casting your proportions or
knots: and whereas their whole beauty and commendation does consist in a well
framed and proportioned form, and in a well carried and appointed order of
disposing them, such as may delight the eye: to the end you may attain this
commendable and well pleasing kind of proportion in the contriuing of your
quarters, you must first cast what is the space and whole contents of your
quarter, wherein you mean to draw your proportions, that so according to the
said contents, you may fit them with such form as the place will afford.
After that, you shall have in your hand many measures of small cord, and yet
sufficient strong: many cord-reeles and dibbles, and such other things to
finish the proportions which you desire to have drawn in your quarter.

And thus much concerning the means which you shall use in the finishing up of
a knot with borders. Before you stretch your line to draw and cast the shape of
it, you must first take the breadth and length of the border, and that such as
the quantity of the ground may conveniently bear, and so make it more long
and broad, or else long and broad accordingly.

It is true, that if you have good ground enough, as about some sixty foot
square, after the measure of a common foot, every one containing twelve inches,
you may make your border large enough: but and if you have less quantity of
ground, then you must make your border less, and the proportions at large: you
shall so finish up your borders, as that in the midst of them, you may have
some pretty little knot. When you have cast your ground, you shall begin to
stretch your line with good and firm line-reeles, to take the breadth and
length of your borders round about. Then you shall draw your line a cross,
from the which cross, and from about the which said borders, you shall not
draw up your line and line-reeles, until you have marked out all your border,
or at the least one side, or half of it, because this is the directorie, for
the whole quarter and border to: this is it, whereby you must be guided and
directed for the making of compasses and largeness of your squares and rounds.
Furthermore, you may stretch your line in the midst of the border, thereby to
take the just midst, and that for to direct and guide you. Furthermore, you
shall have two lines of the length of the border or quarter, and two foot over,
and these are called the flying or running lines, for that they serve to carry
or remove from place to place, for the planting of herbs in the said borders.
Again, you shall stretch out a line from corner to corner, because that
without such line you cannot make up your corners: and this is the manner of
making your borders. As concerning the knot contained within the borders: to
take the measure of the proportion or squares, you must have two small rods, of
the thickenesse of a thombe, of willow, of some other straight wood, the one
eight foot long, and the other betwixt three and four, the long one to serve
for the largest works, and the short for the smaller: upon which rods, you must
mark out your proportions, whereof you mean to make your squares, or any other
^orme that it shall please you to make. For round works, you must have an
instrument, commonly called the Gardners Bilboquet, the pattern whereof you
shall see hereafter; but give it what name it pleases you, but this is the
manner of making of it: You shall take a prop or standard, somewhat thicker
than your thombe, you shall put thereto a line of the same thickness that your
gardening lines are, of three or four foot long, or according to the length
and greatness that you would have your rounds of. Upon this line, shall you
make knots, according to the bigness or outside of the work, and then another
knot for the second or inward circle of the round, which shall be eight or nine
inches, or less if you will: but I tell you before hand, that if you make them
any less, the border will be ouershadowed, and will not last and continue so
long; and yet I still refer it to your own discretion. To every knot of the
said line for to make your rounds withal, you shall make fast, right over
against the knot, on the backside thereof, a little stick some four fingers
long, more or less as you shall most fancy, and of thickness of your little
finger. By the means of these knots shorter or longer, you shall make your
rounds so many, and so big, or so little, as shall seem good unto you. If it
may not rather stand with your liking to make two Bilboquets, one for your small
rounds, and another for your greater. This figure following, does show the
form and fashion that must be followed in using your lines for the making of
your quarters with borders. These draughts will serve also to make a border to
broken quarters, with some small whole and unbroken proportions in the midst,
even as you see a square in the midst, and shall further hereafter see it in
other portraitures, which shall be set out for your use. To work the more
surely, you shall let all your lines be stretched out in length, and our
standards, props, or dibbles fast in the ground, until such time as you have
thoroughly finished the border, that is to say, your cross lines in the
midst, as also those which pass from corner to corner, and thirdly, those
which make the sides of the borders. All which said lines are noted with the
letter B. The others which are marked with the letter A. are the running or
flying lines, which are carried from one place to another to make middle
partitions, to the treading of the rounds, and to the squaring of the said
border, and when as one side is down, they are then to be taken up, and to be
pitched down else where. And although that here be four, yet two is
sufficient, at the discretion of the gardener, who according as his number of
workefolkes is, more or less, shall stretch and draw more or fewer lines.

The manner of using, and platform, showing the practice of handling the
lines, for the laying out of a simple quarter without any border. And how the
lines must be continued and kept stretched till the whole proportion be drawn
out and finished.


The use and manner of practicing by the stretched lines.


The use and manner of practicing by the stretched lines.


A simple proportion, or draught of a Knot.


A simple proportion, or draught of a Knot.


A simple proportion, or draught of a Knot.


A simple proportion, or draught of a Knot.


A simple proportion, or draught of a Knot.


A simple proportion, or draught of a Knot.


A simple proportion, or draught of a Knot.


A simple proportion, or draught of a Knot.


A simple proportion, or draught of a Knot.


The way and manner to stretch the lines, to make a quarter with borders, and to
make a border with squares broken and crossed through the midst.


The manner of stretching your lines upon a border with a severed knot in the
midst.


A border with his several proportion in the midst.


A border of broken squares, with a middle consisting of five proportions.


The manner to stretch the lines to make a quarter of broken squares. Let rest
and abide in their places the lines til you have finished the proportions. Take
the measure of the standards of a cross and corner line, whether it be a
square or a round, and let there be so many of them, and as great as the ground
will bear. And if perhaps you would plant any thing in the midst of the
quarter, help your self with the running lines, and their standards, to plant
there what you would, without putting down any other standards, or stretching
any other lines than are already: and those you must not flacke, according as
has been said before.


The manner of stretching the lines, upon a quarter of broken squares.


A border of broken squares with the middle.


The form and shape of Bilboquet, which is an instrument to take the measure
of rounds, as we have declared before.


The form of a Labyrinth.


When the herbs, as well of the Borders, as of the Quarters, are grown up,
if they become too thick set of leaves, and by their large spreading do
ouer-shadow the one the other, cover the small alleyes of the proportions, and
therewithal spoil and hu^^ the comeliness of the whole Quarter, they must be
cut. The season to cut them, is at all such times as need shall require. It is
true, that there must especial care be had not to cut them, the time of August
being once past, by reason of the great los^e that ensues in herbs, which
thereby will fall to wither and pine away, and become as things burned with the
Sun. To cut them which stand in a right and straight line, you shall stretch
a line very stiff, being of the length of the proportion, by the direction
whereof you shall cut very near first the two sides, and then the upper face
thereof. As concerning Rounds, you must cut them, for the ^ight of the
Country, as round as ever you can. To cut the Border, whether it be of
Lauander, Rosemarie, or Box, you must use the ordinary sheeres, which have
handles of wood. To cut other smaller and less herbs, you must have sheeres
like those which Tailors use.

Now you shall again understand, that these inward Quarters, wherein you place
these Knots, or other Devises, may be circumferenced or bound in as well with
(...) curious Hedges, made battlement-wise, in sundry forms, according to
invention, or carrying the proportions of Pyllasters, Flowers, shapes of
Beasts, Birds, Creeping things, Ships, Trees, and such like, as with Borders,
especially if your ground be little, or straitened, because these Hedges take
not half so much room as the Borders. Again, you may at your pleasure,
either within these Hedges, or in the some Line wherein these Hedges grow,
plant all manner of Fruit trees, or other Trees of any curiosity whatsoever:
and within them you may plant your Gooseberrie (...), Prouence Roses, Musk
Roses, or any other fruit or flower that grows shrub-wise, or not above two
or three foot above the earth: So that whereas your Border contains not any
thing but one entire herb, as Prympe, Box, Hysope, Lauander, and such like;
by this manner of bordering, which is to say, with a Quickset Hedge, you shall
have not only all them, but also all kind of fruits, flowers, and sweet
smelling herbs whatsoever: besides, they will keep your Quarters and Knots in
a great deal more safety, because they are not so easy to be run over, or
broken down, either by man, or beast, as your other Borders of herbs are.
Now, for the making of these Quickset Hedges, it is in this manner: First, you
shall with fine small stakes, cut to the length and proportions of your work,
stake your Quarters about: then with small poles, bound to those stakes either
with strong Wyar, or Oziers (but Wyar is the better) make a Lattice-worke,
about two foot above the earth: then with shorter poles and wands, made plyant
for your purpose, fashion your battlements of what shape soever you please to
have them; whether made plain, or pyllaster-wise, or in semicircles, or other
proportions, in such manner as you intend your Hedge shall grow: and this done
either in Autumn, or the beginning of the Spring. Along the bottom of this
Hedge you shall set Prympe, white Thorn, Eglantine, and sweet Bryer, mixed
together, and as they shoot and grow up, so you shall wind and plash them
within the Lattice-worke, making them grow and cover the same; ever and anon,
as need shall require, either with your Sheeres, or Hook, cutting them to that
shape and proportion to which you first framed your Lattice-worke, and this
will in two or three years bring your Hedge unto such perfection, that besides
the beauty thereof, the defense will be so good, that you shall not fear the
harm that Dogs, Swine, or other Cattle may do, if at any time they shall
chance to break into your Garden. These Hedges are also very excellent to set
along your Alleyes, or other Walks, and add a great beauty thereunto.
There be some that make these Hedges only of Oziers, or small Sallowes,
planted crosse-wise, or otherwise, as your invention pleases, and these Hedges
are good, and beautiful, and very speedy in their growing, but they are not
of any very long continuances: therefore, except your ground be very moist, the
former Hedge is much the better. Which that you may the better know how to
make, I will here set you down the models of a couple of them; by the example
whereof, you may at your pleasure make any other proportion whatsoever: and
you shall also understand, that these two Models contain but the dead work
only, which is to be made of Poles or Wands, and the Quickset to be planted
close unto it, and so placed within the dead Lattice-worke, as you may here
perceive.



CHAP. LI.
Of the manner to keep and preserve Herbs, either for the use of the Pot, or
of Physic, or such as are of a sweet smell and savor.
THe root of Elecampane is preserved after this sort: The preserving of the
root of Elecampane.
When you have taken up the root in the month of October, at such time as it
is very ripe, you must first take away all the sand and earth which is about
it with a rough Linen Cloth, or with a Strainer: after that, you must scrape
it all over with a very sharp knife, and according as the roots are of
bigness, to cleave them in two, three, more or less pieces, of a fingers
length, and boil them in a Brass Cauldron with vinegar, and that in such
sort, as that the slices may not burn within the Cauldron. Three days after
they must be dried in the Sun, and put into a new pot well pitched, and cuted
wine put unto them, and that so much, as that they may be covered therewith,
and a good deal of Sauorie pressed down upon them, and then the vessel close
shut up and covered well with leather. Otherwise: You must carefully look that
the roots thereof be made very clean, and then cut in two or three pieces,
of a fingers length: then afterward, for the space of a whole day together, you
must infuse them in water upon hot embers, and afterward boil them with twice
or thrice as much Honey, or Sugar.

There may likewise conserve be made of the root of Elecampane after this
manner: Conserve of Elecampane roots.
Make very clean the roots of Elecampane, as we have said, and cut them in
small slices, infuse them a long time upon hot embers in water, and after to
boil them so long, as till they be tender ^odden: then stamp them and strain
them through a Linen cloth or Strainer, and in the end boil them up with
thrice as much Honey or Sugar.

You may in like manner preserve and conserve many other roots, Preser^^s and
conserues of Gentian, Pioni^, Corne-flag, wild Vine, Pars^^ps, Turnips, and
(...).
as Gentian, Pionie, Corne-flag, wild Vine, Parsneps, Althaea, or marsh
Mallows, Turnips, Carrets, Radishes, Naue^s, Caraway, Eringus, and such other
like, all which will be the more pleasant, if you put unto the conserved or
pre^erued a little Cinnamon.

Lastly, The difference betwixt (...) and conseruing.
be it known, that by this word confected, preserving, or confection, is to be
understood the remaining of the root or other thing (whatsoever it is that is
preserved or confected) whole: and by the word conserve, or conserved, is to be
understood that manner of ordering things, whereby they are stamped and beaten
very small.

Purslaine is preserved in this manner: The preserving of Purslaine.
Gather Purslaine before it have cast the seed, ^ake the tenderest stalks
thereof, and the fullest of leaves, from these you shall ^ake the roots, and
wash them thoroughly from the sand and earth that might hang about them:
afterward dry them a little, even so long, as till you perce^ue them to begin
to wither: afterward put them up handsomely in some Barrel or little Vessel
of earth, in manner of little Beds, every Bed sufficiently covered with salt.
When the Barrel or Vessel shall be full, power thereinto a sufficient
quantity of Vinegar, or else one part of Veriuice, and two of Vinegar. This
being done, set the Vessel in some dry place, and not moist, for fear that
the preserve should smell any thing of mustinesse, and look to it well, that
the Purslaine be continually covered over with the pickle: And when you would
use it, wash it first with warm water, or wine, afterward make it up in Salads
with Salad oil. The preserve of Asparagus, Harts-horne, Trick-madame, etc.
After the same manner, Samphire, the ^pro^ts of Asparagus, Harts-horne,
Trick-madame, Broom flowers, the flowers of Capers, Cucumbers, Limons,
Oranges, Plummes, Pears, and such like, may be preserved.

Lettuce is preserved after this sort: The pre^^^uing of Lettuces.
They take the stalks of Lettuce clean picked, and the leaves pulled off,
even from the lowest part of them, unto where you perceive the leaves to grow
tender, and these stalks you must salt in a little Trough or Tray, and so let
them continue a day and a night, until that they have turned the ^alt into
brine: after this, they must be washed in the same brine of salt, and after
that they have been spraind, they are laid abroad upon hurdles, until they
be well dried: afterward there must be put upon them dried Dill, ^ennell, a
little Rue, and L^^kes chopped small: after all this, the said stalks are put
up in a pot thus dried, and there is powered in upon them a pickle, which is
made of two parts of vinegar, and one of salt brine: after this, in stead of a
double Linen cloth to cover it, there must be thrust in good store of dry
Fennel upon them, in such sort, as that the pickle may swell up and ouer-couer
them. And evermore, in all confections, it must be a special great care that
they remain not dry, and to that end to power in pickle oftentimes, ^f by
turning them aside you see they have need. After this fashion may Succorie,
Scariole, Harts-horne, the tender shoots of Brambles, the young and tender
croppes of Thyme, Sauorie, Organie, and Radishes, be pre^erued: and such
preserues must be made in the beginning of Summer.

The herbs preserved with salt and vinegar are chiefly ordained for Salads*
but these that are made with sugar and honey, do serve for the use of
Physic: such are those which follow hereafter.

There is but very seldom any preserues made of the flowers and leaves of
herbs: What is meant by the word preserve.
I understand by this preserve, taken properly, the preserving of things whole,
and not stamped and beaten into one body: notwithstanding, who so is disposed
to preserve the flowers or leaue^ of herbs, may do it in this fashion: The
preserving of herbs and flowers.
Take the leaves or flowers of such herbs as you will preserve, make them very
clean; afterward, without any manner of stamping of them, put them all whole
into some vessel wherein (...) will keep them, cast upon them a sufficient
competencie of fine Sugar made in p^^der, and so ^et them to Sunning in the
vessel. Also in this ^ort boil them at a (...) fire with Sugar, so long, as
till the Sugar become as thick as a syrrup, and (...) them in a vessel.
Otherwise, after that you have diligently cleansed the leaves or the flowers of
the herbs, put them in an earthen pot or glass, and after pour into them of
boiled Sugar of the consistence of a syrrup, and well clarified. Thus may
Roses, leaves of Mines, Spleenewort, Maiden-haire, Sorrel, Ceterach, Buglosse,
and such like, be preserved: the flowers of Marigolds, Succorie, Violets,
Broom, Sage, and other such like: (...).
and such preserues are more acceptable than conserues, because the flowers and
leaves do in better sort retain and keep their natural smell thus, than in
conserues; for in conserues they are powned with Sugar, which does rebate very
much the natural smell of the leaves or flowers.

Now as concerning making of conserues of leaves or flowers of herbs, you
(...) keep^ this course: Take the tendrest parts of the flowers or leaves, and
cast away the hardest, such as are the white tails of Rose leaves, the stalks
of Mints, Spleenwort, Maiden-haire, and such like, make them very clean, and
bray them afterward in a Marble Mortar, or of other Stone, with a pestle hard
and solid enough, and that so long, as till they become in manner of a past,
and then put unto them twice or thrice as much Sugar or Honey: And if it fall
out, that the leaves or flowers so ^^amped be of themselves somewhat too moist,
as the leaves of Violets, water Lillies, and Buglo^^e be, then put thereto
great quantity of the powder of Sugar. When you have thus done, put them into
an earthen Vessel, and set them abroad a Sunning a whole month, that so their
superfluous moisture may be spent by the heat of the Sun; but they must be
stirred every day. Or if you had rather, do thus: Set the Vessels upon hot
ashes, to the end they may take a little boil: but this is not so good as the
setting of them in the Sun. After this manner may the flowers of Rosemarie,
Mar^golds, Be^onie, Pionie, Marierome, Balm, Scab^o^s, Elder tree, Mints,
fu^^itorie, Eyebright, Succorie, of the flowers of the Peach-tree, Sage,
Broom, Oranges, M^^lowes, Hollyhocke, and other such like, the tops of
Thyme, Hysope, and Worm* wood; the conserve whereof, we have said before to be
very sovereign in the Dropsy: as also the conserve of Peach-tree flowers,
and that of Broom flowers, for the obstructions of the reins and spleen. And
for as much as the conserues of Violets and Roses are in great use and request,
we will speak particularly of them.

To make conserve of Roses, Conserve of Rose^.
you must take the leaves of Roses, white or red, which are not as yet open and
blown, you must make them clean, and stamp them, without being dried before,
in a Stone Mortar, and after put thereto thrice their weight in Sugar, and then
put it up in a Glasse-vessell well covered with Parchment, and set in the Sun
the space of three months, and stirring it almost every day. If you would
make conserues of dry Roses, Conserve of dry Roses.
boil in half a pound of Rosewater one whole pound, or thereabout, of fine
Sugar: afterward, when you see that all the water is con^^^med, cast into the
Sugar an ounce of dry Roses made into powder, boil them altogether
reasonably, and after with a spatule of wood you shall make your conserve into
morsels or cakes. Otherwise, make three infusions of Roses in Rosewater, let
the third settle, the bottom whereof you shall let alone, as being the earthie
and gross part, taking that only that is above, and in it you shall boil
fine Sugar: and after that, you shall cast thereinto half an ounce, or
thereabout, of dried Roses in powder, and do in like manner afterward as has
been already said.

To make conserues of Violets, Conserve of Violets.
you must take the fresh and new flowers of Violets, and take from them their
tail, and the little green cup by which they hang, and after dry them some
small time in the shadow of the Sun, to take from them their superfluous
moisture which they have: after that bray them in a Stone Mortar with twic^ so
much Sugar, and put them in a Glas^e vessel, which shall be set to Sun for
the space of three months, and stirred very often during the said t^^e, as has
been already said of the conserve of Roses.

If you would make conserve of dry Violets. Conserve of dry (...)
make one or two infusions of Violets, and in them boil fine Sugar, afterward
casting half an ounce of powdered Violets to one pound of Sugar: then boiling
them a little together, you shall with a spatule make your conserve into
morsels or cakes.

For to make Mustard, The making of Mustard.
you must pick and cleanse your seed very well, ^earce it, wash it in cold
water, and after leave it a whole night in the water: then take it out, and
when you have wrung it or pressed it (as near as you can) dry with your hand,
then put it in a new or very clean Mortar, and bray it with a pestle with
strong vinegar, and then after that strain it. But the most ordinary way for
the making of your Mustard, is, only to wash the seed very clean, then put
it into your Mustard Quernes, and grind it either with strong vinegar (which is
the best) or with good Beer or Ale, or with Butter-milke; only the Beer will
make it eat a little bitter whilst it is new, and the Butter-milke will die
soon. Some make a very pleasant Mustard in this manner: Take two ounces of
the seed of Se^uie, half an ounce of Cinnamon, powne them very small, and
with honey and vinegar make a paste, and of the paste little loaves, which you
shall dry in the Sun, or Oven: and when you would use it, dissolve one, or
some of one, of your loaves in Veriuice or Vinegar, or some other liquor. Some,
to take away the great sharpness that is in it, do steep the ^eed in new
Wine during Vintage time, and then make it as we have said already: after they
put it in little Barrels, such as Mustard of Anion Mustard of Anion.
is wont to be put in. The people of Dijon make it in small loaves, and when
they will use it, they dissolve it in vinegar. The Mustard of Dijon Mustard of
Dijon.
has won the praise from all other, either because of the seed growing there,
which is better than that of other Countries, or by reason of the making
thereof, which the inhabitants there do perform more carefully than in other
places.

To preserve Cucumbers, Preserving of Cucumbers.
you must put them in Lees of white Wine, which are not sour, and in a pitched
Ves^ell, and stop it well. Otherwise, you must put them in salt Brine, or else
hang them in some Vessel wherein is a little Vinegar, but so also the Vessel
must be very well stopped. Some preserve them in an earthen Vessel with Salt,
Vinegar, and Mari^rome. Others cast them into sandy P^^s, and cover them with
the seed of Senuie bruised with Vinegar, and after that put upon them dry hay
and earth.

To preserve Gourds, The preserving of Gourds.
take them when they are tender, and cut them, then power upon them warm
water, and let them cool in the open air for a nights space: after that sowce
them in strong salt Brine, and so you shall preserve them a long time: or else
dry them in the Sun, and after hang them up in some smoakie place. In France
they are preserved all Winter, being hanged up under some chamber floor, or
set in rows upon planks, especially the Citruls.

To keep Onions, How to keep Onions.
you must dry them in the Sun, and afterward put them in some dry place,
and well ayred. Some preserve them after this manner: First they dry them in
the Sun, and lay Thyme and Sauorie below in the bottom of a pot, and lay the
Onions above, putting thereunto pickle, which shall be made of three parts of
vinegar, and one of salt brine, and above this again a bunch or small bundle
of Sauorie, to the end that by the weight of it the Onions may be sunk down^
into the pickle, and when they are so drencht, as that they have received of
the pickle into their own juice, then they fill up the pot with the same
pickle. Some do steep them only in water, and afterward preserve them the
whole year in vinegar. But there is no better way to preserve or keep Onions
long, than after they are first gathered to spread them thin upon a boorded
floor, where they may receive both Sun and Wind: and then, after they are
sufficiently dried, to bind them up in long Ropes or Bundles, and so hang them
near the air of the fire, as over your Kit^hin chimney, or such like.

CHAP. LII.
A brief discourse of small and great trees, as well strange as growing in the
Country, planted or removed in the Garden: and first of such as Arbours are
made of.
THe Garden of Pleasure having been devised and ordained for the only
recreation of the chief Lord of the Farm (as has already been said) and
seeing that this his recreation cannot be altogether so great and so sufficient
in the only smell of flowers and sweet herbs, as and if there be withal
presented unto the sight the view of strange and Countrey-borne trees, both
great and small; which do not only yield a more pleasant smell, without
comparison, than the herbs, but do also (the greatest part of them) bring
forth fruits of great wonder and admiration, as Pomegranate-trees, C^per-trees,
Citron-trees, Orange Trees, Limon-trees, Citron-trees of Assyria, Date-trees,
Figge-trees, Oliue-trees, bastard Sene-trees, and others such like. Therefore,
to the end we may leave nothing out of our Garden whereof the Master of the
(...) may reap any solace, we will speak briefly of handling and husbanding
of great and small Trees which must be planted in it: of which, some are
employed as necessary about Arbours, and the Garden is to be set about with
them; they are the Cypresse-tree, Iuniper-tree, Sauin-tree, Cedar-tree,
Rose-tree, Box-tree, and others: othersome are sown, or set, and removed unto
Beds only proper unto them, or into Vessels and Cases, as the Bay Tree,
Mulberrie-tree, Date-tree, Pine Tree, Citon-tree, Orange-tree, Limon-tree,
Fig Tree, Oliue-tree, and such like, which shall be spoken of hereafter.

The Cypresse-tree, The Cypress tree.
as well the male as the female, notwithstanding that in the (...) of Crete it
does grow in great Tufts and Forests, without any sowing, or planting, of his
own accord: yet in this Country it cannot be got to thrive, without the great
pains of the Gardener, and notable goodness of the ground: for naturally
(...) delights not but in hot Countries, where it grows as one would wish
it. It grows either set or sown in a dry ground, far from Floods, Rivers,
Marshes, dyrtie, and moist places, and on the tops and sides of Hills where
the Sun shines, better than in valleys. It abhors all manured ground
especially and most of all, be it never so little: yea, if one do but fill a
trench with dung round about where (...) is planted, it will die in a short
time: notwithstanding, it is requisite some certain time before you plant it,
to put some good mould into the pit where you intend to plant it, or to s^w it.
This is (as it were) a wonder of Nature in the seed of this tree, which, though
it be so small as that one can scarce see it, yet it brings (...) goodly and
so tall a tree. When you sow it, you must sow it in furrows, from after the
twentieth of October until Winter: and near unto it, some Barley; for there is
such great familiarity betwixt these two seeds, that they grow (as it were) in
spite one of another: whereupon it will come to pass, that when it is a great
Barley year, it will be also a great Cypress year. If you remove it, do the
like: but be careful in the mean time not to water it, nor to pr^ne it, or to
snip off the top^ of it, for it cannot endure any wound, be it never so
little. This tree has a male and a female: The male grows more high, has
his branches and boughs more close and straight together, and brings forth
Fruit, or Nuts, but so does not the female.

The Cypresse-tree bears fruit and flourishes three several times a year,
(...) I^nuarie, May, and September: and therefore at these times you must
gather the Nuts, which you shall dry in the Sun, to make them easy to
break; and take (...) the seed, which you must likewise dry in the Sun: And
if you be desirous to sow it (the fit time for which is April in very hot
Countries, and May in temperate ones, and in this Country from the twentieth
of October until Winter) you must choose a dry, fair, and calm day; and
being sown, you shall riddle over it with a small riddle, open above, some
earth in an even and equal sort about the thickness of two or three fingers,
and after that, so soon as the Cypres is put forth of the ground, you must be
watchful o^es the Ants, and besprinkle it with water every third day before
the Sun rise, or else after the Sun set, which i^ much the better: but
after that it is grown above the earth, you must not water it but very
seldom, for often watering of it would make it die: but in steed of this, it
must be carefully weeded, pruned* and dug, but without touching of the root:
neither must you go upon it (...) upon it with your feet kills it: and
whereas ^or the first and second year it is very tender, you must cover the
head of it for that time to keep it from the burning hea^ of the Sun by day,
and the pinching cold of the frosty nights, even so as we have said of Melons:
the laying of the earth light about it spoken of before, is to be understood of
the time of his young years, and whiles it is growing: for after it has once
perfected his sciences and bows, it has no more need either of that or any
other labor and help. It is wont to be removed being betwixt five and six
years old, and that in March or in April, and because it scatters and
spreads abroad his roots, and pearceth not far downward with them, the pit
whereinto it is to be removed must be made wide, and that somewhat more than it
self is broad in the roots, and in a moist country it must be but a little
depth, whereas in a dry country it may be two foot deep. The Gardener must
be careful to keep it from ants, because this little worm loves Cypres
above all other things, and causes it oftentimes to die.

The vvood of Cypres is better than any other to make coffers, The virtues.
chests, cabinets, and presses of, because besides the good smell which it
yields, it endures an infinite long time without corrupting, moulding, or
rotting any thing at all, and it is such an enemy to all worms and vermin,
as that the leaves and nuts thereof being laid amongst clothes, do free them
of worms. The leaves and seed are very much commended for the killing of
worms in children. The decoction of the nuts in vinegar do assuage the
toothache, if the mouth be often washed therewith: the decoction of the leaves
works the like effect: the ashes of Cypres nuts, and the horn of an A^^es
hoof mixed with oil of Myrtles, keep the hair from falling. The decoction
of new and fresh gathered Cypres nuts made in old wine, does exceeding good to
them which have the falling down of the fundament, if they drink thereof
every day the quantity of three ounces, but in the mean time they must rub
their testiicles with the leaves of Cypres brayed and beaten: and this is a
certain remedy, such as has often been experimented and tried: the like
virtue has the young sciences of the Cypres-tree, if they be so chawed, as
that thereupon their juice may descend into the body.

The Rose-tree sits it self for all manner of air, The Rose-tree planted
and removed.
whether hot or cold, but in countries that are hot and somewhat moist, it
grows more fair, greater, and ^lourishing a longer time, as may be seen in
many coast towns and places near the Sea in Spain, where Roses continue
and flourish unto mid-Winter. It requires a fat, substantial, and reasonable
moist ground; for as for grauelly and sandy grounds, they are altogether
enemies unto the Rose-tree. It must be planted in October, November, and
December, in hot and dry co^ntries, and in January and February in cold and
moist countries; yea and also in March, and such as are planted in the later
season, will put forth Roses the same year, which will not fall out in
those which were made have of and planted a great deal sooner: if the earth
be good of it self, the Rose will crave no manure, but yield a more perfect
smell, but and if it be spent and worn out, it must be succored with dung
well rotted.

As for Roses there be many sorts of them, that is to say, the vvild ones,
which we call Eglantine, and the red also growing in hedges: Damask of the
color of Scarlet, which we call Prouence Roses: and amongst the branches,
besides the vvild ones there are, Muske-Roses, Common-Roses, and Roses having
five leaves only. The Rose-tree grows either of plants or seed. It is
planted of shoots, or little (...), divided into pieces of the length of four
fingers, The Rose-tree sown.
and set into a well manured earth* ^oot deep. It is good to remove it, for it
will grow the fairer: as also every year* or at the least when it is past
five years old (which is the term of his approaching age) to cut it, or else
to burn the branches of it that are superfluous; for this restores (...) unto
his young years again. If you remove it, remove it by branches, setting the
one four foot distant from the other, in a ground that is not ^at or clayie,
nor moist, but dry and stony. The Rose-tree sown, grows slowly: but yet
and if yo^ sow it, let it be four foot within the ground: and deceive not your
self with the seed; for the seed is not that little yellow flower which is in
the midst of the Rose, but that which is contained and nourished in the
little fruit which the Rose brings forth after Vintage, Seeds of Roses.
which is known to be ripe when it grows black and soft.

For to have Musk Roses, you must graft the Rose-tree upon it self, or upon
the Eglantine, and before the grafting of it, to put into the cleft, where the
graft (...) stand, a grain of Musk, or else one or two dry leaves of sweet
smelling Roses. Such Roses are pleasant to behold, as being but a little tree,
and yet laden with leaves, the flower very sweet of smell, and such as will
never fail, but always hold and bring forth in their season: besides that, a
man may fit the root and branch^^ thereof to make a shadow. Such Roses are not
good to make conserues, or distilled water, nor for any use in Physic, only
they are good to dry and put amongst Linen and other Apparel, because of
their good smell. It is true that some say, that they loosen the belly. Look
further in the third Book in the Chapter of the special properties of
Grafting and Planting.

To have Roses that shall smell very sweet, V^rie sweet smelling Roses.
you must plant your Rose-tree in a place that is very dry, or else to set it
round about with Garlic. The Roses will come early, if you make a little
trench of some two hands wide round about the Rose-tree, and therein power
warm water morning and evening: Early, hasty, and timely Roses.
and yet this must not be attempted before it begin to put forth his buds. You
shall do the like if you place your Rose-tree in baskets, or pots of earth,
and order them after the manner of timely Gourds and Cucumbers, as has been
taught before.

You may keep new Roses in their liveliness, Fresh Roses.
if you put them in the lees of Oil* so as that the lees may swim above
them: Others pull up green Barley, roots and all, wherein they wrap Roses as
yet not blown, and so put them together in a (...) that is not pitched. The
way to have green Roses, is, if you graft the Rose-tree upon an old Colewort
stalk, or upon the body of an Oak, but then the Roses will (...) no smell.

You may make the Carnation Rose white, To make carnation Roses white.
if you perfume it with Brimstone (...) such time as it begins to spread.

You may have Roses of a yellow color, if after you have planted the Rose-tree
with his natural earth near unto the broom, you bore through the broom
stalk with a vvimble, and plant in the same hole diverse roots or shoots of
the Rose-tree, scraped round about so far as they are to lie in the hole, and
after tie and make the^ fast unto the broom plant with mortar: and whenas you
see the hole bored in the stalk to be grown up again* you shall cut off the
broom stalk above the pla^^ where you bored the hole, and shall let the
Rose-tree to put forth his shoots, and (...) by this means you shall have
yellow Roses.

The virtues of the Roses are sufficiently known unto every one. Some distill
the white and Prouence rose, which* if you will have it to retain the full
quality and virtue of the Rose, together with the smell and favor of the
same, you must distill in a glass vessel, and not in lead, as is ordinarily
accustomed. Some make (...) and syropes of carnation Roses, which have force to
loosen the belly, and to purge the humors offending in serious and choleric
matter, as also good for (...), the jaundise, the obstructions of the liver,
and beating of the heart.

The yellow growing within the Rose, which is a flower accompanied as it were
with small hairs, does stay the white flowers of women: the white end of the
leaves of Roses, are good in a decoction to stay all manner of fluxes: the cup
has the same force and virtues: the seed and wool contained within the
button of the Rose, as also the whole button, dried and made into powder, is
singular good to stay women^ whites and terms, for the scalding of the water,
for the disease called Gonorrhaea, taken the weight of a dram with sour red
wine.

Box-tree Box-tree.
is planted of shoots or boughs, after the twelfth day of November. It
delights in hilly places and mountains, and grows very well in cold,
dry, and vvindie places. Bees-bane.
It must not be planted near the place where bees are kept, A corrupt air.
for the flower kills them suddenly. Some affirm, that it corrupts the
air by the stinking smell it has, and for this cause it would be as sparingly
planted in the garden as possibly may be.

Box-tree is better to make combs and other durable instruments of, than for
to use in medicine, if it were not that Physicians do hold that the scrapings
or r^^ped powder of Box and the leaves thereof boiled in Lee* do cause the
hair to look ^ed. Some likewise do think that it has the like properties
that Guaiacum has in decoctions for the French disease, but herein I refer
my self rather to experi^nce than to reason.

Broom, Broom.
as well the small as the great, is planted of shoots and boughs, in the
in^rease of the Moon, about the Calends of March. It may likewise be sown, To
make water.
and it requires a dry and sandy ground. The flowers, The stone.
as also the seed, do provoke urine, and break the stone, To vomit.
as well of the reins, as of the bladder: the flowers provoke vomit, taken in
a drink: the leaves and crops boiled in wine or water, are good for the
dropsy and obstructions of the liver, spleen, and kidneyes: some use the
stalks of broom to tie their vines, as also to make ropes and sackes of, and
that by ripening it in water as they do hemp.

Spanish broom Spanish broom^*
grows also in dry places: it must be removed after the first year that it
is sown: it is sown in February, and removed in March the next year after:
the flowers in decoctions procure vomit after the manner of white hellebor:
the seed alone does loosen the belly, and forces downward great store of
water.

Furze Furz^*
grow in untilled and sandy grounds: the leaves boiled in water or wine do
stay all manner of ^luxes.

The Cedar-tree The Cedar tree*
is very rare in these countries: so that if you will have it in your garden,
you must assign it a well husbanded ground, and lying open upon the Sun,
notwithstanding the places where it is found most growing, be cold and moist
mountains, and full of snow: if you do well you must sow in pots of earth,
and cases or impaled places the small and exceeding little seed that comes
thereof.

The liquor thereof put into the hollow parts of the teeth, does stay their
ach: being anuointed it kills the worms, and preserves bodies from rotting.
The wood is very pleasant to look upon, and to smell unto, whereupon some use
it in steed of perfumes.

Sa^in Sa^in.
is planted as box, and grows much better if it be watered with Wine Lees, or
sprinkled with the dust of tile stones. The leaves as well in decoction as in
per^umes, provoke the terms, and expel the afterbirth and dead child: they
also cause to fall off the warts growing upon a man's yard.

As concerning Iunip^r Juniper.
it affects the tops of mountains, and stony ground for to grow well in,
and by how much it is the more ^ost of the winds, and pinched with cold, so
much the fairer it grows. The fruit thereof is good for the stomach, for
weak and broken people, and against all sorts of venime, whether it be drunk
or taken in a perfume, as also against an evil air: It is with good success
used in the decoctions prescribed against the pockes: take seven
Iuniper-berries, and as many Bay-be^ries, half a dram of Zylocassia, and a
dram of Cinamome, put all this whole in the belly of a Turtle-do^e, roast the
said Turtle thus stuffed, and ba^t her with Capons grease, give every second
day one of these at supper, to a woman that is ready to be delivered, and she
shall have an easy delivery: boil twelve pound of Juniper wood cut small, or
raspt in a great cauldron, and in a sufficient quantity of water to the
consumption of the third part of the water, put this wood and water in^^ a
bathing tub, and let the party troubled with the gout, ^it in this water up
unto the middle; he shall feel incredible relief hereby.

Elder tree Elder-tree.
is fitter to plant in the garden hedge, than to make at bou^s in (...):
notwithstanding where other sorts of small trees are wanting, there may use be
made of the Elder-tree. It would be set in the month of November upon sciences
and shoots, in a moist and shadowed place, near to some little river or
brook. To cause it to grow well, you must take this diligent course: to cast
the earth as it were into furrows of a good half foot broad, and a whole foot
deep with a spade, and not with a pickaxe, for there must no earth be taken
away: then presently after the (...) of Saint Martin in Winter, plant your
Elder-trees, the great end thereof which sha^ be put into the earth, shall be
cut bias like the foot of a Hind, and thrust down (...) the ground thus
prepared, a foot or nine inches deep: and let it stand up above the ground, at
the least a foot and a half, or two foot, so as that in all, your plant m^st
be two good foot and a half, or three foot long: before you put them into the
gro^nd, open it with a dibble, either of iron or vvood, so that the rind of
the plant may (...) be torn, in putting of it into the earth. If you plant it
in the furrows, there must be at the least three foot betwixt every furrow,
and a foot betwixt every plant. Having once thus planted them, you shall never
need to take any further pains (...) them, if you will not your self, but to
cut it two joints at the least every year (...) the space of the two or three
first years, to the end the root may grow the (...)* and the first two or
three years being past, you may cut it from two years (...) years to make
props for vines: in any case you must ^op it every year, and cut away all the
evil sciences and shoots which it ill fauouredly puts forth.

Some distill the water of the flowers, as singular to appease the headache
Headache.
coming of heat, if the brows or hinder part of the head be rubbed therewith.
Some likewise do make very good vinegar with the ^lowers and juice of the
be^^ies. The juice pressed from the rind of the root, moves vomit, and draws
forth the (...) that is in those that have the dropsy: the juice pressed from
the leaves and taken with some pottage does loosen the belly: the dried seed
is good against the dropsy, and for ^at folk to make them lean, taking of it
the quantity of a dram in (...) wine, and continuing it a certain time, and
mixing therewith a little (...)* because it is a procurer of vomit, and a
disquieter of the stomach.

Rose-marie and Iesamin Rosemarie and Iesamin.
are likewise fit for the adorning of arbours in (...)* of the ordering
whereof we will say nothing in this place, because we have before spoken
thereof very largely.

Iuie, Iuie.
as well the great as the small, does delight to be planted in moist and
vvaterie places, from the month of November until March, and it flowreth not
but in Autumn, neither does the ber^ie thereof become ripe but in Winter: it
growe^^ not high, if it be not near unto some tree or old ruin, unto both
which in the end (...) works ruin and overthrow. It will bring forth a
goodly fruit, if you (...) with powdered Allome, or ashes made of burnt
Oyster-shells. Black Iuie will become white, if you water the root thereof
with white earth tempered with vv^ter eight days together continually.

If you take three Iuie berries, and tying them up in a clean linen cloth
(...) thread, give them to some one that is troubled with pain and stiffness
of his (...) to wear about his neck, the said party so vvearing them three
days together (...) be whole and cured of his disease. The leaves brayed and
applied, do heal ^^nings and ^^^ldings made with hot water: boiled in
vinegar and applied, (...) cure the hardness of the spleen: the gum thereof
kills lice and ni^s, and (...)* anointed in any hairie place, causes the
hair to fall away. The vessels (...) the wood of Iuie are singular to know if
there be any water in the wine, for the (...) will abide in the vessel, and
the wine will run out. Seven Iuie ber^ies, (...) many peach kernels the skin^
taken off, boiled in oil, and afterward stamp^ (...) applied unto the temples
and brows, do assuage the headache coming from the brain: the juice of the
leaves of Iuie drunk with red wine, does heal the swelling of the spleen: a
cap made in form of a headpiece or skull of the leaves of Iuie sowed
together, and applied unto the head of a little child which has the falling of
the hair called Tinea, does heal it thoroughly: the water or gum which
droppeth out of the stock of an Iuie tree the rind being cut, kills nits and
lice.

Priuet Priuet.
grows more than a man would wish amongst brambles and bushes, from which
places it may be transplanted into the garden for the benefit of arbours. The
water of the flowers thereof may be distilled, and it is most singular against
all manner of ^luxes, whether of the belly, matrix, spitting of blood, and of
the eyes, as also for all sorts of cankers: the same virtue has the juice
pressed out of the leaves, especially for the canker growing in the mouth.
There is an oil made of the flowers thereof infused in oil in the Sun, which
is singular good for the headache coming of a hot cause, and also for
inflammations.

CHAP. LIII.
Of Herbs for the Arbours of the Garden.
FOr want of trees of low growth (such as have been spoken of here before) you
may help your self in the making of your Arbours for your Garden of Pleasure,
(...).
with certain herbs which are plyant, and with their leaves apt to make
shadow, still provided, that they be borne up by poles of Willow, or Juniper,
dressed and ordered in form, and after the manner of Arbours: They are such as
follow; the wild Vine, Hoppes, Gourds, Cucumbers, the marvelous Pease, Winter
Cherries, the marvelous Apples, and other such like.

And as concerning the wild Vine, it grows more plentifully than a man would
wish amongst the Brambles and Bushes: and therefore from hence it may be
transplanted and removed into your Garden for the benefit of your Arbours. The
root, especially the juice, does mightily loosen the belly, provoke urine,
purge the brain, open the spleen, and take away the hardness thereof:
applied in form of a Pessarie, it brings down the terms, the afterbirth,
and dead child: stamped with salt, and applied, it heals ulcers, it cleanses
the skin, and takes away the red pimples of the face: for which purpose also
serves the water thereof, which you may gather in the month of May out of a
pit which you shall make in the head of the root, as it stands in the ground,
according as we have already said in the Chapter of Violets going before. In a
Cataplasme it is singular against the Sciatica, as also to take away the hair
from some place: being mixed and stamped with Bulls blood, it is of marvelous
effects in hard and schirrous swellings, and cankerou^ tumors.

We have spoken heretofore of cucumbers and gourds: Cucumbers and Gourds.
and therefore it is not needful to make any new repetition.

The ordering of hops Hops.
is like unto that of the wild vine, for one and the same ground and dressing
will serve both. The flowers, crops, and juice pressed out, do take away the
obstructions of the liver and spleen: and the use thereof is very con^enient
for such as have the dropsy: therewith beer is made, as we shall further
declare hereafter.

Maruailous apples Maruailous apples.
are very fit to ouerspread arbours, as well in respect of their beauty, as
for that they are pliant, and winding easily about the poles. They would be
sown in the Spring time, in a fat and well battilled ground: they cannot
endure the cold: so soon as their fruit is ripe, which is in Autumn, they
dry away by and by: wherefore you must sow them where the Sun has full
power upon them, and water them often in the time of great heat, gathering their
fruit in September. These apples resemble little lymons, as being sharp
pointed at the end, (...) bellied in the midst, rough as wild Cucumbers,
green at the beginning, but a^terward turning red: the first that ever brought
them into France, was Re^e du Bellay* Bishop of Man's. They have also been
found in the gardens of the religious of S. Ge^manes in the fields, and in the
Temple garden at Paris. They are called of the Greeks Gracious apples, because
of their well pleasing beauty; and of the Latins, Viticella, Momordica, and
Balsamita, this last name was given to them by reason of the virtues of Balm
which they have: and in French Maruailous apples, because of the maruailous
virtue that they have to heal wounds. Some take all the seeds (...) of the
apples, putting the said apples into a viole of unripe oil olive (or instead
of oil made of unripe olives, which is not always ready to be had at Paris,
some (...) common oil very well in Rose Water or Common water, or plantaine,
or Mulberie water) and do afterward set the said viole a long time in the
Sun when it (...) his heat, or else they put it in a vessel of hot boiling
water: or else bury it in the earth, or in horse dung, and this oil is
singular good to assuage inflammations of wounds, and of the breasts, and has
no less virtue than Balm to consolidate (...) heal wounds either new or old,
being a thing tried of many. The fruit soaked (...) oil of sweet Almonds, or
Linseed, adding thereto an ounce of liquid vernish (...) every pound of oil,
(...)
makes the oil very sovereign for the pains of the H^^^^rhoides, Burnings,
prickings of the sinews, and to take away the skarres of ^ound^. The leaves
dried and made into powder, and drunk the quantity of a spoonefull with the
decoction of plantaine, do heal the gripes in the guts, the pain of the
colicke, and the wounds of the guts. The oil wherein this fruit has been
soaked, does keep in his place the fundament wont to fall down in little
children, The f^lling down of the fundament.
if it be often rubbed therewith: To make women fruitful.
it makes barren women fruitful, if after they have bathed in a bath for the
purpose, and drunk of the powder of the leaves of this herb, they anoint
their secret parts with this oil, dwelling afterward with their husbands.

The maruailous pease The maruailous peas^^.
are very rare in this country, resembling somewhat Winter cherries, as
having their seed enclosed in a little filme or skin, like unto a ^ich pease;
in the midst whereof, there is the shape as it were of a heart. They delight
in a very fat, moist, and well sunned soil, and cannot abide to endure the
cold.

Winter cherries Winter Cherries.
(which the Latins call Halicaca^um, and the Arabians A^^kengi,) are delighted
in vines: wherefore they which would have it planted in their garden, must
pick out for it such a soil as would fit the vine. The little (...) which is
enclosed in the bladder, is singular good to provoke the decayed urine, and to
take away the sharpnes^e and scalding thereof, for the juice thereof mixed with
(...) cream or milk of white poppie seed, or with the decoction of the seed
of melo^^ or gourds, mallows, or barley ptisane, and drunk, does maruailously
mitigate the scalding of the urine: if the root come near unto the aspe or
lizard, it casts them into a dead sleep, and kills them: the use of the
cherrie is sovereign against the stone and gravel. Likewise for this disease
some make a Wine which is called Winter-cherrie wine, which is made with the
new pressed liquor of good white wine, when in has been infused a certain
quantity of these cherries: or with a certain quantity of these cherries
cast with an equal quantity of white wine grapes all whole into a new
ves^ell, the same ves^ell afterward being filled up with white wine new from
the press, being afterward scummed and used after the manner of other wines:
or else this wine may be thus made, these cherries are trodden amongst ripe
grapes, and being suffered to work together certain days, they are afterward
^unned up (...) vessels, and ordered as other wines: this wine taken the
quantity of four (...) the morning three or four days together in the
decrease of the Moon, cleanses the reins, and purges out great quantity of
gravel.

CHAP. LIIII.
Of Trees both great and small, as well outlandish as of the same Country,
being planted or sown either upon beds or in vessels, in the Garden.
THe Bay Tree The Bay Tree.
will grow in all places, but it is not as easily preserved and kept in every
place: for it delights especially and naturally in a hot or temperate
country, for in a cold it grows not but by constrain* but and if you be
disposed to have it to grow in this cold country, you (...) plant it so upon
the Sun, as that it may thereby sh^ke off and better pass (...) the
extremity of the cold; and on the contrary, in a hot country you must plant*
(...) so, as that the Sun may come but sparingly to it, to wit, even when the
shadow. (...) be hard at the foot if it: notwithstanding it delights much in
places near (...) the Sea, in lean and thin grounds, where the air is warm
and temperate of it self. It must be planted in Autumn and in the Spring
time, of sets, of whole plants, (...) of branches: and in March it is planted
very fitly and seasonably, when as the ^ap ^putteth up and comes to the
barbe. It may likewise be fowne after the four. (...) day of March in a ground
that is well manured, one foot within the ground (...) four berries together:
and at the years end* to remove it to some other place. The Bay Tree fears
the cold above all other things, The Bay Tree cannot endure cold.
and for this cause it must be planted in this country in a firm and solid
ground as has been said, to the end that during the times of snow, frost, and
freesing upon rain, the roots may be defended from cold, which although the
boughs and branches should be dead by the cold of Winter, it would yet
continue to bring forth new boughs in the Spring time* for the fastness and
closeness of the ground will have let and stayed the air from having pierced
unto the roots. And in ca^e the ground where you have planted your Bay Tree
should be sandy, dry, and barren, then it will be your part during the time
of Winter to spread and cast ashes and straw about the roots of the Bay Tree,
to preserve the heat of the earth, and to withhold the cold from piercing unto
the roots. Then for to procure a flourishing and fair Bay Tree, (...).
two things are necessary* the heat of the air, and the fastness of the
ground, of which, if the one be wanting, the Bay Tree will not grow any thing
at all; or if it grow, yet it will be bu^ a small and starued thing, as we may
easily make trial and proof in this ^countrie. The Bay Tree may be grafted
upon it self, as also upon the Dogg-tree, the Ash-tree, and the Cherrie-tree,
as we will declare more largely in the third Book.

The Myr^^e tree The (...) tree.
is of two sorts, the one is a dark green, the other is a light green, the
one bears a yellow flower; and the other a white, but of these the later is
the better: but every sort of Myr^le craves a hot Country, a light, sandy,
lea^^^, and brittle kind of ground, and yet notwithstanding this, it grows
well upon the Sea banks, as also upon the sides of pooles, lakes, and fennes.
It is planted either of young boughs borrowed and cut down for the excessi^e
rankness of them, after (...) four or five years old, or from the shoots
putting forth at the root thereof, ^epe^^ting them from the maine root so soon
as they be put up, and from after a year of their first planting to remove
them: or else of seed, rubbed and cha^ed betwixt your hands, and after thrust
into an old band or small cord: the same buried all along according to that
length that it is of in a furrow cast a foot deep, or thereabout, and well
manured with rotten dung, and watering the place. The myrtle-tree would be
planted in the highest part of the Garden, for by his smell it makes the place
most delightsome: it may be ^owne also after the manner of the Bay Tree, but
then it will not grow up till after a long t^me. It will grow both high and
fair* if you make it clean and sco^re it often round about, and it will b^ing
forth much and great fruit, if you plant Rose-trees near unto it, or else
plant it near unto Oliue-trees, in the country where they grow: for the
Myrtle and Olive trees do help one another greatly. It loves and craves to
be watered with man's urine, but especially with sheep: or when you can get
neither of these, with warm water, wherein it delights exceedingly, as
sometimes appeared by a Myrtle planted near unto a bath, which to every man's
sight grew very pleasantly and beautifully, though there were no reckoning or
account made thereof. Myrtle-berries put in a vessel which is not pitched, but
well covered, does keep a long time green and fresh: Some hold it better to
put them in, hanging upon their boughs: The Myrtle (...) nothing so much as
cold, and takes delight to be near unto pooles, brooks, and maritime places.
If you water it often with warm water, (...)
it will bear fruit* (...) any kernel.

The fruit is called Myrtle-berries. It must be gathered when it is (...) great
while after the Rose is fallen and shaken. It may be grafted upon another of
his own kind, and the white upon the black, and the black upon the
Apple-tre^, Medlar-tree, and Pomegranet-tree.

After vintage time, in the country of Prouence, where there is a great number
of Myrtle-trees, the birds feed of the fruit of the Myrtle-tree, and thereby
become so fat, and their flesh so pleasant to eat, as that men eat birds so
fatted all whole, with^^^ pulling out of the garbage: insomuch as it is grown
into a common proverb, (...) the excrement is better than the flesh.

The leaves, bays, or berries of myrtle-tree by their astringent force and
(...) do stay all manner of fluxes, whether it be of the belly, or of the
terms, or principally of the whites: the juice and distilled water of
Myrtle-tree are singular good to drink, to keep up the falling fundament. The
decoction of the seed of Myrtle-tree, does black the hair, and keeps it
from falling. The berries of the Myrtle-tree may serve in steed of pepper, the
sauce made therewith works the like effect, and is singular good to comfort a
languishing stomach: myrtle berries even do comfort the heart, and cure the
beating of the same: the ashes of the dry leaves of myrtle-tree burned within
a pot of raw earth, so thoroughly as that they become white, being afterward
washed, have one and the same virtue that Spodium or Pomphol^^ has.

If you cannot make the myrtle-tree to grow in your garden, you must content
your self with the Myrt-tree, The Myrt-tree.
which craves the same ground and manner of orde^^^ that the Myrtle-tree, as
being a kind of wild Myrtle-tree) and which may be (...) the steed of
Myrtle-tree when it cannot be come by, as having the same or (...) virtues.

Butchers-broome Butcher-broome.
is also a kind of wild myrtle, which grows commonly in Forests and
Underwoods, from whence it is better to translate it into your garden, (...)
either to sow or plant it.

He that is desirous to plant Tamariske (...)*
in his garden, must make choice of the moist and wettest ground, and for want
of a sufficient moist ground, to water (...) It is likewise seen that
Tamariske does grow fair and tall, by ponds, (...), and other standing waters.
It is planted either of roots or sprouts, and that from the (...) of October,
till the four and twentieth of December, yea until the beginning of
February; but yet it thriueth best being set of roots: there is no frost
almost (...) hurt it, especially the root, for when it is once taken, it
puts forth continually (...) and boughs along the plant.

The wood is principally commended, for that it assuageth and diminishes (...)
spleen in such as have it stopped too full of melancholicke humors: and hence
(...) that many troubled with that disease, do eat and drink in vessels made
of (...) wood thereof. And some likewise do counsel to give swine that are
troubled (...) too much fullness of the spleen, water to drink in their
^^ough^, having first ^^^ched therein coals made of the wood of Tamariske. The
decoction of the (...) damask raisons in good for leprous persons, and such as
have their spleen (...)* as also for the pockes.

Bastard Seen, Basterd Seen.
(called of the Latins (...)) delights in a fat ground, and well battilled
with Sheep dung. It grows not planted, but upon seed: and it is meet that
the seed be steeped first a long time in water, even until it begin to sprout.
The time to sow it, is about the beginning of the month of June. It must not
have any of the branches cut off, nor be pruned or touched before the fourth
year. The fruit serves to good use for the fatting of Sheep, and makes them
to have much milk: it is good also to fat chickens, bees, goats, and kyne.
Some take it to be Seen, but they do greatly deceive and beguile themselves.

The Caper-tree The Caper-tree.
in many countries grows without any tilling, ^n ^arable ground: but where it
wants, if it must be sown, it must be in a hot country, and a dry, stony,
and sandy place, which shall before hand be enclosed with a little ditch,
which shall be filled with stone and lyme, or else with fat earth, for to be a
fortress and* defense unto it, that so the roots of the Caper-tree and thereby
all shoots that might grow up from them, may be kept from breaking forth, and
spreading further than this ditch: for if they should be stayed and kept back
from spreading by some such means, it would come to pass that within a small
time they would overrun the whole Garden, and plant themselves in every
corner of the same. Notwithstanding the Caper-tree is not so noisome in that
respect (because it may be pulled up) as it is by inueniming (I know not by
what venomous humor or juice) the whole ground, and making of it barren. It
has no need (except a ver^e little) to be any way tilled or fashioned: for it
grows well enough (without any thing done unto it) in ^ields and desert
grounds. It may be sown in the Spring and Autumn.

The fruit of the Caper-tree, as well the great as the small, is good in a
fallade to provoke appetite, cleanse the flegmaticke stomach, and to take away
the obstructions of the liver, but principally of the spleen: the rind of the
root and leaves have the like virtue, but more effectually. Capers both the
great and the small, whiles they are yet green and not salted, do nourish a
great deal more, both of them are in request, not so much for that they are
fruit, as for their manner of preserving, which is performed either with
vinegar, or else with salt brine: for Capers not pickled are of a very sharp
and unpleasant taste, but the vinegar wherein they are preserved does make them
very acceptable unto the stomach: but the great ones because they have both
more juice and more pulpe, are a great deal better than the little ones:
though the little ones are more delightsome to the taste than the great ones,
because they are fuller of vinegar than the great ones.

Agnus Castu^, (...)
seeing it comes very near to the nature and condition of the Willow, and
of the same color with the leaves, disagreeing only in smell, craves to be
planted in a watrie place, where there is much shadow: or at the least to be
often watered. The leaves, seed, and flowers, are singular good for them which
would live chastely, Chastity.
taken inwardly, or applied, outwardly: for some say, that the leaves, (...),
or ^lowres, put into little b^gges, and applied unto the reins in bed, do
help to keep the chastity of the body, which is the cause that in many
countries it is seen planted almost in all the Monkeries. Heat of Urine.
The decoction of the leaves is good against the sealding and burning Urine, as
well in drinking as in fomenting it, as also against the obstructions of the
liver, spleen, and matrix. If you carry a branch of Agnus Castus about you,
you shall not grow weary, The burning beat of the secret parts.
no not after much travel. The fume thereof taken in at the secret parts of
women, does quench the insatiable lust and burning desire unto venerie and
carnal copulation.

Beane-tree, (...).
or S. Iohns-bread (bearing a long, flat, and broad fruit, like unto that of
Ca^^ia) would be planted of new shoots, in February and November, in a dry
ground, lying open upon the Sun, and where as there are very deep ditches
made. It may also be grafted in a Plum-tree, or Almond-tree: in any case you
must never think upon the sowing of it, because so it would never bear any
fruit, but would die very quickly: it must be often watered.

The Cod^ are good either to fat children or ^win^, To ^eed swine.
but not so fit to feed men withal: It is true that the fruit does loosen the
belly gently, as it were after the manner of Cassia.

There (...) sorts of the Date-tree: The Dat^-tr^e.
some bear fruit, and some (...) and of the fruitful, some bear a reddish
fruit, and some a white, and (...) gray. Furthermore, some are males, and some
females, some are high and (...) some are stooping down, and but low, and
therefore called the little or (...) tree; and some of a middle size betwixt
both: but howsoever they differ, yet (...) they agree, that they all desire a
hot air, a great deal more than temperate: for in a hot Country it brings
forth very fair and ripe fruit, and of it self is (...) kept and preserved,
without any f^rther pain or ^are, except it be about the (...) of it; where,
in a temperate Region, it either ripeneth not his fruit, or (...) none at all.
It craves a (...), and nitrous ground, foreseen that it be (...) moist, and
this is the cause why it ^ro^pereth well upon the Sea coast: and if the ground
where it be planted, be not such, it must be watered with salt water, (...)
brine. It is planted of small Plants, with roots in April and May, the Plant
being well laid about with fat earth. Some also sow the new stones of Dates
(and they bring forth their trees in October) two cubits deep in the ground,
and that mingled with ashes, and well enriched with Goats dung, and the sharp
side of it must be upward: it must be watered every day, and every year
there must be ^alt shed (...) it* or else, which is better, that it be
oftentimes watered with water that is (...) salt. Again, that it may grow high
and fair, it gladly accepts the watering of hi^ roots with the lees of old
red Wine strained.

Note likewise, that (seeing of one Date stone alone there will hardly grow up
any Date-tree, bearing sufficient bigness in the bole and body, to carry and
(...) the weight of the head) it will be good to put and join together two or
three (...) stones, sowed up in a Linen cloth, in such sort, as that the
sharp sides may behold one another, and so to set them; for by this joining of
two or three together, your tree may come by a body sufficient big to bear
the head. Not further, that if you would have the female Date tree to bear
fruit, that then you must plant it near unto a male Date tree, and not one
only, but many, if it be possible, because the near standing of the one unto
the other, causes that the virtue of the male is conveyed and imparted unto
the female, and that by the commixtion made by the wind, from (...) arises
abundance of fruit. But and if you have not the means to plant many (...)
Date trees near unto the female, it will be sufficient if you do but touch
the male oftentimes with your hand* and then afterward lay the same hand upon
the female^ or you must gather o^ the flowers of the top o^ the male, or of the
mos^e of the male, and sprinkle the same upon the female. Eat but as ^ew Dates
as you can, for they make obstructions in the liver and spleen, and are also
of hard digestion, and (...) the headache.

The Pine Tree The Pine Tree.
grows chiefly of a kernel, which must be planted in October or November in
warm places: or in cold places in February or in March* or about the fall of
the apple, or a little after, and that in pits well dug, and which have lain
untilled and unoccupied a g^od time: the apple must not be broken by force of
an iron thing* to get out the kernels, which must lie in steep three days
before hand, and seven of them set together, and that five fingers deep only,
when they are grown up, you must not be too hasty to remove them, because
they take (...) but in long time, and very hardly: nay, they cannot abide at
all to be transplanted without their great hurt and hinderance: but yet when
time may serve to transplant them, in any c^se beware that you do not hurt
their roots, especially the principal and thickest ones. The Pine Tree grows
chiefly and thr^ueth best, upon high mountains, and places that are open unto
the wind, still regard being had, that the place where they shall be planted,
be as carefully husbanded and tilled, as if it (...) for to bear and bring
forth wheat. It will continue the longer time, if the bark (...) often taken
from it, because that under the bark certain little worms do breed, whi^^
fret and destroy the wood.

The distilled water of new Pine-kernells, (...).
^^ake away the wrinckles of the face, and diminish the breasts that are too
great and swagging, if there be laid unto (...) clothes dipped ^n this water as
often as you can: this water also is singular good to draw narrower the secret
parts of women being too much distended and enlarged, and to cure them of all
manner of rheumes and distillations: but yet their juice ^s more effectual for
these matters, than the distilled water.

Pineapples are a meat of very easy nourishment, The virtue of the Pin^^pple.
and for that cause are very good for such as ar^troubled with the cough, for
them which are in a consumption, and such as are sick of an hect^cke ^euer,
but they must have been s^^^pt sometime in Rosewater to take away their
acrimonie, sharpness, and oily substance: it is true that they be hard to
digest, and therefore to such as are cold of nature, you must give them with
home; and to those which are hot, with sugar, to help out with the hardne^^e
of their digestion. They are good for such as have the palsy, for ach in the
sinews and back, for heat of the urine, and gnawing of the stomach, taken with
the juice of Purslaine.

Figs (being one of the best fruits we have, The Fig Tree.
according to the ground and plant whereof they come) are either more or les^e
sweet and sauorie, and this comes of the air as it is tempered with heat,
cold, or a milder temper: or else in respect of the moisture and dryness of
the grounds, their fatness, and leanness; their roughnes^e or smoothnes^e;
their s^^ngth or gentleness, and easiness; their sto^^nesse or being without
stones, or their situation amongst some old ruins and rotten stone walls: for
in respect of all these, it falls out that there are great diversity of
figs, as having some great, some small, some round, some sharp pointed, some
white, some black, some green, and some gray. So that this tree loves to be
in places standing open upon the Sun, and therewithal rockie or clayie,
stony or mixed much with lyme, near unto walls or old ruins, yea within the
very walls being (...), or half fallen down, especially that which bears
little figs, very sweet and white ones, such as are those of Mar^^^llis, for
such a fig tree delights in a dry and grauelly place: as on the contrary,
the fig tree that brings forth great, less sweet and reddish figs,
desires a fat and well manured ground. It thriueth and prosper^th in a hot and
t^mperate air, so that the ground be somewhat moist: for this tree is very
dainty and quickly wronged and injured by frosts, broken down by winds, and
made thin and lean by drought, by the which the fig will sooner be ouerth^owne
and spoiled than the Mulberrie. They are easily hurt by Frosts, Mists, and
great Cold: wherefore they must be planted in the Spring, when Frosts are past,
upon the South or East quarter, in great, deep, and well-digged pits, of
shootes and boughs of two years growth, being fair and round ones, and full
of knots* for these are most fruitful. And to cause them the better to take
root, you shall take away their bark at the nether end of the stem about
half a foot, and yet leaving it notwithstanding fastened thereunto, that so
the said bark may turn into ^ootes.

It may in like manner be sown of figs laid in steep, and bound about with
small lines, and then afterward planted in that manner, and watered often and
diligently: but it would su^e better, if it were grafted upon a Plumme tree or
Almond tree* for so it continues a great deal longer. But whether it be
planted or grafted, it must not be much watered* for abundance of water
corrupts the natural beauty of the fig tree, and makes them very
subject to rot. It would be a great deal better, to make them grow fair, and
become fruitful, to thrust the plant into a wild Garlic, called in Latin
Squilla, and better in English, Sea-Onion: or else to steep it in Brine, or to
set it round about with Ox dung, or with vnquencht Lime. And to keep and
guard them from Frosts, they must from the eleventh of November be covered
very well with Straw, or with the stalks of Line, tying these things to the
roots and to the boughs so well and in every place, as that there remain
nothing to be seen of the plant. If you would have the fig tree to bring
forth a late fruit (which is a thing against his nature) (...).
you must take from it his first small figs which begin to grow great, and
the fig tree will put forth another and second fruit, which will be kept till
Winter. Likewise it will be fruitful and bring forth a full fig and of a
good verdure, A fruitful fig tree.
if from the time that it shall put forth his leaves* there be put to his root
(...) earth ^eaten and tempered with the setlings of oil olives and man's dung:
or else when it shall begin to spring, to cut off the tops and ends of the
branches. Figs will be more forward and early, if there be applied unto the
roots of the trees pigeons dung, and pepper brayed and mixed with oil: (...)
and timely figs.
or else if when their gros^e and unripe apples shall begin to grow red, you
anoint them with the juice of a great onion, mixed with oil and pepper, or if
when as their fruit shall be reasonably great, you pierce them with a needle,
and afterward rubbing them with oil, you cover them with oliue-tree leaves:
for the heat, being nothing hindered through the great moisture of the fig,
does concoct the fruit and ripen it most easily. But if your fig tree grow in
a cold soil or such a soil as the clime appears somewhat unnatural
therefore, you shall then when he puts forth his first or later kno^^, and
by reason of his want of Sunshine is not able to ripen them, you shall then
let them remain on the tree, and by no means pull them away, and the next
year following, in the height of Summer, they will all be ripe and pleasant
which you shall know by their shining, softness, and transparancie, then will
they also put forth other new hard knots which you shall again suffer to
remain till the next year, and thus allowing them two years to ripen in, you
may have in England or elsewhere as good and as pleasant figs as are any is
Spain.

They will be of a diverse color, Figs of diverse colors.
that is, white on the one side, and red on the other, if you tie together in a
linen cloth the seed of two diverse figge-trees, and so planting them,
afterward to transplant them. You shall reclaim a wild fig tree, To make a
good fig of a wild.
if you water him at the roots with wine and oil mixed together. Figs will
not fall down from their tree, if you water the body ditched round about with
salt-brine and water equally mixed together: or if you bury near unto the
fig tree the horns of Rams or Weathers. Green figs.
You shall keep them continually green, if you put them in a pot full of
honey and well stopped, in such manner as that one of them do not touch another,
nor yet the pot: or else in a gourd every one by it self, hanging the gourd
in a shadowed place, where neither fire nor smoke may come unto it. Or if you
put them in an earthen vessel, having the mouth well stopped, putting the same
vessel afterward into another vessel full of Wine: for as long as the Wine
remains uncorrupted, so long the figs will remain ^ound and safe. You
shall preserve dry figs from rotting or corrupting, if you spread them upon
a hurdle in an oven* after the bread is drawn, and put them afterward into a
new earthen vessel vnpitch^. You shall have figs that loosen your body, and
make it soluble, Soluble figs.
if you (...) at the root of the fig tree when you plant it some black
hellebor ^^ampt with spurge, or some other such purgative.

Furthermore, To ^ame a wild Bull.
the fig tree has this virtue, that if you have a wild and (...) Bull which
you cannot tame by any means, if you tie him to a fig tree, by and by he will
become gentle, forgetting his natural savageness. Furthermore, to make the
hard and rough ^lesh of any beast tender by and by, you must hang it to a
branch of a fig tree; as also, to make it to be boiled quickly, you must
stir it oftentimes in the pot wherein it boyleth, with a ladle of the wood of
a fig tree: for the fig tree breaths forth a certain kind of vapor
which dries vehemently, and digesteth the hardness of any ^lesh whatsoever,
whether peacocke, birds of the river, or other such like. It is true that there
is other means to make tender the flesh that is tough, (...)
as to put it in a heap of corn. We may further note I know not what secret
virtue in the fig, for the horses and asses laden with figs do easily fall
down under their burden, and loose all their strength, which notwithstanding
are as easily recovered of their strength and refreshed, if they have but given
them a (...) of bread. It is also worth the noting how that the juice or milk
of the husbanded or ^ame fig tree (as we have before showed in the treatise
of the making of cheeses) serves for the turning or changing of the milk into
curds, as well as the (...): figs boiled with Hysope, do heal an old Cough,
and amend the diseases of the Lungs. The fruit does soften the belly,
nourishes much, provoke sweat: being dry, mingled with the flower of
Linseed and Fenugreeke, it kills or resolves impostumes, and hard swellings:
in decoctions it is good for the Cough, and difficulty of breath* the flowers
are good to eat, notwithstanding that Swine avoid and shunn^ them in all they
may.

King Mithridates made an Opiate against all manner of Poison and danger of the
Plague, The Plague.
which was compounded of Figs, Walnuts, and Rue, as we have said before in
the Chapter of Rue.

Figs burnt and made into powder, mingled with a very little Wax, do make a
very sovereign medicine for Kibes. (...)
The ^uice of Figs does heal all Roughness, ill conditioned Scabbes, small
Pocks, Purples, Freckles, Ringwormes, and other spo^s and defilements of the
body and of the face, being anointed thereupon with the flower of parched
Barley. It cures also the pain of the teeth, a little Cotton wool being
dipped therein, and laid upon the tooth. It opens the Hemorrhoids.

This Tree is easy to make grow, The Olive tree.
and delights in hot and temperate Countries, as in Languedoc and Prouence,
where it may be seen growing (as it were) in little Forests: and it is so long
lived, and of such durablenesse, as that though the labor due to be bestowed
about it, be left off for a long time, yet it cease not to bear fruit more
or less: and coming to it self again, being old, it becomes young again,
and getting foot lively, of dry it becomes marrowish and fattie, and of
barren, fruitful. In these Northern Countries it grows not without great
pain and labor, by reason of the coldness of the air. Wherefore if you be
minded to plant the Olive tree in your Garden, choose out a place standing upon
the South or East quarter, raised sufficient high, and open to the Western
wind, and which has also rested a good while, consisting of Potters clay
underneath, and above mingled with Sand and Fullers clay, being also a close,
moist, and not lean ground: and in this you shall plant it about mid March,
not of sprou^s putting forth at the foot of the Olive tree, but of sienes,
shoots, and branches that are young, fair, and fertile, pulled from the
boughs of the tree, as thick as the wrist, and a foot and a half long, very
round, having a sleeke and glistering bark, without boughs, and cut down in
the new of the Moon, raising the thick bark about the length of a fathom,
and letting the green bark alone, which is more fine and thin* And you
shall set them in the ground in such manner as they did grow upon the tree; as
the lower end downward, and the upper end upward toward Heaven, as when they
grew upon the tree: for if you set them the upper end downward* they will
hardly grow; but and if they grow, yet they will abide barren for ever. You
must lay the root, as also the head, all over with dung mixed with ashes, and
set them on such a depth in the earth, as that there may be above them some
four fingers thickness of fine small mould, and afterward tread all close
down together, round about the new-set Plant, and so cast still more earth
unto it, as it sinketh with treading, or else you may beat it down with a
rammer of wood. It must not be transplanted till after five years: but in the
mean time you must dig it every month, and dung it with Goats dung every
year in Autumn. You must water it with rain water, rather than with
Fountain, River, or Well water. And sometimes you must prune and c^t away the
superfluous branches, especially the dry and withered shoots, and the branches
putting forth upon it, if so be that the plant be not become old, feeble, and
broken, in such sort, as that it stands in need to be renewed and planted
again, for then it will be requisite to leave growing one or two of the
fairest, and not to cut them down before they have grown eight years, and
then at such time as the Moon is decreasing, and the season dry and fair.
And sometimes, every eight year, you must moisten the root of the Olive
trees, that are lusty and well liking, with the lees or grounds of Olives, to
keep them from worms and other vermin, which are oftentimes noisome unto
this Plant. You must also defend them from Cattle, especially from the
browsing of Goats, which would make them altogether barren. You must not plant
any other Plants near unto the Olive tree, except the Fig Tree, or the
Vine, whose company and neighborhood it rejoices greatly in, and hates
especially the Oak, yea, even to be planted in the place where the Oak was
standing, and is pulled up, for there it dies presently. The Olive tree may be
grafted in the bud with that kind of grafting called the Scutcheon, and that of
the thickest and strongest grafts that may be picked out of the Olive tree, as
we will further show hereafter: but it were but a lost labor to sow it of his
stones and kernels.

The Olive tree is less subject unto vermin than any other, A marvelous
thing about the Olive tree.
because of his strong ^auour, insomuch, that it is as good as a shield unto
all other herbs that are about it: as also by his bitterness it kills
Coleworts, Lettuces, and other moist herbs which are sown in the same ground
with it. Some hold (which is a marvelous thing) that the Olive tree grows
more fruitful and abundant in increase, if it be planted and looked unto by
such as are virgins, Virginity. (...).
and have not unlawfully abused their bodies, and other men's beds, or
otherwise: and that therefore in some Countries the pla^ing of it is committed
unto such youths as are certainly known to be chaste, as also (...) ordering
and governing of them, and that there they grow fair, and bring (...) much
fruit.

You must gather them with your hand, when you are got up into the tree by a
ladder: The gathering of Olives.
you must not hurt the branches, for that might make the Olive tree barren: it
must be done in November, when they begin to change their color, and are very
black: this time must be fair, and not rainie: yea, and if it have rained
sometime before your gathering, you must see that it be dried up again very
thoroughly. Some gather their Olives after another fashion: They beat them down
with long slender Poles, or Pearches of Reed, not of Wood, and are careful not
to strike against them for fear of beating down some of the branches,
together with the fruit: but such manner of gathering Olives is not good,
because the Olives beaten down, or stricken, do wither incontinently, and do
not yield so much oil: put also unto this discommoditie, that other; which is,
that the tree is bruised, and many of his branches broken, which is a great
hinderance in the years following.

Furthermore, Olives are gathered for two ends, either to make Oils, Olives
serve to make Oil of, and to serve as Table.
or to sent as dishes at Banquets, to the end that they may provoke appetite:
notwithstanding, we must not think that all sorts of Olives indifferently do
serve for these (...) uses; for the greatest, for the most part, are better for
Banquets, and the less to (...) Oil out of. But those which are intended to
be reserved for Banquets, must be carefully preserved with salt Brine, or salt
Vinegar, or Oil, or the grounds of Oil, or with Cure, or the dross of
Grapes, or Honey, or Veriuice, in manner as follows.

They must be gathered with the hand, having got up into the tree with a
ladder, The gathering of Olives to serve in Banquets.
in fair weather, when they begin to be black, and are not as yet thoroughly
ripe: than afterward to spread them upon a hurdle of Oziers, and there pick
and cull the^ out at your pleasure, putting aside all such as are spotted,
corrupted, or very small, and reserving only those which are gross and
great, fashioned like an egg, full, fast, having a long and slender stone, a
close pulpe, or flesh, and in good quantity. This done, they must be cloven in
four places, or without any such cleaving, be put whole into an earthen pot,
and salt Brine or Veriuice powered upon them, or else Honey with Vinegar and
Salt, or Oil, with Salt beaten small, or else with Wine new from the Press,
or such other liquor as has been already spoken (...). Some put in the
bottom of the earthen pot, under the Olives, or into their (...), the leaves
or ribs of Penyryall, Min^s, Annise, Masticke tree, Oil tree, (...), Rue,
Parsley, Fennel, and Bay tree leaves, and the seeds of Fennel, (...)* and
Rue. Finally, you must keep the vessel well stopped, and put it in some
C^llar to keep: but he that would keep Olives a long time, must change his
(...) euer^e quarter of a year.

As concerning Olives to make Oil of, The gathering of Olives to make Oil of.
they must be gathered when they are somewhat more ripe than those which are to
be preserved, and when as there are many of them become already black, but
yet not so many as are white: in other respects they must be gathered in such
manner as we have said that the others should be gathered, that is to say,
with the hand, and when it is fair weather, except it be those Olives which by
tempests and winds have been blown to the earth, and such as must needs be
gathered, as well because of wild, as ^ame and house beasts. There must no more
be gathered at one time, than may be made into Oil that night and the day
following: for all the fruit that is gathered in a day, must presently be put
upon the Milles, and so into the Presses. But before that they be put into the
Press, they must first be spread upon hurdles, and picked and culled: as
likewise, that their (...) and waterish liquor may run out a little, and
spend it self; for it is a great enemy unto the Oil: insomuch, as that if it
remain, abide, and stand with the Oil, it spoyleth the taste and savor of it.
And therefore in this respect, when sometimes the quantity of Olives is so
great, as that there want Presses and workmen to dispatch them, you must have a
high and well-raysed floor, where you must provide partitions to keep asunder
every days gatherings: and these partitions, in the bot^^me, must be paued
with Stone, or with Tyles, or Squares made somewhat sloping, that so the
moistness of the Olives may convey it self along the channels which shall be
there provided. And thus much concerning the preparing of Olives to make Oil
of: it remains now to speak of the making of Oil; but we will reserve that
for the end of the third Book, where we will make a large discourse of the
making of Oils.

Finally, there is a very astringent and binding faculty in the Olive tree:
for the decoction of the leaves in a Clyster does stay the flux of the belly:
Flux of the belly.
the juice pressed from the leaves, with white Wine and Rain water, does stay
all manner of fluxes of blood: the liquor which droppeth from the green wood
of the Olive tree when it is burning, does heal the Itch, Flux of (...) Itch.
Ringwormes, and Scabs. (...).
Olives yet green and vn^ipe, do stir up and provoke an appetite, being
eaten, and cause a good stomach, but they make the body costiue, and are hard
of digestion. Ripe Olives do ouerturne the stomach, and make boylings
therein: they cause also headache, and hurt the eyes. As concerning the virtues
of Oil, we will speak of them in his place. See more of the Oliue-tree in
the third Book.

Pistates (...).
require as great toil and diligence about them as the Oliue-tree, and would
be sown about the first day of April, as well the male as the female, both
^oyntly together, or at the least one very near unto the other, the male
having the back turned to the West: for being thus joined, or near neighbors
one unto the other, they bear better and greater store of fruit, especially if
they be sown in a fa^ ground, and well ayred: and there you may graft them at
the same time upon themselves, or upon the Turpentine tree, notwithstanding
that some do graft them on the Almond tree. They may in like manner be set of
Plants; and the manner of planting them is thus: You must make Pits sufficient
deep in some place where the Sun shi^eth very hot, and choose new shoots of
the tree which are in very good liking, and ^hese bound together, put into the
Pits the second day of the month of April, afterward bind them together from
the earth up to the boughs, and cover the roots with good dung, watering them
continually for the space of eight days. And after the ^odie of the Tree is
three years old, you must lay open the Pit near unto the root^, and set the
body somewhat deeper in, and then cover it again with good dung, to the end,
that when the Tree shall be grown great, it may not be ouer-blowne with ^^eat
winds.

This Tree was rare and hard to be come by in this Country, before the most
reue^end Lords, Cardinal du Bellay, and Reave du Bellay, Bishop of Mants,
brethren, and (...) worthy of eternal memory for their incomparable
knowledge, alone, and (...) all other Frenchmen, had brought into this Country
the knowledge, not only of (...) which were altogether unknown unto us, but
also the ordering and figure^ of strange Herbs and Trees, the fruits whereof
we are greatly in love withal, and do highly commend; notwithstanding, that
as yet we do scarce know themselue^* But surely herein this whole Nation is
bound to acknowledge an everlasting (...) unto them for the same.

The fruit of Pistates (as A^icenne says very well, not sticking at the
scruple and doubt which Galen casts in the way) do comfort the stomach, and
nourish (...) and this is the cause why they are prescribed them which are
lean and worn away with sickness, and which desire to be strong and mighty
in performing the act of Venerie.

Citron-trees, Citron-trees.
Orange Trees, Orange Trees.
Limon-trees, Limon-trees.
and Citron-trees of Assyria, Citron-trees of Assyria.
require (...) like manner of ordering, by reason of their like nature,
whereunto, in respect of (...) great tenderness and incredible daintiness, it
is needful to give great heed* (...) otherwise there is no hope of reaping any
profit or pleasure of them. And for as (...) as they are best dealt withal,
and found to prosper most, when they are gotten (...) grown great from some
other place (it being so difficult a thing, and exceeding toil, to make them
break the earth, and grow upon the seeds in this Country) I will make a
brief discourse concerning whatsoever is requisite for the (...), planting,
removing, and governing of them in our Country and Grounds. And therefore to
speak (in the first place) of the manner of transporting of them, The manner
of transporting Citron-trees, etc.
(...) must think, that these Trees get no good by changing their place, but
that they would do a great deal better in their natural and native soil and
ground, when they were first planted, sown, or grafted, than to be removed
else whither. Notwithstanding, if it please the Lord of the Farm to procure
them from (...) must do it in the Spring time rather than in Autumn: because
even as in (...) the wood thereof grows hard and solid, being ripe, and for
that the ^appe (...) to comfort it with his warm moisture, by reason of his
approaching cold; so i^ the Spring time, on the contrary, they begin to bud by
and by after that they are (...) and planted, and bring forth leaves, yea and
flowers, if the Plants be great and strong enough.

The way to transport them, Taken (...) of the remembrances of Monsieur Nicot,
sert from Portugal unto (...) mother, and to the C^rdinall of Lorraine.
is in such sort to ^it the roots with ^lothes or (...) that you may bind
therein unto them so much of the earth, from which they (...), as may defend
them from being hurt either by the Wind or Sun: and having thus done, to fit
them further with Barrels, or Sere-clothes, the better to keep (...) from all
the injuries of the air, as also from the rain, and to cause them to be
^^^ueyed upon Horses, Carts, or Wagons: so soon, even the same night that
they shall come to the place where you would set them, you must well advise and
(...) they be altered (which will be known by the change of the leaves and
bark) (...) then to provide for that accordingly: for in such case you must
take away the earth, and temper it soft anew, water them, cut them, and take
away the blasted or (...), until such time as the pits where you intend to set
them, be seasoned in such sort (...) manner as shall be said hereafter.

You shall in the day time view well your ground, Ground fit for these Trees.
and see that it be a good substantial black, open, tender, sweet, light,
fat, and clean earth, without any (...) stone whatsoever, near unto the Sea
coast, if it be possible, where moisture (...): and furthermore, that it be
easy to be stirred, to the end it may drinks in (...) water in abundance
where you mean to set these Trees. For these Trees (...) much watering, if the
water should stand above the earth, and not sink (...), the roots would become
sick, discolored, and by little and little would look the (...) color of
pale, black, or blew. If the earth be not easy to be stirred, you (...) cover
it with Horse dung very well rotted, or else with Ox or Sheep dung, (...)
by this means it will become easy to be pierced or stirred. The place where
(...) are to be planted, must be open upon the Sun, a high place, and
sheltred (...) the quarters from whence fro^tie winds do blow, but principally
the (...) wind, which is always most contrary unto those Plants. It must be
also open upon the South (because contrary to the nature of all Trees they
feed upon this (...), and starve through that of the North) and a little upon
the West, in such sort, as that they may be guarded on the back part, and both
sides, but specially the Citron-tree, which is the most tender of all the
other. For which considerations, it will not be amiss to set them near unto
some wall; of a convenient height, to the end they may have a rampart against
the Northern parts: and for the more certainetie, to make them a hood and
flankers of Bay trees, for the increase both of the beautifulness, as also of
the profit of the same: for some hold, that the company of the Bay tree does
keep the Orange tree from frost. These Bay trees shall be planted in double
chesse, that so the thinnest places of the first may be amended by the thickest
places of the second: but and if you have not Bay trees to do it withal, then
you may take Cypress trees. And here you must learn, that Orange Trees love
not the company of any other tree but of the forenamed, and of the
Myrtle-tree. The best of all, and most assured for profit, were to plant the
said Orange Trees, Citron-trees, and other such like Trees, in half Barrels or
Vessels, of earth made for the purpose (they being the chief pleasures of
Princes and great Lords) or else in Cases, that are wide below, and narrow
above, builded of cloven boords, very well joined and fitted together, in such
sort, as that no shoots may grow through them: for the earth, by reason of the
often watering of it, does not cease continually to cause them to put forth and
break out one way or other. But that such watering may be conveyed in best
sort for their growth, it must be provided and brought by some low conduit and
passage, and the surplusage carried away by some such cock as is used in Lee
tubs: and such, or the like Vessels, must be made to carry into any place
whatsoever a man will: for seeing that these Plants do die, if they be touched
never so little with frost, as being most tender and dainty of their natural
inclination, it must be looked unto in Winter, after that they are well covered
and compassed about with straw, or the stalks of Gourds (for by a natural
contrariety they are given to let and hinder the frost from hurting them) that
they be conveyed upon small Wheele-barrowes into vaulted Caves, and when Summer
is come, to return and bring them back again into the full and open Sun,
to be nourished and refreshed by the heat thereof. Then having found out such a
place in the Garden (as we have spoken of) there shall Pits Holes, or Pits.
be cast with distances betwixt: and whereas the Orange-tree does shoot out his
roots deep into the earth, you must cast the said Pits a good fadome deep,
and a fadome and a half in compass, which shall be well broken and made soft,
that so the root may rest and spread it self at pleasure: which Pits shall
grow narrower by little and little toward their top, and where they are to
embrace and close in the foot of the tree. These Pits, to do well, should be
kept open a year, or thereabout, if it were possible, for the well seasoning
of them, which by many Sunne-shines, and many Raines, would be effected: but
there may more speed be made with them, either by covering the places of the
said Pits with well rotted dung and new ashes, which never were wet, and
watering it with a little water, if the time and season be not rainie, or by
filling up the said Pits with Wheat straw, or with small Vine branches, burning
it all, and afterward watering the ashes which shall remain, if the season be
dry, and without rain: for within eight or ten days after this preparing
of it, the said Pits will be well seasoned. About the end of the same time, you
must again break and soften the earth of the seat of the said Trees, and the
sides thereof, and lay into them a finger thickness of dung, and again, upon
this dung, the like thickness of good mould, and then upon it to set the Tree,
in the very same aspect of the Sun, if it be possible, that it stood in
before the taking up; that is to say, that every part of the tree stand upon
the same quarters of the Heavens that it did before: for otherwise it would not
serve, if the ^ide beholding the North before, should now behold and stand upon
the East or West. And this observation is of great moment: for as much as they
which fail in this, do oftentimes see their Trees dead, or else
(notwithstanding whatsoever other means used) bringing forth very late and
untimely fruit, with like untimely growth and blossoming, which they would not
have fallen into, if they had been see again after the manner they stood,
before they put forth (...) budde (...) of the earth. And this di^aduantage
likewise happens unto them, which (...) planted their Trees in Pots or Cases,
use to carry them into houses and under (...) in the Winter time, and out
again at the Spring, without an^e ragard^ed in them after the same si^uation
and state of standing wherein they stood the (...) before.

Thus the Tree being seated upon the ground in the like aspect of the (...) it
was, you must dress it about the foot with a leuelled bed of good earth, or
the thickness of half a foot, and trample it down: and again, upon this,
(...) bed of the same thickness of good made earth, and for want thereof, with
(...) newly mixed with good dung, and to tread and trample it down, and thus by
(...) of the one and the other to continue till the Pit be filled up even with
the (...) swarth, and then to water it. All these said and several works
shall be ended before the full of the Moon, and the better, if it be in the
increase of the day, that (...) about nine or ^enne a clock in the morning:
For some hold, that if these things (...) done in the full Moon, that then
there would grow Worms and Ants (...) body and bark of the Orange tree.
Being thus planted, you shall order and govern them both in Summer and Winter
in manner as follows: In Summer (...) shall be watered every three days,
morning and evening, and ofter too, if the (...) of the heat do require it:
For the Orange tree, above all things, does (...) water, and stands in need
of two buckets of water at the least unto every (...) tree root; and therefore
the Gardiners are happy in this case, which in their (...), or not far off,
have water at commandment, because commonly they (...) both more fruit, and
that also more beautiful and fair, and better seasoned. Such (...) water
them, must beware of touching the stocks or trunkes of the tree, or else the
(...) therewith, but rather that they cast it a pretty way off, and that round
about, that so it may suck in and sink down equally unto and upon the
roots: And to this (...) you shall make a little furrow, dug some three
fingers deep round about, and into this you shall pour your water, and when
it is sunk, you shall fill up the (...) again. In Winter the care and labor
is the greater, in keeping them from being tainted of the Frost: and therefore,
so soon as the Frost shall begin, you shall (...) them in good time, about the
first of October, with good store of boughs, held up with props, or else to
make for every one of them a lodging of Mass, with a (...) in it open unto the
South. Some use to cover them with Cork, and it is a (...) good covering for
them. Some, as has been said before, remove them into (...) under the earth,
carried thither upon little Wheele-barrowes, and fitted of (...) or Cases, But
which of these cour^es soever it shall be that you shall take, you must always
see, that their tops and outsides be at liberty, and not pinched of due (...)
by that which covers them, and that this coueret be not taken away till (...)
be past. It is true, that before you cover them, or set them in vaulted caves,
you must see, that they be not wet any manner of way: for if the cold should
seize upon them in that pickle, both the tree and the fruit would be easily
spoiled by the (...) that, this wetnesse would cause the flowers and fruits to
corrupt and rot when they were under their covert: but good and wise Gardiners,
before they co^er these (...) do take from the Citron trees (being the least
able to endure cold of all the rest) (...) the flowers, buds, and tender
boughs of the same. You must beware that it (...) not into their lodging or
place of covert, especially upon the thaw of Snow, (...) Snow water is more
hurtful unto them than any other. Likewise, if any (...) of Snow or Sleet
come thwart their lodging, or that any trade wind do bring it (...) them, you
must shake it off from their branches, and take it from the foot of (...), for
it would scorch them. And therefore, to meet with these inconveniences, if
(...) be any cleft or hole in the covering, you must make it up close, and
stop it well (...) dung, or vvispes, so as they may be taken out when it is a
fair and clear weather, (...) that the Sun shall cast forth his beams,
that so it may shine upon the (...) dispell the ill, corrupt, and infected
air, and take away and dry up the (...) moisture rising of the continued
shadow: and then again, when the Sun goes down, and falls off, you must
stop them up again, that so the cold may not take hold upon them. It will not
likewise be amiss to make a fire there, during the extreme cold times, of
good dry Wood, or Coal, because the heat thereof would be great, and continue
well, without working any annoyance unto the plants, either by his flame or
smoke: and this to be most chiefly performed in the behalf of the
Citron-trees, which are most subject unto the cold of all other, the cause
being, for that they have in them greatest store of juice and substance; as on
the contrary, they are least subject to cold which have least juice and
substance in them. Again, you may not be too hasty in uncovering of them,
upon some show and promise of gentle, meek, and fair weather, because the
cold oftentimes faining it self to be gone, returns again in more vehement
manner than before, threatening the killing of them, only it will be the best
and safest to open some board or window of their lodging, that so the tree^ may
enjoy the present heat of the Sun for certain hours. In the time of the
covering of these new translated trees, you must not forget to renew them at
the foot a cubit height with good earth, enriched with good rotten dung, and
that to lie round about the said foot the breadth of a good fadome: and this
will serve and stand in stead, in case that by extremity of cold the body of
the tree should be frozen, to refresh and repair it again from below, where
the frost shall not have pierced it; notwithstanding, if in such extraordinary
cold seasons you cover and lay over their former covering with other dung well
rotted, you shall preserve the said Orange trees. Their grafts (whereof we are
to speak hereafter) are a great deal more tender and more easy to be broken
by the cold and frost, and therefore they must be covered at the foot, and laid
high with earth, and as it were cloaked or hooded, and double covered and
clothed, as has been said, and that a great deal higher, that so it may not
be pinched in the place of the setting in of the graft. But and if the cleft,
or other receipt made for the setting in of the graft, be so high, that the said
provision and defense cannot conveniently be applied unto it, you must then
cover such chase with thick new cloth, being well woolled, or else with straw,
and to tie the one or the other fast to, by wreathing it about with one of the
breadths of a Mat, and stay it up with a prop, if need be. In hot Countries, as
Spain and Portugal, it is held as an approved opinion, That by how much the
more Orange trees are watered in Winter, so much the less subject are they to
frost; because their water is either out of the Well, or fresh drawn from some
Fountain, or of water broken out of the earth, and made warm with the Sun,
or with the fire, and for that it is drunk up all into the earth: but I fear
me, that it would not fall out for well done, if so be that in this cold
Country one should take that course: notwithstanding, if you will use the same
order, you shall do it either by the help of the foresaid Sun beams, or by
a pipe of Lead, laid good and deep in the earth, a far off from the root of
the tree, pouring of the said water into it, that so it may descend and reach
unto the roots: but so soon as you have thus powered in your water, you must
stop very well and cover the said pipe with earth and dung, that so the cold
air may not run along it unto the roots, for so they would be frozen. They
must be vnder-digged and cast at the foot from month to month, if the season
will suffer it, and the earth made light and soft, mingling it with dung, and
watering it as has been said. And for the better preserving of the branches
of these plants, and keeping of them in their strength and force, they must be
cut every year, more or less, according as the good and expert Gardener
shall judge it necessary, in as much as these trees, being both dainty and
precious, do require a very careful regard to be used in this cutting. It
must not furthermore be forgotten to take from them continually all manner of
superfluity, filth, and grass, growing at their foot, or elsewhere; and
likewise thorns or pricks, and that with the hands, or some other cutting
iron: And if any branch, through ^rost, or otherwise, grow dry, pale, or
black, you must cut off the dead part at the Spring in the decrease of the
Moon, in fair weather, and calm and temperate, and upon the putting of it
forth again, and this must be done with a Garden Sickle or Knife well
sharpened, and the cut must be well (...) together, and covered over, that so
it may put forth branches again. You must also bow the boughs as shall be
necessary, and to raise some higher, and pull some lower, as occasion shall
require: cut the ends and sprou^s which put forth at the tops of the tree:
take away those that grow too high, to the end they may be proport^^^^ in an
equal measure of growth: for these trees, especially the Citron tree, growing
in any great height, and having any great store of boughs, do neither bring
(...) so much nor so good fruits, as when they are otherwise fitted and freed
from their vn^necessarie boughs: and further, if need require, to se^ some
store of p^les to hold up the boughs. If notwithstanding all the pain and
preservation spoken of before, they fall now and then into mislikings and
diseases, then you must bury at their (...) some Sheep horns: for some are
of opinion, that by these they are maintained is ^ound estate and good plight.

And thus much as concerning the ordering of these Trees, The ^itting of Citron
and Orange trees of Plants.
when they be brought out of other Countries: but as for those which we
procure to grow and spring out of the earth here in this Country, we must
know, that they grow either of (...), boughs, grafts, or ^eeds. But to speak
of these particularly, the Orange tree grows not, but very hardly, either
upon shoots or grafts: for having a very hard (...), it hardly takes root. It
is true, that some use to prepare a Plant of it in such manner: They pick and
prune from an Orange tree bough his sprigges and (...), plant it the small end
downward, wrapped in a Linen cloth, having within it (...) dung that is very
new: and of such plants have been seen to grow Orange trees, growing indeed
lower than the other, but having a well spread and large (...) yet it is better
to sow it, To sow Orange trees.
so that it be in a good soil, notwithstanding it be long before it bring
forth fruit: but he that will help that, and cause it to hasten to bearing,
must graft it. The manner of sowing all these sorts of trees, is, first to
prepare and manure the ground very well with Horse dung about the month of
May, or else with Ox or Sheep dung, and to mix therewith some Wood ashes,
or which were better, some Cucumber ashes: then making pits in the said ground,
of the breadth of half a foot, to put three seeds together, and the sharp end
upward, and the higher part of the seed toward the earth: after this, they must
be often watered with (...) water, or with Sheep milk, for so they will grow
better and sooner. And yet (...) not, before you sow them, to lay them in
steep in Cowes milk that is warm: and if you desire to have them sweet
fruit, put to the liquor wherein you steep them, (...) Sugar cand^e.

You shall plant their shoots after the same manner, in a well husbanded and
(...) ground, as also their boughs and grafts, about mid May, setting the
great ends upward, and filling the pits with ashes made of Cucumbers. These
bring forth (...), and the middle part of the apple will be sweet, if the body
of the tree be pierced with a Piercer in the month of February, and that
there be made therein an oblique and sloping hole, which must not go through,
and from out of this the sap is let distill, until such time as the apples
come to be formed, and then you must stop up the said hole with Potters clay or
mortar: or else give a slit in the thickest branch of the tree, and in the
place where you have given the slit, make a hollownesse of the depth of a good
foot, which you shall fill with honey, and stop up with mortar, (...) fear of
rain and of the heat of the Sun: when as the tree has drunk in all the
^on^y, you shall put in more, and water the root with urine: in the end, you
shall (...) off all the little shoots which shall put forth of the tree,
letting those alone which shall grow upon the slit branch.

At the same time Orange trees may be grafted chiefly upon the Pom^-(...)
^tree, To graft Orange grafts.
for upon this they thrive maruellously (especially the Orange tree) both in
goodness, greatness, beauty, and thickness of such fruits as they bring
forth, in respect and comparison of those which they bring forth when they are
grafted one (...) another: that is to say, the Orange upon the Citron, or the
Citron upon the Orange tree. They may be grafted likewise upon themselves, as
the Citron-tree upon the Citron tree, and sometimes upon the Pomegranate,
Pear, Apple, and M^lberrie tree, but seldom betwixt the bark and the wood,
but upon the head of the trunk or body of the tree, cut off near unto the
root. In the grafting of them, you must make choice of the fairest grafts which
may be found, as ^o graft a good Citron tree upon a better. The Limon grafted
upon the Citron, does bear fairet fruit than the Citron grafted upon the
Limon, because the Citron tree is a great deal more ^appie and full of juice
for to make nourishmen^ of than the Limon tree, Citrons and Li^^ons, grafted
upon an Orange tree, do bear more fruit than upon their own ^^umpe and
body, and are not so subject unto the cold, because they enjoy and par^^cipate
so largely of the Orange tree his properties and qualities which consisting of
a hard wood, without sap, does resist the cold a great deal the more. (...)
way to graft them, is by cleaving the stock, and then it must be done in
April, or in March: or by way of crowning; and that must be done in May: or by
cutting a ^ound hole in the bark of the tree, and this must be done in July.
When they be grafted into the bark of the tree, you must cut away whatsoever
is superfluous, or more than needs, of buds or sprouts which are not grafted,
and withal, take away all the shoots which grow thereupon afterward. When they
are planted, you shall ^ot suffer any weeds to grow there about them, Gourds a
friend unto the Citron.
except it be the Gourd, whereof they are refreshed, if it grow near unto
them, as being much succored by them, and protected from the cold; as also for
that the ashes thereof sown and cast about ^he roots of Citrons, do make them
more fair and fruitful: And se^ing that the Citron tree is very fruitful,
and bear^th a heavy fruit, after such time as it has brought forth his fruit,
you must gather the greater part, and leave but a few remaining, and so the
remainder will prove very fair ones, and a great deal the better.

The Orange tree will never freese nor die with a cold wind, nor yet with the
frost, if it be grafted upon Holly, being an approved thing: but then indeed
the fruit will not be so natural as that of the others.

Citrons, To keep Citrons etc. long.
Oranges, Limons, and Syrian Citrons, must be gathered in the night, with their
leaves, in the change of the Moon, not before they be ripe, but when the
Orange is of a golden color all over, if you purpose to keep them long: and
you must not tarry till they be become pale before you gather them. You may
keep them fresh and vncorrupt all the year, if you hide them in heaps of
Barley, or Millet: or else if you anoint them over with plaster well temp^red:
or if you close them up in vessels every one by it self. You must not in any
case lay Citrons near unto hot bread, for it would make them not.

To have Oranges of a mixed nature, Oranges of a mixed nature.
and as it were half Oranges, half Citrons, you must about the beginning of
March cut a sience or branch of the Citron tree, whiles it is yet young, of the
thickness of three fingers, and plant the same in a convenient time, giving it
all his orders and best helps of husbanding: at the end of two years, or
thereabout, when it is well taken, and betwixt March and April, you shall sow
it of a finger within the earth, and closing the cut fast, you shall graft, by
way of cleft, a graft of a young Orange tree thereupon, as of some two years
old, proportionable and suitable unto the Citron tree in thicknesses afterward
you shall rub and anoint the said cut, and cha^e or cleft for the receipt of
the graft, with the root of the herb called Aron, and you shall cover it well
with a good cappe, after the manner of other grafts, putting therewithal unto
the foot thereof well rotted dung, or the ashes of Gourds: after that, you
shall lay it about with good earth, a reasonable height, and underprop it, till
such time as it shall grow great and strong: but know, that the graft must be
taken of the side of the Orange tree which stands toward the East, and it
must be done in the increase of the Moon and day, for so it will prosper more
effectually.

The Citron Citrons.
will be red and sweet, if it be grafted upon a Mulberrie tree, Citrons of
(...).
and will grow in such form and after such manner as a man will have it, if
before it be grown to his bigness, any way it be closed up in a frame or
mould, cut after the shape you would have it (...) may grow (...) quantity
therein. By the (...) it be put into a vessel of earth, or glass, (...) it be
fully grown, it will (...) fashion of the vessel, and become as great as the
vessel: but, in the (...) is have air, you must make some small holes in the
vessel.

The fruits of these Trees are alike differing, The difference betwixt Orange,
Citron, and Limon trees.
both in color, disposition, (...) for Oranges have a more yellow and golden
rind, a sour or (...) sour and sweet together, being round as an Apple, and
fitter for the Kitchen (...) for Medicine. The Limon has a longer shape, a
paler rind, a sowre-tast, and is good for the Kitchen, and in Physic, to
cool, cut, and penetrate. The Citron is long, (...) the fashion of an egg,
the rind thick, yellow without, sour, good for (...) and preservative
medicines. Syrian Citrons are twice so great as (...) fashioned like Cucumbers,
and the rind an (...) thick.

The leaves of the Citron tree do cause a good smell amongst clothes, The
leaves of the Citron tree. The juice, seed, and (...) of Citron trees.
and (...) them from the fre^ting of Moathes. The rind, juice, and seed of
Citrons, are all of them very sovereign against all manner of Poison, and
danger of the Plagues (...) also that of the Limon. And for this cause there
may a whole Citron and (...) boiled in Rose water and Sugar, until such time
as all be consumed away to (...) juice, and after to use every morning, to the
quantity of one or two (...) this decoction, in the time of the Plague. The
rind and juice of Citrons do procure a sweet breath: the rind preserved
heat^th the stomach, and helps dig^^^^* The juice pressed from the rind of
an Orange, is quickly set on fire: A sweet breath.
it (...) by his great subtlenesse, through the glass, even into the Wine that
is (...) therein. The juice of Limons kills S^abs, Itch, and Fre^kles, and
takes away the spots of Ink out of Cloth. The same distilled through a
Limbeck, makes (...) countenances smooth and beautiful, and takes away all
filthiness from all the (...) of the body: being given to children to drink,
it kills the Worms which are in their bodies. If one bring the Limon near
unto the fire, the thin juice that will come forth, Redness of the face.
does cleanse the faces of young girls, and takes away red pimples i^ the
same, as also other manner of spots like unto them. Likewise, the juice of
(...) distilled in a Limbeck, besides that it helps and polisheth the
countenances of women, is furthermore good to take away, Warts.
out of the face, and other parts of the body, all white Spots, Warts, and
other such like things. The juice of a Limon is of such virtue, To soften
pearls.
that if you strain it twice or thrice, and then wash in it whole Pearls, and
afterward s^eepe them in it, and after lay them in the Sun, within five or
six days they will become so soft as honey, so that you may make any shape
with them that you will. Furthermore, the juice of Limons is so corrasiue, as
that if you steep in it a piece of Gold some certain hours, To diminish Gold.
you shall find it diminished, and become light: and as much will fall out, if
you stick a piece of Gold in a Limon. See more of (...) matter in the third
Book.

The flowers of Oranges are preserved with Honey or Sugar, and those are very
cordial: therewith likewise is made a very precious water, of rare and
singular sweetness, which is called the water of Nafe. The water of Nafe.


Pomegranate trees crave a hot or temperate air, for they cannot bear fruit
(...) cold Country: and albeit their fruit be of one of these three tastes, as
sweet, sour, (...) both sweet and sour, notwithstanding, all manner of
Pomegranates do crave (...) and the same air, ground, and manner of ordering.
They maintain themselves (...) good state in all manner of ground, whether it
be far, or strong, or grauellie, or (...), or sandy, foreseen that the sand
be somewhat gross and moist. They refuse not (...) situation of any ground,
be it hill, valley, or plain: yea, they refuse not to grow well in stony,
dry, and rough grounds, for a little nourishment does content them: And for
these causes they need not to be so carefully husbanded as the former; and
(...) rather, because they will grow if they be but pricked down, and do well
bear either to be planted or grafted. Further, if you will take the pains to
pick and (...) them whiles they are young, and in due time, the fruit will be
a great deal the bigger, and of a better fashion: but it must be looked so,
that they be planted upon (...) South Sun, but never upon the East, nor yet
upon the West, for this quarter does most hurt them, as well as the Vine. Note
notwithstanding, that the young branches which you shall cut off from them must
be taken when the tree has put forth his buds, and not before (which is
contrary to the branches of other trees) as also that the si^nces, with bark
and all, be of the thickness of the helue of a knife. And before that you
plant them, you must make sure and close both ends of them, and anoint them
with Swines dung, which is more familiar unto them than any other, and then
lay them overthwart or cross in the earth. they delight in a ground that is
no^ lean, nor moist, but indifferent fat: and they grow the more easily and
fair, if there be planted and set by them the Sea Onion, or especially some
Mulberrie tree. The time to plant them, is from after March until May: betwixt
the same times it is good to graft them upon themselves, but to better success
upon the Myrtle tree, wherein they delight greatly. The Citron tree, the
Willow, and the Mulberrie tree are not so good, howsoever that sometimes they
may be grafted upon them.

The manner of grafting them, is to put into the body of the tree the graft of
the Pomegranate tree, To graft Pomegranat^.
so soon as ever it shall be cut off from it, and after to pour upon it some
oil, and to plaster and cover it with earth: and as concerning the graft, it
must be taken from the Pomegranate tree after it has budded, after the same
manner that we have said of the branches. Furthermore, the crave to be often
watered when the Sun is in Libra.

Pomegranate trees, by mighty raines, Pomegranate trees loosing their flowers.
excessive dewes, and great fogges, do easily loose their flowers and fruits
before it be ripe: but to prevent this mischief, they would be planted near
unto some wall, and have their boughs bowed downward, to the end they may not
so easily take wet, which is so noisome unto them. They endure clefts and chaps
in their bodies, without any danger: and therein they are like unto the
Fig Tree and Vine. If the Pomegranate tree bring forth sour, or scarce sweet
fruit, you must water the roots thereof with Swines dung and man's dung, Sweet
Pomegranats.
mixed with old urine: or temper a little Beniamine with wine, and therewith to
bath and wash the top of the tree, or to spread upon the roots Asses dung, and
after to cover them and water them with man's urine.

The seeds of the Pomegranate will be white, White Pomegranate seeds.
if the roots of the tree be compassed about with Potters and Fullers clay, and
one fourth part of Pla^ster, A fruitful Pomegranate tree.
for the space of three years. The barren Pomegranate tree will become
fruitful, if the body thereof be often washed with ashes and lees. The
Pomegranates will become red, Red Pomegranat^.
if the roots of the Pomegranate trees be often watered with lee, or covered
with the ashes of Acornes.

The Pomegranate will grow gross and thick, Thick Pomegranat^.
if you put much Swines dung at the foot of the tree: again, look how much
more of this dung you put there, by so much the more sweet will the great sour
ones become. Pomegranates will have no seeds, if you take away the greater
part of the sap of the boughs of the tree, Pomegranat^ without any kernels.
and lay them in the ground all shiuered, and after that they have take, cut
that part of the Plant which spreads furthest, and has already put forth
his buds. Pomegranate trees will be fruitful, if you stamp Pur^^aine and
Spurge together, and therewith anoint the body of the tree.

Pomegranates will not break nor open upon the tree, Open Pomegranats.
if there be three stones put at the root of the t^ee when it is planted: but
and if the tree be already planted, then near unto the tree roots you must
plant the Sea Onion. But indeed, all these helps, and such other, do but
little prevail: and therefore it were better to plant or graft them only
which will not bring forth a fruit that will break when it comes to
ripeness. The Pomegranate tree will not fall his flowers, Pomegra^^^^ flowers.
it the roots be watered every year thrice with old urine mixed with as much
water.

Pomegranates will keep and continue, if you dip them in fair warm water,
The way to keep Pomegranats.
and take them out again by and by: or else if you put them apart in dry sand,
or in a heap of corn in the shadow, so long as till they become wrinkled: but
yet better, if when they be ripe, and yet hanging upon the tree, you wrythe the
small bough a little, (...) the start by which the Pomegrana^e hangs: or else
lay Pomegranates in (...) clay tempered with water, and after dry them in the
Sun. It is good likewise (...) lay them in dust, or scrapings, or sawings of
the Poplar tree, the Holme tree, or the Oak, in a new earthen pot, and within
it to set them in order, in manner of (...), and then afterward to cover the
pot, and lute it very well. But whatsoever way (...) take, the principal end
must be to keep Oranges in a cold and dry pla^e* and (...) they be gathered
with their stalks, as also with their little branches, if possibly it may be
done without hurting the tree, for this helps much to keep them long. They
must likewise be gathered in the old of the Moon, so that they be then (...)
very dry, and not being wet from above: and then, after that, to keep them ^
day (...) two in the Sun, their flowers lying downward: then, after that, to
clo^^ them (...) in a pot very well stopped, and well pitched or ^eared, that the
air may not get in* (...) do cover them and work them over very thick with
Potters earth, very well beaten and tempered, and when it is dry, then they
hang them in a cold place: and wh^^ they will eat them, they steep them in
water, and take away the earth. Others do wrap every one of them alone by it
self in hay or in straw within cases. The (...) of Pomegranate trees do drive
away ven^mous beasts: and this was the cause why men in ancient time were wont
to put the boughs of Pomegranate trees both v^de^ and above them in their beds.

The Plane tree The Pla^^ tree.
is more commended for the beauty of his leaves and shadow, than for his
fruit: it grows of shoots and siences drawn and taken from the tree, and
planted in a very moist ground, and such as is near unto some Fountain or
Riu^^* and yet besides this, it delights to be wa^red oftentimes with neat
Wine, and sometimes with men's Urine, to help it to shoot up and grow high, and
to put forth larg^ and ample branches, and long leaves, for to make the better
shade. In this Coun^^ey we cannot see many fair ones. I remember, that I have
seen one at Basil in (...) Peter's place, betwixt the height of fifteen or
sixteen cubits, under the shield and shadow whereof, the people betook
themselves, for their refreshment, during the time of great and scorching heat.
Some make dishes of Plane tree wood, to (...) pain and wringings in the
belly, being applied thereunto. You must beware of the dust which hangs upon
the leaves: for being taken into the body, by drawing in of your breath, it
hurts the rough artery and voice, and in like manner, the ^ight and hearing,
if it fall into the eyes or ears.

The Nettle tree is well enough known in Languedoc and Prou^n^e, The Lot^ or
(...) tree.
especially in a borough near unto Mompelier, called Bontonnet: it grows in
a fat ground, well man^red and toyled, open to the South or East Sun. The
wood is good to make Flutes, Cornets, and other Instruments of Music: it is
good also to make handles for Knives and Swords. The fruit is very much
desired at the Tables of great States, of his great sweetness, and most
pleasant and delightsome smell which they find in it that do eat or smell to
it. Likewise, some do press a Wine out of this fruit, being stamped and
beaten, which is very sweet, and seems like unto other new pressed sweet
Wines, but it lesteth not above ten or twelve days.

The Masticke tree The Masticke tree.
delights in moist places, and is planted after the first day of February:
it bears fruit thrice a year. The leaves, bark, and wood in decoctions have
power to restrain, strengthen, and comfort. And this is the cause why it is
used to make Tooth-pickes thereof.

The Turpentine tree delights in a low and moist ground, and withal, in a
(...) and warm air, open upon the Sun. The leaves, bark, and wood, have
the (...) virtue that the Masticke tree.

The Iuiube tree, The Iui^be tree.
and others, as well foraine as growing in our own (...) further to be seen
and read of in the third Book.

CHAP. LV.
Of the two particular Gardens situate or lying at the end of the Kitchen
Garden, and of the Garden of Pleasure.
THe Kitchen Garden, and the other of Pleasure, being of the largeness above
declared, may have referued out of them, two or three acres, for the profit of
the Lord of the farm, as for Madder, Madder.
Wo^d; Tasel, Line* and Hemp. And we may also add unto these, Saffron, albeit
that all these things, even as well as pulse, if it be a free and kind ground,
do well deserve (...) have every one his several field by it self, and to be
tilled and husbanded after the ^anner of corn and pulse.

For Madder therefore, it is meet that there should be appointed out four or
five ^eres of ground in a place by it self, which must not lie far from the
water, but in (...) free and not in a strong mould, and yet not too light:
which has had his three or four arders with the plough, or (as indeed is
best) dug and si^ted: notwithstanding that the sifting of it be a longer
piece of work, and of greater cost, it being v^ed to be cast and tilled with
thicker raisings of the earth, and smaller clouds than is ^ont to be in the
casting or digging of a new vineyard. The difference betwixt the vine and the
Madder.
For this plant has his proper and particular seasons to be dressed and
planted in, as well as the vine: but in this they differ very manifestly, that
the one is an herb, and the other a shrubbe, and as it were a knot to many
trees: the one dies yearly (and there is nothing of it (...) request but
roots for to make good colors of) but the other lasts and conti^^eth at the
least twelve years in good liking and liuelihood: of which, the first six is
for growth, and a little for bringing forth of fruit, and the later six, for
whole, ^^mple, and entire profit, the danger of hail, washing away of the
grapes, when the ^ines be flower by much rain and frost; being excepted; unto
which in like ma^^er Madder in subject, and oftentimes more than the vine,
because of his tenderness. This prehemencie it has, that the vine being
frozen, cannot be recovered, but Madder may be either set or ^owne again, as
also Woad, the special husbandry of such as dwell in Prouence, and the wealth
and commodity of Dyers of Cloth or Wool, with what color soever it be. It
may be sown or planted: but indeed being sown it yields scarce at any time
any great store of increase: but if you will sow it, then bestow the like
quantity of the seed thereof upon an acre, as you are wont to do of Hemp,
and that in the month of March, upon the tops of hills well battilled and
^manured: thus the seed being cast into the ground, and the same well
incorporated with harrows of rakes, there is no need of any other labor but
keeping of it clean from hurtful weeds, until such time as the said Madder
be ready to be gathered in September for to take the seed of it.

The choice of the roots which you intend to set and plant, must be out of the
country of high Prouence, being more Easterly and cool, and as for the sight
and taste of them, they must be more yellow, thick, and stringed, coming near
unto the color of the true Prouence Orange-tree, very bitter in taste, and in
seething (for the trial of it) more red and full of juice, that is to say, not
so dry and withered. The time to plant, is from March be ended unto mid-May,
and as for the best and most profit to be expected from it, it is not to be
attained or come by, till after the two first years after the first planting
of it: and withal, you must make a sure defense about your ground against the
coming in of cattle; for there can no greater hurt happen unto it. In Italy
they use not to take up the roots of Madder, till after they have continued ten
years in the ground, either set or sown: but they cut the boughs of it
every year to have the seed, and after they cover the roots one after
another, laying two fingers depth of earth upon every one, the measure b^ing
^^ken from his chief and principal, to the end the frost may not hurt them,
and that so the roots may grow the thicker: after the eight or tenth year,
they pull up the roots, drying them in the Sun, and afterward when they would
grind or press them, they do further dry them in a great Oven made for the
purpose, and so press them under a Millstone, and this is called the fine
Madder. Thus they have found by exp^^ence, that look how much the longer they
delay the gathering of the root, so much the more Madder have they every
year, and that fine, which is more than if they should take up the roots
every year. You may both sow it and plant it in the sam^ place, where you
have taken it up, or which is better, sow that place for the nex^ two or three
years following with wheat, because it will bear very fair and great store
thereof: in as much as the field wherein Madder has been sown, is ^ade much
fairer and better thereby, as whereof it may be said this ground has rested it
self, seeing the root has done nothing but brought forth boughs, for seed,
and that the leaves falling from them, do as much feed the ground as the
ground does the roots and boughs.

But Autumn being come, and when you see that the herb begins to look^
yellow, and to loose his natural color, you shall draw it out or pull it up
with the spade or pickaxe, and shall strip the roots from their leaves, which
you shall cast upon small heaps to dry, for the space of three or four
days, if the weather be such as it should, or else six or eight days in a
rainie and moist weather: then you shall cau^^ them to be taken up, dusted, and
scraped, that so they may have none of their hai^ie strings at them: and when
they are thus made clean, you shall keep them whole, or ground into powder
either gross and great, or more fine and small, either for your own use or
for the sale.

Madder is in this one thing much to be marvelled at, To color the (...).
in that it colour^^h his urine that shall but hold it in his hands: and which
is more, it makes the bones and flesh of those cattle red, which have been
fed with it some certain time: some say, that the powder of it is so
penetratiue, and so takes up the nos^hrills, as that it in^^nimeth and kills
many in a few years. To procure the (...).
The decoction procures v^ine, and the terms of women, and colors eggs
red that shall be boiled with it. The (...) because they are rough and stiff
are good to scowre brass vessel.

CHAP. LVI.
Of Woad.
AS concerning Woad, it is tilled in a field, and requires much labor, (...)
as the Nauets or Turnips, though there be no part of it in request but the
uppermost, and that which is furthest off from flowers and stalks: it does not
fear frost, rain, or extraordinary cold: Indeed it does not crave any long
rested fat ground, but a strong ground, and such as may be said to be in good
plight, rather than an indifferent and light: it grows better also in
ground^, which have laid fallow three or four years before, or which have
been Medo^ground two years before, than in grounds which have been well
tilled* which (...) clean contrary unto Madder, which craves as much help,
as the ground oppointed for wheat or vines: yea and it craves the rest of
soil, and set from one year to one: for otherwise the roots when they are
set, do degenerate oftentimes and mi^^^rie, loosing their force and goodness.
And whereas Madder does fat the gro^^d, Woad does make it lean, and therefore
it must not be sown in a lean gro^^d, where it evermore grows but little,
and where it proves almost nothing wo^^^; but rather in a ground that is well
manured before it be sown, as also renewed wi^^ dung when it is to be sown.
But the best approved ground of all other to sow woad in, is that which has
lain long swarth, and has seldom been broken up (...), wherein you are to
observe, that in the ploughing up of such grounds* you must turn up a great
and a deep furrow, laying them broad and flat (...) that the seed may be
thoroughly well covered, and that the swatth rotting underneath and above the
same, may be as a warm and comfortable meanure to make it flourish and
increase. Being sown of seed, it must be diligently harrowed, to the end it
may be well covered and incorporate with the earth, and when the planes have put
forth their leaves the height of two fingers, you must weed and dig it about
mid-Aprill* or somewhat later, according as the time has been fair or
rainie: then shortly afterward you must gather the leaves: and they being
gath^red, you must weed and digg^ the feet of the said roots (...) left void of
their leaves: and this must be continued ^uerie month, that is to say, June,
Iulie, August, and Sep^^mber: in such sort, that (...) as the leaves are
gathered from foot to foot five times, so they must be dug (...) the earth
cast as often, and that so soon as the gathering of the leaves is past: and this
labor of digging is ordinarily to be seven ^^mes gone over, that is to say,
the fi^e times now spoken of, and the two first, which are before any gathering
of the leaves do fall. The manner of gathering them is in this so^t: When the
leaves begin to be colored about the edges, and not in the midst, you must
take them from plant to plant in your hand, and break them off in such manner
from the root, as that it may seem and show as though one had cut them away
with a hook, and after that, to lay them in order in the shadow, that so the
Sun may not harm or injure them.

The manner of making Woad. To make wood.
Under your Mill, which would not be as some use a M^ll-stone, for that
crusheth out the sap and juice of the Woad too much, but a Mill made of strong
timbers the compass of a large Millstone being hollow or d^^uided on^
outside from the other, and running circular or round, and these outsides
shall be bound together both in the midst by the drawing axell-tree, and also
at the outmost Verdges, by strong places of iron made broad and flat, with
reasonable rebated edges, and these plates shall be at least three foot in
leng^h, answering to the full breadth of the trough in which the Mill shall run,
and this Mill must be (...) about by a horse. Now the leaves (as aforesaid)
being ^^rewed in the trough under the Mill, you shall grind them as small as
may be, till they come to be as it were all one substance, which may easily be
done, by often turning the Woad over and over as the Mill runs, which one must
continually do with a shouell, then the Woad being thus sufficiently well
ground, you shall stay the horse, and tak^ all the ground Woad out of the
trough, and then fill the Mill with fresh Woad again, and thus do till you
have ground all you* woad, which being finished, you shall forthwith mould it
up into great round balls, as big as a culuerine bullet, or twice so big as
a man's fists, and these balls you shall place upon fleakes or hurdles made of
small wands, pent-housed, housed, or covered over to keep them from the rain,
but all the sides open in such wise, that the Sun or Wind may have full power
to pass through the same, and these hurdles shall be moun^ed one above another
in many heights and degrees, and your Woad balls shall lie thereupon without
touching one another till they be thoroughly well dried, then at the later end
of the year, which is toward November, you shall break those balls again^,
and put them under the Mill, and grind them as before, and then taking it from
the Mill, you shall lay it in great heaps in some cool vault kept for that
purpose only: and when upon this laying together upon heaps it shall begin to
take heat, it must be turned, and in turning watered, until it be sufficiently
moistened: for as too much water drowneth it, so too much heat in the heaps
does burn it: thereupon you most pile it upon heaps not high but long ones,
and stir it every second day, so long as till it become cold, and yet after
this, to put it abroad every fou^th or sixth day, while it be thoroughly cooled
indeed. And this work must be very carefully performed, for otherwise the
woad would roast it self, and prove not any thing worth, which being so
^^immed and ordered as it should, it is left in some cold and paued place,
until the time of the selling of it, and look how much the longer it lies in
heaps in this ^ase, by so much it becomes the better and finer. The coun^rie
men of Toulouse, in whose country there grows great store of Woad, do not
grind their. Woad-balls into (...) but gather it together by great vessels
full, and put under the Millstone to (...) out the waterish parts of it, and
then they make up the remaining substance (...) like lo^ues, which they dry
and rot afterward, by laying them in the (...) heat of the Sun in Summer
time, and then they cast these lumpes into their (...) where they put their
Wool to be died, a blew, black, or other color, as it best pleases the
Dyers. The leaves thereof made into a plaster, do (...) ^^^^stumes, and heal
wounds new made, they stay fluxes of blood, heal the wild (...), and the
ulcers which run over the whole body.

Also the leaves of Woad thus ground, are excellent to kill any itch, (...), or
other r^islike either in men or children, also it is most excellent for the
di^^^^ is (...) called the Farcie, and cures it very suddenly.

CHAP. LVII.
Of the Tasell.
THe Tasell (called also Venus her bathing tubbe, because it keeps (...)
drops of water (being by nature as all the other Thistles are, hot and dry) in
the lower part of the leaves, close by the stalks, to refresh and water it
self withal) serves greatly (in respect of his head) for the use of
Clothworkers, both to lay the Wool of their new clothes so much^^ is (...), as
also to draw forth so much as lies loose out of order amongst the rest: and it
is (...) serviceable or more unto Cap-makers, after that the Cap is spun,
wouen, (...), and scoured with soap, Walkers-earth, or other scouring earth:
Now he that will (...) profit by this herb, must make choice of a good fat
ground, well (...) tilled with two, three, or four arders, and well harrowed:
and then after (...) it with the best seed that possibly may be ^^und, and that
very thick, and when (...) has shot one of the earth as in the beginning of
May, then to make it clean, (...) weed it with the hand, and in June and Iulie
to dig it, if need be, in the end of September you must gather the heads that
have flowred the first year, le^^^^^ the rest to grow for to be gathered the
year following, at such time as they shall be (...) flower. The heads cut off,
the plants must be planted anew in a well tilled ground, putting all the root
into holes, from one to another (which is all one with the (...) ring of the
Radish) and trampling the ground upon them very orderly and (...) and
furthermore, to dig them when they begin to prick and put forth branches^^
in March, April, and May: and to cut them which are cankered or (...), and so
unprofitable; that so the juice of the earth may be fed upon by those only
which are good and serviceable. And whereas at the time of their flowring they
begin (...) flower on high on the head, and so downward till the whole head be
(...) flower being once fallen, you must cut off the head either evening or
morning, (...) half a foot of stalk thereunto. Furthermore you must not
forget, that they must be set or sown in furrows, that so water may have an
orderly course to fall to the (...) of them, and give them a continual
refreshment, and not to sow them in any (...) place but such as is reasonably
watrie: for too much moisture makes the (...) the head thereof (which is the
thing of most importance) more low and short, and of less commodiousnesse. You
must not gather or bind them up in bundells, (...) a dry season, toward the
month of October at the furthest, and not any (...) earlier than the later end
of September. Some gathering it do leave it at the (...) to dry in some place
by itself, because it is subject unto fleas or lice, and other (...) vermin,
which causes the small ^oot that should hold up the head to fall dow^^ others
do put ten or twelve of them in little faggots together, and so hang (...)
standing one a pretty deal from the other in the shade or wind, and not in
the (...), or in any moist place. Some dry them in the South Sun, turning
them twice or thrice, and after hanging them by paires in order upon poles.

The Tasell is to be commended in this point, for that in the midst of the
head thereof, after it is well dried, there is found a little Worm, which
being hung about the neck or applied unto the wrests, does heal the fever
quartaine: it assuageth likewise the great ach of impostumes which grow about
the nails, being applied ^^hereunto.

CHAP. LVIII.
Of Saffron.
AS for Saffron, the best Farmers, and such as are most cunning in the ordering
of plants, do make very much and highly esteem of that which is called
Bastard Saffron, and of the common people termed Parrot-seed, being the same
that old writers call Carthamus: the plant is of no use, the (...) excepted,
which purges flegmaticke humors, or else feeds Parrots, which are dainty and
fine mouthed. This plant when it is grown up being well husbanded (...)
ordered, bears certain little thick heads, like the heads of Garleeke, and
in (...) midst of it a flower which one would say were Saffron. This good it
does, (...), that it enricheth and makes fat the ground where it grows:
likewise it ^^^ueth no great food or maintenance, neither leaves it any root
in the earth after it (...) gathered that may put forth or take any
acknowledgement of, or do any harm ^^to the soil wherein it grew. There is
every way as much profit in tilling of this ^earbe, as there is in Anise or
Fennel: when all is said, a good Farmer will make profit of every thing, and
there is not (as we say) so much as the Garleeke and Oni^on, which he will not
raise gain of, by selling them at faires, most fitting for their ^^me and
season, and so help himself thereof and fill his purse with money.

The ordinary Saffron, serving for sauces, painting and making of colors, is
a ^^hing of toil and of profit, as may be learned and easily understood by the
inhabi^^nts of Tourain, Prouence, and Portugal, where the same grows exceeding
abundantly: It is planted like cammomile in the Spring, upon heads, four
fingers off one from another: but it must be in a free and well battilled
ground, not very far, nor very lean, but open to the Sun: it must be well
trodden down with the feet, when it shall let fall his flower: but when it
buddeth and puts forth, it must be left ^lone to natures work. At the time
of the gathering of it, you must have linen ^loaths to draw it out of his bell
evening and morning: and after dry it well in the ^hadow of the Sun, and
^ouer it with clean linnens, make it clean, and taking away his white, purge
it, that so it may be free from all filth, and fit to be kept in a dry place
well covered, or in some vessel close stopped: and leaving in the earth the
Oni^^ns or heads of the Saffron, with a good quantity of Grapes, or of the
dross thereof (...) it comes from the press put unto them, you shall take
them up in the month of March when they have brought forth fruit three years,
and dry them in the Sun, ^eeping them after in some place that is not moist,
that so you may plant them again (...) some other place and ground that is
well tilled, as has already been delivered at ^^arge in the five and
thirtieth Chapter. (...).
Some are of judgment that it is naught for a (...) to use Saffron much, and
that it is a special venime unto the heart: but howsoe^^er this be true, the
profit of it is great: and therefore commodious and requisite for (...) Farmer,
which would not that his ground should be unprofitable unto him. See ^ore about
in the place afor^named concerning Saffron.

CHAP. LIX.
A brie^e and short reniew concerning Pulse.
I Will say nothing of the Nau^t, nor of the two kinds of (...) of which, the
great and round one is for them that dwell in Lymosin, (...) and Prouence; and
the long one (which they call (...)) for France and other places: as in like
manner I will make no mention of Mustard Seed, Millet, Pannicke, and Cummine;
neither yet of great wild (...), Lupines, Lentils, and Fenugreeke: which
notwithstanding are all pulse and ^eed of profit and commodity for the
household, as having reserved them for the (...) garden, planted at the end of
the kitchin-garden: I will content my self in this place (...) admonish the
good Farmer, that for the bringing of the ground into some kind of occupation
during the time of his rest, and after that it has been employed in bringing
forth better corn, it will not be amiss to sow therein either (...) or (...)
fores^^ne that the ^eed, after the pulling up of the plants, be so well and
thoroughly gathered and carried away, as that the ground may be quite rid and
(...) of the same, for otherwise in time there would be nothing to be found
amongst this seed but wild Coleworts, D^newort, and other noisome weeds: and in
deed pulse (...) make as much for good husbandry, as the corn that is good
for to make (...) pottage is in continual request for the household, in what
house soever it be. (...) make a (...) of making bread of Millet, as is to be
seen in some places of (...) but it is not but when great necessity drives
them to it. But howso^^er (...) be, (...) peason, fiches, and fetches, are not
of less request or inferior in taste unto great (...) lupines, cummine,
fenugreeke, and lentills: and for the proof hereof, I will (...) to witness
the people of Aruernia, Lymosin, Sauoy, and Dauphine, for the (...) whereof
(not to speak further in this place of any other thing whatsoever, that may be
as it were superfluous) we will refer you to learn the whole (...) in the
(...) of tilling of seeds and pulse in arable grounds.

CHAP. LX.
Of remedying of strange accidents that may happen unto Herbs.
THe Herbs either sown or planted in the gardens before spoken of (...) not
hurt only by hail, (...)
lightning, thunder, frosts, fogges, blash^^^, and other harms happening by the
courses of seasons, but also they (...) annoyed, by reason of wast and
destruction brought upon them (...) little beasts, as Grasshoppers, Weazles,
Caterpillars, house and field Rats, (...) Moules, Pismires, Flies, Gnats, Bats,
Wall-lice, Fleas, Greone-flies, Horse-(...), Frogs, Snailes, Adders, and such
like, which mischiefs you must be (...) full to meet withal, that so you may
not loose your labor about your garden, (...) frustrated both of the profit
and pleasure that might rise and come thereby. And to speak generally of the
preventing of these inconveniences, it is good, ac^ording to the counsel of
Columella, to steep the seeds for a certain time in the juice of (...)
madame, or to mingle with the said seed some ^oot, or else to water them with
(...) wherein soot has been tempered: but it is better to speak of these
things p^^ticularly.

Generally against all such beasts as do hurt gardens, it is good to (...)
place of the Garden as where you think these beasts do most abound and keep,
the paunch of a Sheep, full of dung, as it comes out of the Sheep belly,
and to cover it with a little earth, and within two days you shall find all
these beasts gathered together into this place: before you have done thus twice
or thrice, you shall be provided of the means to kill and root out all these
(...): know then, in a word, what be the necessary remedies for the avoiding
of such accidents.

Against Hail, Against Hail.
ancient men were wont to set the whole compass of their ground about with
white wild Vine, or else to fasten unto the top of a high post an Owl, having
her wings spread.

The Lightnings and Thundering will do no harm, if there be buried in the
midst of the Garden a kind of Toad, Against Lightning*
called a Hedge-toad, A Hedge-toad
closed up in a pot of earth. Others do hang in the midst of the Garden, or at
the sour corners thereof, the seathers of an Eagle, or the skin of a Seal.
Others plant many Bay-trees round about the Garden. It is true, that to break
or dissolve the Thunder, accompanied with a great thick cloud, threatening
hail, there is nothing better than to ring the belles, as is used to be done
in hot Countries, and to send forth the roaring sounds of the Canons, as is
wont to be done at Sea: or else to set on fire some heaps of Weeds, or
stinking and rotten Seeds.

There is nothing more hurtful or dangerous for herbs than Frost, Frost.
which comes when Snow and Ice are thawing. And for to preserve your herbs
from this inconvenience of cold, you must spread all over the ground great
store of straw, and ashes withal about that: for by this means the heat of
the earth will be preserved, and the frost hindered that it cannot enter.

If you conceive that your herbs are like to be hurt by mists or fogs, you
must get together in diverse places of your gardens diverse heaps of tender
twigs and straw, Against Mists and Fogs.
or of weeds and shrubs pulled up in the same place, and after to set them on
fire: for the smoke thereof does correct and clear the duskish and cloudie
air.

Against blasting, Blasting.
which is a corruption happening to herbs and trees by some evil
constellation, there is nothing better than to burn with the dung, the right
horn of an ox, in such sort, as that there may on every side be caused a
very great smoke: for this smoke will drive away and resolve the evil
quality of the air which is the carrier of this malign influence: or else it
will be good to plant in di^er^ places of the gardens, diverse Bay-tree-boughes,
for the blasting will fall all upon them.

To preserve seeds from being eaten of birds, you must s^atter round about your
gardens wheat or barley sod in wine, Against Birds.
mingled with hellebor: or else, water and s^eepe the seed in the decoction of
^ray fishes, boiled in fresh water, assuring your self, that look what
grows of such seeds, will be free from all danger of these fowls: or else
water your seed with water and the l^^s of wine: or else ^ca^er throughout the
gardens, some boiled leekes, for so soon as they shall have swallowed thew,
they will be easily taken up with your hand. Some put ten cray fishes in a
vessel full of water, which they cover and set out in the Sun for the space
of ten days, afterward they (...) the seeds they would sow with this water
twice; once before they be sown, and the other eight days after that they are
sown. By this means the seeds will not only be kept safe from birds, but
also from all other manner of beasts.

To take away all harm which may come by little beasts, Against little (...).
it will be good to dry, upon the skin of a Tortoise, all such seeds as you
intend to sow in your Gardens: or else to plant in diverse places of your
Gardens some Mints, especially amongst your Coleworts: or else to sow amongst
your pot-hearbs some Cich-pease, or Rocket, or to fill the ground of your
Kitchen Garden with Goose-dung, tempered with salt ^rine, or else to sow the
seeds in the first quarter of the Moon.

New Oil lees, or the foot of the Chimney sown all about in your Gardens,
Against Snailes.
is good against Snailes.

To keep away Caterpillars, you must water your herbs with water wherein
have been steeped the ashes of the young shoots of Vines: Against Caterpillars
or perfume your herbs and trees with quick brimstone. Some steep^ the seeds
in the (...) of fig tree (...) and to kill the caterpillars, do cast upon them
the ashes themselves: others like it better to plant a great onion called
Squilla, or else to burn ^oad-stooles that grow out of the nut-tree: or else
some great store of garleeke without any head, to the (...) that by the strong
smell which shall (...) thereof, they may die.

Columella makes mention of a certain and approved remedy in this (...)
Caterpillars, which is, Women's (...).
that when they will not be driven away by other mea^^, to (...) a woman ba^e
footed, having her terms, her bosom open, and (...) about her ears, to walk
three times about the quarters and alleys of the hedges, or (...) of the
garden. This done, you shall see the Caterpillars fall upon the earth, from the
herbs and trees bearing fruit, neither more nor lesle, than and if by shaking
you beat (...) the rain or water from a tree: but in the mean time there must
be care bad that this be not done at (...) rise, because that then every thing
in the garden would (...) and pine away.

If you water the fleas or lice with strong vinegar, mingled with the juice of
^enbane, wherein the water of hemlocke shall have boiled, Against (...).
or with water (...) Nigella has bin steeped: or with the decoction of
mustard-s^eed; they will die shortly.

Gnats will be killed if you lay (...) in sleep, Against (...).
and sprinkle the water about the garden: or if you make a perf^me of Galban^m,
or of Brimstone, or of (...) or of ox-dung. If you would (...) away flies, make
a perfume of Colo (...), or water the place with water wherein it has steeped.

To gather together all the Pa^mar-wormes and other like beasts into one place
to the end you may kill them, Against the (...).
you must spread in the place, especially where they (...) bound, the g^ts and
(...) of some sheep newly killed, the same made (...) clean, but still full
of filth and dung: then two days after, you shall find them all come together
unto the entrails.

For to kill Weazles, you must steep Sal-ammoniack and Wheat together, Against
(...).
(...) sow them near the place where the Weazles haunt, for by this they will
(...) killed or caused to run away if they eat it: Some say, that if you catch
a (...) cut off her tail and cods, and let her go again alive, that
afterward there will be (...) more (...) in that place.

Ants will she away if you burn those which you take, or if you anoint the
(...) of the tree which they use, Against (...).
with oxe-gall; or with the de^^ction of Lupines: or (...) if you burn in the
garden wild cucumber: or if one clay over with white or red (...) the tree
where they are: or if there be put at the mouth of their hole, some (...) and
(...)-stone together.

You shall kill worms, Against (...).
if you perfume their holes with the smoke of oxt-(...) if you water them with
pure lee. You shall make them come out of the ground if (...) water the place
with the decoction of the leaves and seed of hemp: or if you (...) in the
ground where you see great store of worms: it is true also that you shall rid
your ground of them, if you ^are your ground during the time of great heat,
(...) then you shall ^ind them in great numbers upon the face and uppermost
part of (...) earth, and so you may gather them into bowls to give them to
your (...) which thereby will become fat, and lay great store of eggs.

You shall kill snailes, Against (...)
if you sprinkle them with the new l^^s of oil, or with the foot of the
chimney.

Grasshoppers will do no great hurt unto herbs, Against Gras^oppers.
if they be watered with (...) wherein Wor^ewood or Le^kes, or Centaurie has
been stamped: (...) kill them, you must boil bitter lupines, or wild
cucumbers in salt brine, and (...) therewith, or else burn a great sort of
Grasshoppers in the place from (...) would drive them, for the smell of the
smoke does kill them: but and if you (...) them altogether out of your gardens,
you must hang up some Bats upon yo^^ highest trees.

You shall drive away field-Rats, (...).
if you cast in the canicular, or dog-(...) of hemlocke into their holes,
together with hellebor and barley meal: or (...) you shut the mouths of their
holes with Bay-tree-leaues, to the end that when they would come forth, they
may be forced to take those leaves in their teeth, and so by the only touching
of them they are killed. Or if you mingle amongst their meat such as you know
them to be delighted in, quick silver, tin, or burnt lead, black hellebor,
or the (...) of iron: or if you make a perfume of the bodies of their kinds: or
if you boil beans in any poisoned water, and so lay the said beans at the
mouths of their holes, which upon the smell thereof will quickly run unto them.

You shall also kill Rats and Mice with paste made of honey, coperas, Against
Rats and Mice.
and stamped glass mixed together, and laid in places where they haunt most.

Moules will never cast in those gardens where the herb called Palma Christi
does grow either of it own accord, Against (...)
or purposely sown: likewise you shall either kill them or drive them away, if
you lay at their holes mouths a Walnut filled with chafe, brimstone, and
perrosin, and there set it on fire; for by the smoke that will come of this
nut, the Moules will be killed, or else run away: or if you lay in diverse
furrows about the garden a small ball of hemp seed, it will be a let to keep
that there come not any into those grounds out of other, and withal will drive
away those which are there already. There are three ways to take them: the
first is to stand as it were upon your watch about Sun rise, near unto the
place where they have lately cast up the earth; for this is ordinarily the
very hour that they cast in according to their custom, and thus may you
throw them very easily out of their holes with a pic^axe or spade. The second
way is, by causing water to run into the hole where they have newly dug; for
when as they once feel the water, they will not stay to (...) forth and save
themselves upon some green turffe or other, and there you may ^^ther take them
alive or kill them. The third way, Take a live one in March, when they are a
bucking, and put the same into a very deep and hollow basin at night af^^er
Sun set: bury the said basin in the earth up to the brims, that so the
Moules (...) easily tumble into it, when they hear the captive cry in the
night time; for all such as shall hear her (and this kind of cattle is of a
very light hearing) coming ^^eere to their food, they will into the basin one
after another; and by how many more go in, by so much will they make the
greater noise (not being able to get out again) ^^ecause the basin within is
smooth, ^leeke, and slipperie. Some lay garleeke about their holes, or onions,
or leekes, and these make such a smell as that they either drive them away, or
kill them.

All manner of Serpents are driven away with the perfume of Galbanum, Against
(...).
or of harts^^rne, or of the root of lillies, or of the horn of a goats claw,
or of hyssope, or brim^^^^, or pellitorie, or an old shooe-sole. It is good
also to plant in some part of the ^ardens an Elder-tree, or an Ash-tree; for
the flowers of the Elder-trees by their ^^inking smell do drive away Serpents:
and the shade of the ash does kill them: (...) like sort it fares with the
pomegranat-tree, whose shade (as we have said before) ^^riueth away Serpents.
It is good likewise to plant some one or other bough of fern (...) the garden,
because the only smell thereof does drive them away.

You shall drive away scorpions, if you burn some of them in the place whence
(...) would banish them: or if you make a perfume of verjuice mixed with
Galbanum, Against (...).
(...) the fat of a goat: or if you plant in your garden some little Nut-tree.

The perfume of Iuie will cause the Reremouse to abstain flying in your
garden. Against (...).


Frogs will hold their peace and not cry any more, Against (...)
if you set a lantern with a (...) light, upon the side of the water or river,
which compasses the garden. If you (...) in any corner of your garden the gall
of a goat, all the frogs will gather (...) and so you may easily kill them.

CHAP. LXI.
Of the Honie-Bee, the profit rising thereof, and of choosing a place to set
them in.
But if the greatest part of the profit of a farm depend and hang of (...)
keeping of cattle, I dare be bold to affirm, that the (...) thing that can be
kept about a Countrie-house is Bees. Indeed (...) is (...) pa^t^es and care to
be taken in choosing, gathering together, holding, (...) watching and keeping of
them clean in their hiues: but withal, (...) great, rare, and singular a
commodity have we as the wax which we enjoy by (...) Bees: yea what say you
to honey it self, that their admirable work, and no (...) profitable and
pleasant for the use of man? Let it not then seem strange unto you, if we
advise the householder to give care and be careful to keep Bees about his
(...), and therewithal teach him in a few words, what should be the ordering
and go^^^ning of them and their hiues, and withal at what time and hour it is
good ^^^^ther honey and wax.

The householder therefore shall first make choice for the keeping of Be^^ of
some fit and secret place in his Garden of Pleasure, in the bottom of some
(...) it be possible, to the end they may the more easily rise on high to fly
abroad to (...) their food, as also for that when they be laden, they d^^cend
the more easily dow^ward with their load. But let us see to it especially, that
the place be open to (...) South Sun, and yet notwithstanding, neither
exceeding in heat not in cold, (...) temperate: and that the same by hill,
wall, or some other rampart be defended (...) winds and tempests, and so also
at that they may fly their sundry and (...) for to get diuer^^^ie of
pastures, and so again may return to their little cottages laden with their
composition of honey: and again in such a place, as wherein (...) great
quantity of Thyme, Organie, Sauorie, Iuie, Winter Sauorie, vvild (...),
Rosemarie, Sage, Corneflag or Gladdon, Gilloflowres, Violets, white (...),
^^ses, flowre-gentill, Basil, Saffron, Beans, Poppie, Melilot, Milfoile, and
(...) sweet herbs and flowers, wherein there is no bitterness: and in like
(...) ^^^^cient good ^^ore of trees of good smell; as Cypress trees,
Cedar-trees, (...), Pine-trees, Turpentine-trees, Iuie-trees, Masticke-trees;
and also, fruit trees, as ^^mond-trees, Peach-trees, Peare-trees, Apple Trees,
Cherrie-trees, and other (...) besides all this, marvelous great store of
herbs, and those of the rarest and (...) known, and withal such as grow in
well tilled grounds and pastures, for these (...) them to grow rich in good
wax, as the wild Radish, the wild Bell flower, (...) Succorie, and black
Pionie: and besides these, wild Parseneps, and garden ^^^^neps and Carots.
Broom and the Strawberrie-tree are not altogether good (...) make honey: the
Elme-tree causes them to have the flux of the belly, as also the (...) males
or spurges Box makes honey of a bad smell, and which troubles their (...)
that eat it, and yet notwithstanding profitable for them which have the
Falling-(...). But if at any time you shall chance to have any of your stocks
to (...) or to dye, by what chance soever it shall be, you shall then by no
means (...) combe^ more than cleansing them from all manner of filth, and take
of the (...) honey you can get, dama^ke Rose Water, and the juice of Fenell,
and (...) ve^e well together, then with a bunch of Fennel dipped in the same,
first (...) combs very well, and also rub the hiue within therewith, lastly
rub the (...) whereon the stands, with the same that you did the hiue, and
you shall be (...) ^ured that the first swarm that rises either in your own
or in any other man's (...) (if it be not above a mile or two from you) will
knit (without any other (...) king) in that stock.

The place must be closed in with a very strong hedge, or else with good (...)
for fear both of beasts and thieves: for kine and sheep do eat up their
flowers, and ^eat the dew off from the flowers, whereof the Bees should load
them, and which is so well beloved of the little pretty birds, yea and that
also, which falls down at the break of the day in fair weather, and is
purified on the leaves and flowers of the plants, herbs, and wild trees: but
of all tame beasts, there is none that does so damnifie these little pretties
vvretches, as Swine and Goats: for the Goats wast their food, and jumpe against
their houses, yea and oftentimes beat them down: the Swine besides the wasting
and eating up of their food, rubbing themselves against the hiues, do
ouerturne them and the seats whereon they be set: sheep in like man^er loosing
some of their locks of Wool upon the hedges, are cause that the ^illie poor
Bees now and then become entangled therein, when they labor to get their ^^od,
and so leave their carcases for a pledge: hens likewise have a gluttonous
ap^^^tite toward them: Serpents also do sometimes take up their Innes in
their hiues: (...) to take away this casualtie at once and for ever, you must
plant Rue round about (...) in good quantity, in as much as venomous beasts
cannot by any means abide ^^his herb.

Callamint also is very good to be planted for the same purposes near unto
the ^^ues, so is also the hea^ be ^ Angelica or Gentiana, but above all things
you must be ^^^^full to make your hiues exceeding warm, that is to say, of
what stuff soever ^^^ey be made, you shall on the outside daube them better
than two fingers thick with (...) and Cows dung mixed together, and over them a
vvarme coat of long Rye^^aw, covering the hiue from the top to the bottom, and
hanging some what below (...) stone.

Their place also must be far off from the dunghill, common draughts or
issues, (...), marshes, fennes, dropping, dirtie, and myrie places, which might
hurt them (...) ill smells, and for that th^^e pretty beasts are deadly
enemies to all filthiness ^^d uncleanness: but rather let their place of
abode be near some ^^all brook of ^^ter natural and of it self continually
running, or by art in some channel, that will (...) along the water drawn out
of some well or fountain, and this rundle must (...) by the edges stones or
boughs of trees for the bees to light upon.

But whatsoever the place is, whether in the garden of Pleasure or elsewhere
(al^^it we have assigned this to be one of the fruits of pleasure to be
g^thered in the gar^^n of Pleasure) it must not be hemmed in with high walls on
every side: and yet if (...) fear of thieves, you were disposed to raise them
the higher, then you must pearse (...) wall some three feet from the ground,
and work it with small holes, for the bees (...) through at, and some twenty
or thirty paces off to build some little house, if (...) be so disposed, for
him to dwell in who has the charge of looking to them, and (...) also to put
his tools.

CHAP. LXII.
Of the fashion of the Hiues, and the manner of setting them for Bees.
A Place and standing for Bees being thus appointed, the next thing is
according to that fashion which may be most convenient for the Country to make
hiues. Some think, the best are those which are made of quarters of sawne
boards, vvide enough, but not very long: others you must have (...) long and
narrow, that so you may have two sorts of hiues, that is to say, great (...)
small ones: the great ones, for such as are to be employed in the making of
Ho^^ and the other, which are the little ones, for such as are to swarm and
cast: the said (...): being fitted together with nails, but yet so as that one
or two of the boards may be lifted up when the honey is to be taken, or the
said hiues to be (...) the hiues which are best and most convenient next unto
these, are those which are made of Bark and of Cork: and next unto them,
those that are made of (...) and Sallowes, such as we see in this country: the
worst are those which are made (...) baked earth, for they s^ald with heat in
Summer, and freeze with cold in (...). I find those nothing convenient which
are made of dressed straw, or of (...) the one is very subject to the fire,
and the other cannot be translated or (...) one place to another, if need
should require. Yet those of straw may (...) ind^^ed and embraced if they be
well looked unto, because the Bee-gard^^ (...) within the danger of the fire;
only the worst fault they have is this, that (...) very apt to breed within
them, and to destroy the honey as it is gathered, (...) withstanding in such
places where wood is scarce, they are not to be (...) in the cold countries,
because of all ^^ues they are the wa^mest. There are also other hiues which are
made of splinted wands of hassell or such like (...) they are esteemed the best
of all other, and are indeed the sweetest, safest, and (...) to work in;
provided, that they be tr^^med, daubed, and thatched as it (...) said: Now
again in your hiues is a great care to be taken touching the (...) of them,
for although the ancient allow but a cubit wide, and two in length, (...) a
cub^^ and a half not amiss in the bottom, and two and a half in length, for
(...) largeness of a have (if it be not too unreasonable) never does hurt: and
wh^^^s some use to make two sorts of hiues, a greater and a lesser, if you make
but one (...) and those large ones, it will be ^^^rie way as good, for you
shall many (...) to enlarge your hiues, but very seldom or never to straiten
them, for all (...) curios^^^e it self can speak against them that be great
hiues, is but only this, (...) is long in casting, and casts seldom,
whereas, on the contrary part, the (...) small hiue casts more soon, and
far o^ter, yet this is most (...) swarm taken from the large hiue, is better
than two swarms taken from the (...) hiue, being both more strong and more
able for their work, and a great (...) better able to endure Winter, nor is it
the number of stocks which (...) but the quantity of the honey.

Moreover, they must be wide beneath, and narrow above, they (...) wide, and
two cub^^s high, drawn over and dre^t on the outside with (...) mingled
together, that so they may continue the longer: Neither (...) made as some are
flat at the top, and shallow, but ascending pyramid wise, (...) smaller till it
come to the top, for thereby it both sheddeth off the rain, much (...) and
makes the frames of the Bees a great deal stronger. These hiues (...)
crosse-barre within with cloven sticks very well rubbed with sweet flowers,
(...) the which the Bees must fasten their combs; and these crosse-barres must
be (...) places of the hiue, that is, ne^re to the top, and near the bottom.
The setting of hiues.
They must be (...) upon boards fitted for the purpose, and that near unto
some wall, but (...) it, that so there may be space for one to go about them
and make them cleane^^^ (...) e^se you may set them upon some vault of stone or
of brick, to the height of (...) foot, and as much in breadth, laid over with
mortar on every side, and (...) ^o the lizards and serpents, and other noisome
cattle, may not get up and (...) ^ther for to hurt them.

But the best and safest manner of setting of hiues, is to drive three strong
(...) to the ground, so as they may stand of one even and just height, and
about (...) and a half above the ground, then upon these stakes you shall lay
a fair (...) using-stone that may reach every way half a foot or more beyond
the (...), and upon that stone you shall set your hiue, for by that means
neither (...) (...) vermin shall get to annoy the hiues.

Moreover, the hiues shall be so set, as that there may be a distance (...) one
and the other, to the end that when need shall require, to look (...) for the
making of it clean, or any other thing, there may not any occasion (...) to
shake or rogge upon the other, nor yet disturb the adjoining (...) greatly
fear when they are touched, least their workmanship of (...) (which is (...)
weak and easy to be ^poyled) should be stirred or broken. The (...)-part,
whe^^ they go in, must be hanging somewhat forward, that so there may not any
(...) fall into it: and when as any, by hap, shall fall in, that then (...)
may not ^^ay, (...) find that as a ready way out: And for this cause the Hiues
must be covered with small couerings and shelter, besides the shade of leaves
and boughs made (...) mortar of earth for a band; and this will ^exue against
the cold, snow, (...), although heat do not so much hurt unto Bees as cold.
Also you shall (...) binding mortar daube the Hiue as close as may be to the
stone, that if (...) happen to fall thereupon, yet it may by no means sink
into the Hiue, but (...) fall off, and shed upon the earth. And therefore
behind the Bees as they (...) must be some building, or else at the least a
wall, which may be unto them in stead of a (...) bank against the North wind,
and withal, may keep the Hiues in a (...) warmth. And furthermore, Hiues,
though they be thus defended and (...) from the cold by this building, yet they
must be turned upon the East in Winter, rather than upon the South (because if
they were turned toward the South, they would be laid fore upon by excessive
heat in Summer.) to the end, that in the morning the Bees, for their earlier
coming forth, may have the Sun hot upon them, for their better wakening;
whereas otherwise, the cold would make them heavy and slothful: and
therefore the holes by which they pa^^e and repsse, must be (...)-little, that
so they may not give place for the entrance of much cold, and they will be
sufficient great, if to be there may but one Be pass. Again, by this means
it will be provided for, that neither the venomous Stellion, nor the villainous
Beetill, neither yet the Butterflies, shall possibly enter to rob the Hiues and
Honey-combes. And moreover, according to the quantity of Bees in the Hiue, you
must make in the same hatch two or three holes, one somewhat distant from
another, that they may pass in thereby, as also for the deceiving of the
Lizards, which would, by reason of their watch, kill them as they came forth,
if they had but one hole in all. It is further meet, that the shelter under
which the Hiues shall stand, be well appointed for little open windows, which
you shall, stop in Winter with Paper windows, or Tyles, and that in such
order, as that they may be easily opened when the Sun shines, and shut after
that the Bees are returned home into their Hiues: and yet there must be holes
in the said Paper lights, that so they may pass forth along at their pleasure
whither they are disposed. Yet this is a curiosity seldom or never used
amongst (...) masters: and therefore, in mine opinion, if you keep them close,
without any more than their ordinary doors to pass in and out at, it will be
best: and these do^^^ would be made of a fine thin board, or a piece of an old
worn trencher, cut in this manner


and so fixed into the bottom of the Hiue, on that side on which the Sun
most commonly rises: and all these doors you shall keep open from the later
end of April till September: but after, which is the dead time of Winter, you
shall close them up, and keep but one open at the most, and that no bigger,
then a Be may well pass through the same.

CHAP. LXIII.
Of what qualities and conditions the Bees must be.
I Will say nothing in this place of the engendring of Bees, as whether it be
by the coupling of males and females together, (...).
as we see in other kind of creatures, or by the corruption and rotting of the
(...) and (...) of the body of a young Bullock (whereof Virgil speaks)
which are knowledges not greatly belonging to the Husbandman; because, (...)
^red, he finds them in his Hiue without any further industry: yet for
(...), it is doubtless, that Bees are bred of Bees, either of their blowings,
or some other (...) of their generation: but the first is most likely, because
the first combs (...) Be frames, she fills with her young, before she
labor for honey, and these (...) are at first but little bigger than
flye-blowes, white and long, and so (...) produces a shape, which takes life
in the comb, and then departs thence* (...) labors amongst the other
Bees: yet being straitened in the Hiue, and (...) room to lodge their honey
in, as soon as the warmth of Summer comes in, they with one consent depart
the Hiue, and seek out some other place wherein to (...) their labou^^s: and
these are called the swarms, or increase of young store, which the elder
stocks brings forth. But letting pass these digressions of the works (...)
^^ture, I will describe them as they are already engendered; as, what be the
prop^^^^^ of such as are fit and like to make good honey. There are many sorts
of Bees: for some are of a golden color, clear, shining, and bright; others
blackish, rough and hairie some great, some small; some thick and round; and
others spa^e and long; some wild, and some tame. But and if you would buy or
gather together (...) out of the Forest, to take their honey from them, look
and take good heed that they have the marks following; as, that they be little
ones, somewhat long, not hairie nea^, golden colored, shining and sparkling as
gold, spotted above, gentle and loving: for the greater and longer that Bees
be, the worse they are; and if they be (...) they are nothing worth;
notwithstanding, that their choler and malice is easily helped, if that
otherwise they be well marked and fruitful, by seeing themost: for in your often
going to them, they become tame. But because one cannot learnt to (...) and
know if they have all these marks aforesaid, if he see them not: if you buy
them, before you cope for them, (...) that is to be (...).
you must open the Hiues, and see whether they be well ^^plenished, or not: and
if you cannot look up higher into them, then you must go^ by guess and aim,
and consider if there be good store at the mouth, and (...) you hear a great
noise and huzzing within; and further, if they be all (...) at rest: in putting
your mouth to the Hiues mouth, and blowing a good blast (...), you may perceive
whether there be many, or few, by the noise which they will ^^^sently make
when they feel the breath. Or where you shall make doubt of (...) these former
signs, there you shall take the Hiue from the stone, and poise it (...) your
arm, and according unto the weight so you shall chaffer for it: because if you
see it is well reple^^shed with Bees, and also very heavy, then you may
assure (...) self it is an excellent Stock, rich both in Cattle, Wax, and
Honey, and so co^^^quently worth your money: but if it be light, though it
promise never so many (...) yet it is but casual: for either the swarm fell
late in the year, so that they (...) time to get their provisions; or else the
year was unnatural, and too moist, whereby they could not work; or else the
Swarm was weak; any of which will hardly (...) out the Winter following: and
in that respect the buyer ought to be very ^^^^full of his purchase. Now it is
an old received opinion amongst old (...) (how true I leave to your i^dgement)
That those Bees prosper best, which are (...) given, or come by chance: Truly I
would not persuade any friends of mine (...) get Bees at this reckoning, to
go to higher rate, for sure the ^asinesse of the (...) makes the profit to
much the greater, and in that respect the saying is true, but (...)
^^^therwise, I am fully persuaded. Others are of opinion, that stolen Bees
thrive (...) but I would have no man believe it: for I never knew profit in
dishonestie; (...) is it possible that there can be any blessing given unto an
act of so much wrong, (...) the taking away of another man's goods comes to:
yet this has been an old received opinion, and for knowledge, not for
practice, I relate it. It is good to (...) them as near unto your abode as you
can, and not in other Countries (...) your dwelling place: for the change of
their Pastures, Air, and Country, (...) s^onish and amase them: besides also,
the further they are carried, the more they (...) pained in their Hiues. But
and if they cannot be got, but by seeking (...) them, you must convey them,
betwixt place and place, some other way that by highwayes, and that the rather
in the Spring than in Winter, as also very (...). for fear of shaking them.
It will be good to take them before day, and to carry them away at night upon
his neck, or rather it is better that two men should bear them: for in the
day time they must be let rest, and have given unto them some sweet liquor,
that so they may have to feed upon, though they be kept within. And when they
are brought to the place of their abode, you must not open them until the next
day at night, to the end, that after they have rested all night, they may be
the fitter to come forth peaceably in the morning: although yet it were better
not to alter or change any thing about them for the space of three days, but
to stop up the mouth with some thin cloth, until the Sun have shone, and
in the evening after to open them.

There is no such careful heed taken in the choosing of those which are given,
Choice of Bees which are gathered in the Forests.
nor yet of those which have been taken or gathered in the Fields or Forests,
although I could advise men to the contrary, seeing the charges and pains are
as great about the bad as the good. Notwithstanding, when one gathers them,
it is not possible to make such choice as he would: and therefore he must be
content with that which comes next to hand; and yet not to be negligent to
purchase and get the best that may be come by, and to take good heed not to
mingle the good and the bad together, for so the bad would dishonor the good,
and there would be a great deal less honey, because of the bad and slothful
ones which are mingled amongst them. The gathering of them shall be after this
fashion: When you have found any place, by which great numbers of Bees do
pass (which is commonly in Woods and Forests where Herbs do abound, and
Trees of sweet smell, near unto some small River or Fountain) you shall use
all diligence to find out the place of their rest and abode, which you may
easily learn after their having been at water, whether it be near or (...),
by the place whither they torn: then afterward, in the beginning of the
Spring, you must take Balm and Thyme bruised, with other such like herbs
which Bees love, and therewith anoint your Hiue so thoroughly, as that the
smell and juice thereof may stay behind: after that, you shall make the Hiue
clean, and sprinkle it with a little honey: and having thus handled it, you
shall set it down in the Woods or Forests, near unto the Springs, and when it
is full of Bees, you shall carry it home. And thus much of gathering swarms
of Bees.

CHAP. LXIIII.
Of the manner of governing Garden Bees.
THe Lord of the Farm, or Farmer, having provided Feeding, Grounds, Hiues, and
fit places for Bees, as also having bought or gathered good store of Swarms to
replenish his Hiues, shall be careful to afford them a more diligent and
attentive kind of government, and ordering, than any ouer^eer or governor of
other Cattle does allow unto the said Ca^^ell under his charge: the cause is,
for that the Be is more discreet and industrious than any other kind of living
creature: yea, seeing she has a kind of wisdom coming near unto the
understanding of man, therefore she looks for a more careful manner of usage
and carriage toward her from them that are her governors, and therefore
cannot abide them to be mockers, ^^uttish, or negligent, for they cannot abide
to be ^^ggardly or filthily entreated. It must therefore be his condition that
shall have the charge of them, (...).
to consider their manners, and manner of living, and accordingly to frame
himself thereunto in the best sort that may be. They have a King whom they
obey as their Sovereign in all things, accomplishing and fulfilling whatsoever
he shall give them in charge, whether it be to go forth, or to return home,
or to stay within: and they attend him always in companies wheresoever he be:
they comfort him if at any time he be sick, and do keep about him if he
cannot fly: not out of them is negligent and slothful, but every one ready
and quick to any kind of work. Some of them gather the Roses, and bring home
what they get of flo^^^ and sweet smelling leaves, unto those which stay within
the Hiue making Honey: others are busy in making Combs, and building of
little Cabbins; some make honey, and others attend other matters and vocations:
some lay to their hands to the softening of Wax, and temper it so well, as
that making thin leaves thereof, they therewith build up and frame them
Celles and Cloisters: others with great (...) do sunder the gross and drossie
substance, and make ready a place for (...) of Honey. Some of them with their
pain and diligence do keep clean the (...), which notwithstanding are never
defiled by any of their own dung, for (...) flying abroad they avoid their
excrements in flying. Some there are which ordi^^rily do nothing but keep
watch and ward, to the end, that to the uttermost of (...) power they may
withstand whatsoever thing may annoy and hurt them. They (...) out such as die
within the Hiues: but when their King is dead, they stir him not from his
place, but crowding one upon another back about him, it seems that they
lament and mourn, as they make show by their noise and humming, and that (...)
vehemently, as that if their keeper do not look unto it, and take him from
under them, they will suffer themselves rather to die for hunger, than they
will forsake him. To be brief, every one of them is so diligent at his work,
as that they cannot (...) it, that any one should be in their company that
should not be occupied in (...) something: and this is the cause why they drive
away the Drone, which will (...) work, neither is good to any thing else, but
to wast the honey, and (...) it. They hate, above all things, evil sents: they
never fly against the light, nor unto (...) or blood, or fat, but content
themselves with leaves and flowers only, which (...) sweet smelling juice.
They take delight in pleasant and goodly Songs: wh^^^^ (...) comes to pass,
that if they be scattered abroad, they will be called together at this
delightful ringing of some Basin, or small Bells, or in hitting the hands in a
soft and easy sort one against another. To be brief, their fashion and manner
of (...) it were) wonderful in nature: but giving over all further describing
of them, (...) will content my self in delivering the conditions and duties
required about (...) ordering and governing.

CHAP. LXV.
The order of governing Bees all the year long.
Whosoever he be therefore that has the charge and oversight of the Bees, must
be careful first of their pastures (whereof we have made mention before:) then
he shall diligently look unto their Hiues twice or thrice a month, beginning
at the Spring, and continuing till November: (...) there is not that time in
the year wherein they stand not in need of something: and if they be well
ordered, they will continue ten years. They must be opened about the month
of March, and the Honey-combes made clean with a very strong and solid
feather, when as they cannot be come by with the hand, that so, wha^^^^^ filth
is gathered there in the time of Winter, may be cast out, and the Spiders
(...), which spoil all the Combs, may be taken away: afterward he shall
smoke (...) all with Ox dung burnt; for this dung, by a certain affinity,
is grateful and well liked of Bees. But in the mean time, before he handle
the Hiues, he shall be well ^^uised, that the day before he have not had to
deal with his wife; that he have not been drunken; and that for the present
he come not near unto them, without being washed, made clean, and well
apparrelled: in like manner he must (...) from all meats that are of a strong
smell, as are all salt meats, and sowsed (...), and all things being strong of
sent, as Garlic, or Onions, or such like things: and contrariwise, let him
carry in his mouth something that has a good smell, for by this means they
will love him so well, as that he may handle their Hiues at his pleasure, and
the little pretty birds will never hurt or annoy him. At the same time (in as
much as then they begin to multiply and increase, and to cast their swarms,
which so soon as they can fly, desire nothing more than to fly away, and not
to abide with the old ones, and much less to become subject unto them) it will
be meet to keep watch very diligently, and that from after the morning tide
is past, till two hours after noone, that so they may not fly unto some other
place. Wherefore if you can discern and spy out their Kings, Kings of Bees.
it will be good to take their wings from them, if they make show of themselves
oftentimes, and seem as though they would fly together with their company;
as also to cast dust upon them, or else water, for by these ^eanes they will be
kept from going away: so that then they will not go out of their own yard,
nor out of the limits of their own kingdom; neither will they suffer their
troop to go far from them: or else it will be good, after that they are
come forth, to astonish and occupy their minds with the sounding of Basins, or
of the ^^ards of broken Pots, ringing forth softly, in as much as by how much
you ^ound the stronglier, by so much they mount the higher into the air, and
stray the further off: but and if it be a gentle and low sound, they in like
manner do stay and keep themselves near at hand and below. And if they
proceed to fasten themselves upon the next branch of the tree, as a (...) of
Grapes do hang upon their branch, you must gather them with your hand, or with
a trowell, into a basket anointed with (...) of swee^ Balm, or some drops of
Honey, and after set it on the row with the other baskets: or else, to make a
shorter dispatch, he may cut the bough or branch of (...) tree, and put it
very softly into all these Bees, which are within the dressed Bas^^^ or Hiue,
the mouth of the same having been first sprinkled with Wine: Then, ^^ter this,
it must be set upon a board upon the ground all an end, the upper part be^^ng
kept to close, as that the Bees may go in no where but at the place which is
open underneath. But and if this swarm of Bees, or little Birds, be got into
any hole or (...) of the bole and body of a tree, then carry thither a Hiue
well anointed in e^^^rie place, as also at the hole or mouth, with very sweet
smelling herbs, and draw (...) over this hole and entrance of hollownesse, to
the end you may inuit them to a (...) with the delightsomenesse of this smell,
and with the better contentment to g^oe in to abide and dwell there. If they
rest themselves in a place where you cannot ^^me to them with your hand, and
such a one as is withal somewhat vn^^^^t to be ^ealt with, then take a pole,
and tie to the end of it a Hiue sprinkled with good Wine, and hold it near
unto this clew of Bees, and thus they will not fail to go ^^to it: then
carry them near unto the Hiues, for no doubt but they will go up and (...)
themselves in a short time. Or else, which is the best, he shall hold, all
rea^^ie, a new Hiue to receive them, when he sees that the young Kings shall
be ^^me forth with their young train, which within a day or two will all be
come ^^gether at the mouth of the old stock, and show by sufficient signs and
tokens, ^^at they are desirous of some place of their own, and peculiar unto
themselves: (...) then if he do give them one, they will rest contented
therewith, and abide ^^erein.

It is to be known when this young host will come abroad, by the noise and
hum^ing which they will make in the Hiue three days before that they purpose
to come ^broad, as if a camp of warlike men would rise up and remove: and for
to know ^hen they make this noise, he must lay his ^are at evening to ^uerie
Hiue, that so he ^ay hear the noise and humming, when they make any.

And yet indeed this noise and humming is sometimes a sign and token of some
^^ght or strife raised betwixt them and some other swarm: (...).
which must be well pre^^^ted; for otherwise by such civil wars and deadly
fights all the whole troop ^^d company will quickly be overthrown and
brought to nothing. This intended ^^ombat is taken up with a bowl of cute or
boiled wine (...) unto them, or else some honied wine, or other such liquor,
which by his sweetness is familiar to Bees, (...) will appease their furi^.
But yet and if you perceive that these ski^mishes are not (...) ended, To kill
the Kings of the Be^^.
you must make have to kill the Kings of the Bees, which are the cause of such
seditions and tu^^lts. The manner to kill them, is to ob^erue when the whole
(...) comes out of the Hiue, and is already ^^^led upon some bough of some
tree, and then to mark if the whole swa^e of Bees do hang after the manner of
a (...) of Grapes upon the branch; for and if they be ^o, it is a sign that
there is but one Ki^^^ or and if that there be more, that yet they agree amongst
the^^selues, and there^^^ you shall let them alone till they be in their Hiues.
But and if the whole troop be divided into many clewes, or round bunches, you
need not then doubt but (...) there are many Kings, and that they do not
agree together. And then where you shall ^ee them gathered most on a heap, and
in greatest troops, there you may search and look for the King, anointing
your hand with the juice of sweet Balm, or with Honey, that so they may not
she away when you shall touch them; and seek thus amongst them until you have
^ound the King, which is the author of all this (...) whom you must kill and
cast out. And thus you may di^^^ne and find out the Kings from the commons: The
Kings are somewhat greater and longer, The marks and signs of the Kings of the
Bees.
their legs (...) straight and high, their wings less, but of a fair
color, and neat, smooth, and polished, without hair and stings, except
perhaps you will say, that a certain gro^^^ and thick hair which they have
upon their bellies is their sting, wherewith notwithstanding they never sting
to do^ any harm. Some Kings are found to be blac^ and hairie, and ghalliy to
behold, and these are of the worst sort of Kings, and must therefore be killed,
notwithstanding that they move no war, nor stir up (...) coals amongst the
young swarmed brood. Thus you see there is no case-to be (...) with maruelling,
when you behold these small birds to be so be^^^ced and enraged with love
toward their King, that for to de^end him, they willingly cast and expose
their own lives into open hazard against all his enemies which come to (...)
him, besides other incredible obey^ance, which they let not continually to
(...) unto him.

The Hiues that shall be made ready to receive the new swarms, must be rubbed
with the herbs before named, and sprinkled with drops of Honey, the more
(...) to cause them to keep therein. At this time of the Spring it likewise
som^^^ comes to pass, that by reason of the hardness of the Winter past, or
of (...) ^ase and sickness, there is great wan^ and scarsitie of Bees in old
stocks, and this (...) be remedied by putting a new swarm into that Hiue, and
killing the young (...) that so his subjects may content them^^^ies to live
peaceably under the old. But (...) if you have not a swarm, then the next way
is to put the troops of two or three (...) diminished stocks into one,
bedewing or sprinkling the same before with some (...) liquor, and after to
shut them up in the same Hiue, and fet something within it for them to eat,
until they be well wonted unto it, and so to keep them three days (...) up,
giving them only a little fresh air at some^^all and little holes. And if it
come to pass, that the King of the old Hiue, which we shall have le^t alive,
do die, (...) you must choose them another King from out of the other Hiues
(where there be (...) nie) and give them him to govern. And in case that
means to do this do fail, (...) that there be not any purpose or
inclination to take new swarms from other (...), you must then break down
all the little chambers and lodgings of their (...), Kings, to the end that the
young swarms, which shall be together in the old (...), may not betake
themselves to their first haunt, and still abide and continue vnd^ (...) old,
but their new King and Captain: and this they must of necessity dot, be^^^
compelled through want of their natural and chief Governors, and by (...)
themselves with their Ancients.

In rainie weather, continuing, long, Bees not being able to go out of their
(...) to seek pastures, and to bring home food unto their young brood, you
must not (...) to help them with some provision of Honey, until such time as
they shall be (...) to she abroad to get their own living, and to work their
Honey-combe of: for otherwise you shall quickly make an end of them, as it has
been oftentimes seen to come to pass.

All the Summer they must gather Honey (whereof we will speak hereafter) and
at the same time, every ten days, their Hiues must be opened and smoaked
with Ox dung, and afterward be cooled, by warring the empty parts of the
Hiue, and ^asting thereinto cool water: and likewise be made clean, and all
grubs taken out of them, if any be therein: and after this, let them roll and
tumble themselves upon the flowers: and then you must not take any thing from
them, that so you may (...) annoy and become redious unto them too o^t, and so
cause them to fly away in despair. In some fair day, about the end of
Autumn, you must make clean their Hiues, looking that it be ho^ also and
calm: and if at this time there be found ever a Comb ungathered, and not
pluck^ away, which sometime was lean and thin, you must not therefore kill
the Bees, as many do: but rather, to save them, you must sprinkle it with a
brush dipped in honied water, or in milk, having driven them together on a heap
with the smoke, keeping them close and shut up after this in their Hiue: for
all the Winter you may not open nor touch them, but keep them close within,
till the Sunne-beames break forth again for their comfort, and that well
covered, stopping without, whatsoever clifts and holes, with Mortar and Neats
^ung mingled together, in such sort, that there be nothing left open, but only
a way for them to pass in and out thereat: And also this must be carefully
looked unto, tha^ although their Hiues do already stand under covert, yet
that further, they be covered again with stubble and boughs, and so much as
possibly may be, kept* ^^om Cold and Winds, which they fear and abhor more
than any other thing. You must fore^ee likewise, that neither Rain nor Snow
may do them hurt: and (...) make provision of store of the juice of sweet
Balm, honied water, ^ugred wa^^r, milk, or other liquor which may be ^it and
convenient for them; in which liquor you must steep pure and clean Wool,
whereupon the Be sitting, may suck^ ^ut the juice or liquor that is therein.
And to the end that they may not endure hun^er in the Winter, and that they may
not need to eat the Honey up that they have ^ade, and which is left untaken
from them, it will be good to give them, at the doors (...) their Hiues, in
little pipes or troughes made of Reeds, Elder, Iron, or Lead, so ^^repared, as
that the Bees may not drown themselves when they go about to ^^rinke, some
dry figs, stamped or te^^ pered in water or boiled Wine: It will be ^ood
likewise to give them some Rai^^ns out of the Frail, stamped and sprinkled
^ith water: or else some Corans, stamped with very good Wine, and boy led
toge^^her: or else some dry Aprico^s, stamped with Honey, and mixed with
boiled water: (...) of Pancakes made of very ripe Corans, of the best Figs
and boy^^d Wine mixed together: or else to cast amongst them, in at the door
of the Hiue, some sweet liquors, with Siringes, as Milk, and especially Goats
Milk, (...) the best of all the rest, to bear out the scarcity and
poorness of the time, vn^^ill the Spring approach.

In the Combs there are found Drones like unto Bees, but greater, which
(al^hough they be unprofitable, because they gather no food or sustenance, but
eat ^p that which others bring in) yet do serve for some thing; for they hatch
the ^oung brood, whereupon come the small Bees: and therefore you must not kill
them all, but keep a certain number of them, to the end that the Bees may not
^row ^^onthfull and idle.

CHAP. LXVI.
Of the remedies of the diseases that Bees are subject unto.
THe Be is subject unto the Plague, The diseases of Bees.
in which case there is no more ^^^^raigne a medicine for them, than to carry
them far off. Again, they are troubled with the flux of the belly in the
beginning of the Spring, when the spourges are in the flower, and the
Elme-trees bring (...) their seed, where they are given to feed greedily, and
with great stomachs, as (...) fasted all Winter: and they be so desirous to eat
of these new and young flowers, as some folk are to eat of new Apples; and
thereupon they die quickly, if it be not speedily foreseen: in such sort, as
that in some places of Itali^, where the (...) do^ grow upon plants, the Bees
cannot continue or endure long. For this cause, you (...) quickly help this
flux of the belly with the rindes or seeds of Pomegran^^^ powned and ^^arced,
and afterward mixed with Honey, and sprinkled with good (...) Wine: or else
with Damask or Languedo^ Raisins dried, powned, and mi^^ed with good sweet
Wine, or with honied water, wherein has been boiled Rosem^^^: or else with
figs of Marseilles, which have been boiled a long time in wat^^: all these
gine them in pots or pipes of wood, to the end they may eat and drink thereof.

Bees are sometimes sick, when as eu^rie year continually there is great
s^ored flowers: for the Bees thereupon labor rather to make great store of
Honey th^^^nie young Bees; and so it comes to pass, that many die of
excessive toil and travail: and further, because those which remain are not
supplied with young and new store, they likewise die all of them. Wherefore,
when in the Spring time the meadows and fields are filled with flowers, it will
be good every third day to (...) up the places whereat they g^e in and out of
their Hiues, leaving only af^^^ little holes, but such as the Bees cannot get
out at, that so they may be (...) from making of Honey; and that so also, when
they perceive that they cannot fill up (...) their Waxen chambers with Honey,
they may apply themselves to fill (...) young Bees.

If Lice or Grubs, Lice and Grubs.
which are engendered of the filth in their Hiues, do (...) you must smoke them
with a bough of the Pomegranat or wild Fig Tree.

They fall into a Consumption, Heat, or Cold.
and become all dried away, after having endu^^^ very great heat or cold. And
it is evidently perceived: for it is often seen^, that (...) bears out of the
Hiue the body of another that is dead, and that some of those (...) are
within, and alive, become all pensive and sad, after the manner of a gen^^^^
mo^^ning: which when it happens to them, they must have meat made of Honey
boiled and beaten with Galls, or dry Roses.

You shall stay the brawles betwixt swarms, Fighting (...)
if you cast upon them some (...) dust, or boiled wine, or honied wine, or
other like liquor, which by his (...) common and familiar unto Bees.

The Bees that are cruel and rigorous, (...) and (...) Bees.
will become tame and gentle, if you (...) go amongst them oftentimes.

Sometimes there is such store of Honey-combs made, Corrupted Comb^s.
as that for want of (...) stand empty: whereupon it comes, that they rot
and destroy the Honey by (...) rottenness; and the spoil of the Honey causes
the Bees to die. For to rem^die^ this you must put two swarms into one Hiue,
or else cut away the put^ified Comb^^ (...) a very sharp and well whe^^ed
tool.

The Butter^^es, A^ain? Butterflie^.
which use sometimes to hide themselves in the Hiues, and (...) the Bees, will
themselves be killed, if when Mallows are in flower, and they ab^^ding in
great quantity, there be set amongst the Hiues, in the night season, a high
and narrow mouthed Tinne-pot, with a burning Light in the bottom of (...) for
presently all the Butterflies will hasten and fly thither unto the light, and
flying about it, will burn themselves: for they cannot easily, from a narrow
bottom, fly right up, neither yet shun and avoid the light, in getting
themselves far off from it, seeing they are forcibly kept within a narrow
scantling, the pot it self being not wide, but narrow.

To kill Drones, which doing no good, Against Dr^^es.
devour the Honey: When it shall be near night, water the couerings of some
vessel, which you shall se^ neer^e unto the Hiues, with water; the Drones will
all of them fly unto those couerings to cool themselves and quench their
thirst, which they have gotten by eating too much honey, and then it will be an
easy thing to kill them: and as for ^^inging of you, you need not fear it,
for they have no sting at all.

CHAP. LXVII.
Of the manner of gathering Honey.
FOr the gathering of Honey, about which there is so much labor taken
continually, The gathering of Honey.
it is chiefly effected at three several times of the year, as shortly after
the Spring, all the Summer, and in the beginning of Autumn. But there cannot
any prefixed day or certain time be appointed for the same, seeing it
depends of the finishing of the Combs: for and if you draw-them out before
they be thoroughly wrought, the Bees grow malecontented, and cease to work any
more, by reason of the thirst which they endure. The time of gathering Honey is
known, by the Bees their no more making of a great noise, but ^^rning the same
into a soft and low buzzing: as also, if the holes which are above in the
vessels be stopped with Wax: if the Bees drive out the Drones, which are like
unto Bees, but a greater beast, and altogether unprofitable, and without taking
of any pain; for they gather no food, but eat up that which others bring in.
The hour of taking the Combs, is commonly in the morning, for it is not good
to disquiet and trouble them in the heat of the day: and this must be done with
two iron instruments or knives; the one whereof must be long and narrow, for
the cutting away of the Combs; and the other, for the scraping away and
pulling out of the filth that shall be fallen into them. It will do well to
moisten these two tools oftentimes in water, that so the Wax may not stick
unto them, and that the Bees which shall be abiding within, may not be hurt.
The vessels may not altogether be emptied, and so all the fruit taken out, but
there must be left remaining (as it were) the tenth part, or (as others say)
the fifth part, as well in the Spring, as in Summer; but in Autumn two parts
must be left, and the third only taken, for by this means you shall not much
discontent them: and withal, you shall leave abundantly behind for them to
eat and feed upon. The gathering of Honey most commonly used, and most
reasonable, is but to take the most ripe Combs, and those which are best
perfected, and withal, of them but two thirds. If the Hiue be half full of
Honey, then there is but the half of that to be taken away: and if it be under
half full, then there must be taken from it with discretion proportionably.
Furthermore, you must make them come forth with the smoke of Neats dung, or of
a Wolfes bladder, or Galbanum or wild Mallows; and with the juice of this
herb must he be anointed which shall gather the Honey, to keep him that he
be not stung: or to make him bold, let him take a mask with a part of
Spectacles set in it to give him light to see, and let him also have a Linen
cloth, close wrythed about his neck and head, and gloves upon his hands, for
to geld and handle them to his good contentment: or, which is better, let him
have a Linen hood to compass and go over his whole face, made of a most fine
and close-wrought Kall, like unto Net-worke, for by this means a man shall see
at his pleasure that which he goes about to do, and yet be free from the
danger of the Bees stinging. But notwithstanding that you take from the (...)
their work of Honey and Wax, yet you must not kill them, nor drive them (...)
away, if it be possible, but to keep them for to draw yet more profit out of
them afterward: and when as yet there is no hope of good of them by reason of
their (...) even then you must not use any ungrateful (...), in stead of
(...), and ^ur^he^ously massacre them. In the Country of Tuscanie, in
remembrance of the bountifulnes^e of this poor cattle, it is forbidden upon a
great penal^^ to kill Bees, so long as possibly by any means they may be kept
alive. It will be good therefore, for their safeguard, at such times as their
Combs are to be gelded, (...) them in such sort, as that they may withdraw
themselves safely into some (...) toward the midst of the covering of their
Hiue, and not to come forth or (...) you shall make them come forth, the
covering of their Hiue taken away, and a (...) to the mouth of the Hiue, and
after smoking the Bees from underneath, for so they will betake themselves
into the said sack, which must be fast tied and laid upon the ground, until
that the Honey be taken away at leisure. After this, the Hiue or (...) must be
see to the mouth of the sack, and the covering put upon it again, (...) so
the Bees may return and enter into their house again, to begin their work
(...) or else see near unto the Hiue which you mean to geld, another empty
Hiue, which shall be per^umed and hung about with sweet smelling herbs, and
it shall have (...) hole in the cover as big as ones hand made round, to the
end that Bees may (...) at it, having made an end of the building of their
Combs, even to the top, and downward more than the half part of the Hiue: by
this means you shall take away, at ease, such Honey as is in the Hiue, and not
loose any part of it, seeting that it may be taken forth at any hour that
you are disposed, without hurting of the Combs, and without molesting or
troubling of the Bees, in smoking of (...) cause them to gather together upon
heaps into some corner, or else by (...) them to fly some whither else. The
Combs being taken away, shall be carried to the place where you mean to make
the Honey, and stopping the windows of (...) place, preutent the coming of
Bees thereinto; for they will busily seek the (...) that they have lost, and,
if they find it, wast and consume it. And ther^^^^, to cut off all means of
entrance for them into this place, you must there raise (...) which may drive
away them that shall assay to come in. And this smoke would be made of green
Wood, wet Hay, Rosemarie, or such like, which sends (...) sharp and piercing
fume.

Now, though this be the opinion of the ancient Bee-masters, yet (...) has
taught us in these later times, that it is much better utterly to kill and
(...) those stocks from whom you intend to take your Honey, than thus to rob
(...) for it is certain, that these Bees, thus spoiled of their wealth, and
wanting (...) flowers, and other means whereby to renew their stores again,
doc forthwith become robbers themselves, and spoil all the neighbour-Hiues
which are (...) them; as also they breed a civil war and much slaughter
amongst other (...) and therefore it is better utterly to destroy them in this
sort; either at the closing of the night, when the Sun is set, and (...) Be
come home, you shall (...) the Hiue from the stone, and sowse it into a sow of
water, and there let it (...) all the Bees are drowned, and then take out the
Honey and the Wax: or else (...) Fusse-ball, or some sharp smoke, smoke them
to death, and then take their (...) and dispose it at your pleasure.

CHAP. LXVIII.
Of the making of Honey and Wax.
YOu must make your Honey the same day that you have taken out your Combs,
although they be warm and somewhat hot. To make Honey and (...)
And for the doing hereof, the Combs must be set one against another in a
Willow or Ozier basket, wrought very clear, and fashioned like an Hypocras
bag, after that you have once cleansed away from the Combs the feed of young
brood, and all manner of other filth: and when the Honey shall be run through
the basket into a basin that shall be set under it, you must put it into an
earthen vessel, which must for some small time be left open, till it have done
boiling and casting sorth of his froth by staying in the same: this done, the
pieces and lumps of Combs shall be taken out of the basket, and pres^ed, and
there will Honey come out of them, but not so good as the former, which must be
put by it self, that so the pure, and that which is indeed very excellent,
may not be corrupted thereby. After that the remainder of the Combs is
thoroughly pressed out, and washed in sweet water, they shall be cast into a
Copper vessel with some water, and so set upon a soft fire to melt. This Wax
thus melted, shall be strained, letting it run out into water, and then being
melted again, with water you shall make it up into what form you will.

CHAP. LXIX.
of the marks of good Honey.
THe good Farmer makes gain of every thing, and by whatsoever he can
perceive necessary for the inhaunsing of his house. Now I dare boldly affirm,
That there are few things found about a Country house, which are of greater
increase and advantage than Honey. Again, we see what traffic the Spaniards
make with it: who, through the barrenness of their Country, having no other
means to enrich themselves, do keep a great number of Bees, to make much
Honey of them. In like manner do the in^^abitants about Narbone; who send
amongst us great quantities of white Honey, which we make serve for our use.
But I would advise such as make a traffic ^^hereof, that they would not
gather ani^ Honey but that which is good: for the ^abour and cost is no less
to nourish and keep bad Bees, than to keep those which are good.

The marks therefore of good Honey are, The mark^ of good (...)
that the Honey be of a yellow color, pleasant smell, pure, neat, and shining
in every part, sweet and very pleasant to the taste: and yet notwithstanding
this, having a certain kind of acrimonie, or sharpenes^e: of an indifferent
consistence betwixt thick and thin, hanging together in it self, in such
sort, as that being lifted up with the fingers end, it keeps together in
^aner of a direct line, without any breaking asunder; for it should argue it
self to be either too thick or too thin, if it should not hang together, but
break, or else to have some other unequal mixture: It must not be long in
boiling, and yielding but small store of scum when it does boil: above all it
may not exceedingly smell of Thyme, though some (as I my self do know) do
greatly esteem of such. And that which is gathered in the Spring, or Summer,
is much better than that which is gathered in Winter. White Honey is not of
less goodness than that which is of a golden yellow, so that there accompany
it the other marks of goodness, (...)
such as that is which the Spaniards and men about Narbona do^ send unto us,
being very white, and (...) firm and hard, and therefore better, without all
comparison, than any other (...) of Honey.

Honey the newer it is, New Honey* Old Wint.
the better it is, clean contrary to Wine, which is more commended when it is
old than when it is new. This also is to be marked in Honey (...) as Wine is
best at the mid-Caske, and Oil in the ^op, so Honey is best toward the
bottom: Honey is best at the bottom.
for by how much Honey is more firm and heavy, so much it is the (...) as
being the sweeter.

The use of Honey serves for many things: it prolongeth life in old folk^s,
The virtues of ^oney.
and in them which are of cold complexion: that it is so, we see, that the Be,
which is (...) little creature, ^eeble, and weak, lives nine or ten years
by her^eeding upon Honey. The nature of Honey is to resist corruption and
pu^^ifaction: The term of the Bees life.
and this is the cause why Gargarismes, to cleanse and mundifie the ulcers of
the mouth, are (...) therewith. The dis^^lled water of Honey.
Some make a distilled water of Honey, which causes the (...) is fallen away
to grow again, in what part of the body soever it be.

CHAP. LXX.
The manner of preparing diverse sorts and diverse compositions of Honey.
THere is such excellent virtue in Honey, as that is preserves and defends
things from pu^^ifaction and corruption: which is the cause, that when any are
disposed to keep Roots, Fruits, Herbs, and especially Juices, it is
ordinarily accustomed to conserve them is Honey: whereupon it comes, that we
use these names, Honey of (...), Roses, Rosemarie-slowers, Damaske-Rai^^^^,
Myrtles, Anacard^^, Buglosse, and such like, which are made with juice and
Honey; of which only we will (...) in this place.

The Honey of Violets, (...)
Roses, Buglosse, Mercury, and Rosemari^^flowers, (...) all prepared after one
sort: Take of the juice of new Roses a pound, of pure (...) Honey, first boiled
and (...), ten pounds, boil them all together in a Caldron upon a clear
fire: when these boil, add unto them of new Roses, yet (...), cut in sunder
with Scizars of Sheares, four pound; boil them all until the juice be
wasted, stirring them often with a stick: this being done, strain them and
put (...) in an earthen vessel for to be kept, for it is better and better
after some time. Otherwise, and better, and ofter used: Stamp in a Mortar new
Roses, add like (...) of Honey, and set them in the Sun the space of three
months, afterward strain them, and boil the liquor strained out to the
thickness of Honey. Otherwise, (...) equal parts of Honey, and of the
manifold infusion of new Roses, boil them all (...) the consistence of a
Syrrup; look how many times the more double the in^usion of the Roses is, by
so much the Honey of Roses will be the better: and this same is (...) most fit
to be taken at the mouth, as the first and second are for Clysters. Or (...)
take new raw Honey before it ever boil, or having but lightly boiled, and
(...) thereto some quantiti^ of sweet water, red Roses that are new, and newly
(...) in the shadow, their white taken away, and a third part of Honey, put
them all together in a glasse-vessell, or earthen one, well glassed, which
being close stopped, shall be set in the Sun, and stirred every third day:
and thus you may fitly prepare Honey of Roses and Rosemarie-flowers a great
deal better than after any of the (...) ways.

Honey of Myrtles is made with a pound of the juice of Myrtle-tree, (...)
and (...) pound of Honey, all boiled together upon a small fire.

The honey of damaskes raisons is thus made: Take damask raisons cleansed from
their stones, Honey of (...)
steep them four and twenty hours in warm water, and after boil them to
perfection: when they have thus boiled, strain them through a strainer very
strongly, and after that, boil them again to the thickness of (...).

Mel Anacardinum is thus made; Stamp a certain number of the fruit Anacardia,
Honey of the fruit Anacardia.
and after let them lie to steep for the space of seven days in vinegar, but
on the eight boil them to the consumption of the one half; afterward strain
them through a linen cloth: the juice that is strained out, must be boiled
with like quantity of honey.

The manner of making honied water: Take one part of honey, and six parts of
rain water, Honied water.
put all together in a little barrel, well pitched and s^opt above, that (...)
no (...) at all may enter in at it: afterward, set it out in the hottest
weather that is, as in Iulie, but out of all rain, and leave it so about (...)
days, but with such prou^^o as that you turn the barrel every eight days,
to the end that the Sun may work on all sides of it. To make it more
effectual, and of greater virtue, it will be good in quincetime, to mix
therewith the juice of quinces, in such quantity as that there may be for
e^erie pound of honey, a quarter of a pound of juice of quinces. Some before
they put the honey and water together into the barrel, boil them together
upon a clear fire, or upon coals without smoke, they scum the hon^e, and
boil it to perfection, which they gather by casting an egg into it, which if
it swim above, then the honey is sufficiently boiled, but and if it sink, then
it is not boiled enough.

The Polonians, Musco^^es, and Englishmen, A wine made of (...) and water.
do make a drink having the (...) of a honied water, which is far more
pleasant, and more wholesome than many mighty wines, and it is called Mede.
They take one part of honey, and six parts of rain, river, or fountain water,
they boil them together, and in boiling them, take off the seum very
diligently, and continue the boiling till the half of the whole be consumed:
being cooled, they put it up in a wine vessel, and after add unto it ^ix
ounces of the barme of ale or beer, to make it purge and boil up, and withal
they hang in the vessel a nodule or knot full of (...) pepper, ginger, grains
of paradise and cloves: also they cast into the vessel a handful of
Elder-tree-flowres: they set the vessel in the Sun in Summer time, for the
space of forty days, or in Winter they set it in some cave under the ground.
This kind of honied water is very so^^^aigne against (...) agues, (...)
dispositions of the body, diseases of the brain, as the falling sickness,
apoplexy, and palsy, in which cases wine is forbidden.

The country men of Prouence, (...) of honey.
and the Italians, do^ make marchpaines of honey and almonds after this manner:
Take white honey three pound, and three whites of eggs, beat all together with
a wooden pestill in a basin, till it grow unto the color of milk: afterward
see the basin upon a fire of coals, stirring all together very carefully with
the pestill, till such time as it become somewhat thick: then put thereto
sweet almonds stamped and fried, such quantity as shall be needful for the
making of it of some good consistence: being yet hot, power it our upon some
marble or polished table: make up your marchpaine thereof, and it will be
singular good for them to eat which are in a consumption, as also to procure
spitting.

CHAP. LXXI.
Of the marks of good Wax, and the manner of preparing diverse sorts of Wax.
GOod Wax must be of a very yellow color, The (...) of good Wax^.
smelling sweet, far, light, pure, (...) close, neat, and purified from all
filth. It is the ground of other Waxes, called artificial, as being by art
made into diverse colors, as black, red, green, and white Wax.

Black Wax Black wax*
is made with ashes of burnt paper; green, Green wax.
by putting (...) unto it; red, Red wax.
by putting the root of Alkanet unto common Wax, or the powder of Cinnabrium;
but white Wax White wax.
is made many ways, but for the most part, after this sort and manner: Melt
Wax in some vessel ^it for the purpose, afterward (...) it from all manner of
superfluities through a strainer; being thus strained, (...) a soft coal fire,
in a great skellet or vessel of copper, to keep it liquid and in (...) close
thereby you shall have one or two great barrells, made after the manner of
(...) ^ubs, full of water newly drawn out of the well, in which you shall wet
(...) that are round, flat, and half finger thick, fashioned like round coue^
or (...) of pots, and in the midst they shall be made fast to a little stick
or wooden (...) manner of a graspe, by which one may handle them: you shall
dip the same ((...) well wet in water) in the vessel where the Wax shall be
melted, and p^e^^^ly after you shall pull them out full of Wax; and put them
in the water ^ubs, where the (...) will abide, that shall have cleaued unto
them: you shall gather this wax together, and spread every piece by it self
upon hurdles covered with linen cloth, in the (...) heat of the Sun, in the
month of Iulie, and upon these you shall leave it till it become white. In the
mean time, while it shall thus lie in the Sun, if it happen (...) the heat
of the Sun be so vehement, that it melte^h the wax so sp^ed upon the hurdles,
you must water and sprinkle it often with cool water, and by the same mea^^
also defend it from the Bees, which will fly thither from all corners to (...)
out the honey. Otherwise, boil the wax in water so o^t, as until that you see
it (...) it this manner of whitening wax is not so sure, nor of so easy
charges as the (...), for the often melting of the Wax, does wast it very
much: but the drying of it in the Sun, brings no great loss, as you shall
best find after proof and trial made.

To make ^earing candle: Take two pound of new Wax, a pound of good (...) and a
quarter of a pound of turpentine; mix them, and make searing Wax.

The end of the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK OF THE COVNTRIE FARM.
The Orchard, or Green plot.
CHAP. I.
Of the differences of Orchards, or Green plots, and the enclosing of the
Fruit-Garden.
THere are three sorts of Orchards or Green plots, the one (otherwise called
an Arbor) contrived with great banks, and this is pointed out and provided in
a field covered with green grass, and a fountain in the midst of it, and
wrought-into d^uers plain and even plots and branches, consisting of lo^ts,
which are sustained and borne up with carpentrie or frames of timber, under
which a great number of people may sit covered over head. Of this sort I have
seen at Basil and (...) other places in Germany: and, to ^it a place for
this manner of green plot, it (...) requisite that it be cleansed from all
manner of stones and weeds, not so much as (...) roots left undestroyed; and
for the better accomplishing hereof, there must boy^^ng water be powered upon
such ends of roots as s^aying behind in the ground can^^ot be well pulled up,
and afterward the floor must be beaten and trodden down (...) ^ightily; then
after this, there must be cast great quantity and store of turfes of earth
(...) of green gra^^e, the bare earthie part of them being turned and laid
upward, (...) afterward daunced upon with the feet, and the beater or
pauing-beetle lightly (...) over them, in such sort as that within a short time
after, the gra^^e may begin (...) peep up and put forth like small hairs; and
finally, it is made the sporting green (...) for Ladies and Gentlewomen to
recreate their spirits in, or a place whereinto ^^hey may withdraw themselves
if they would be solitary and out of ^ight.

The second sort of green plots is that which our ancient Frenchmen, who
first ^^rote our Roman discourses and histories, have taken and used for a
place of (...) for Princes, and was called in a^ncient time after the manner of
a sojou^^ing (...) abiding place, The (...) place.
but now by the name of a beautiful prospect. Which beside the ^^ately
building singularly contrived in partitions, The beautiful prospect.
diversity of works, and most ^^aire windows, compassed in with goodly water
ditches, ^ed from continual run^^ng Springs, does contain an ^^ner and base
Court with gardens for pleasure and fruits, with underwoods, warrens,
fishponds, and whatsoever goodly and beautiful thing is wont to stand about
princely palaces.

The third sort of green plots, is that which we intend to trim up in this
place, and it may supply the place of the fruit garden, for a house respecting
and looking to thrift, and to keep a household for husbandry: such a one as we
have here (...) to furnish and set out every way well appointed, and in which
we are (...) to regard profit, joined with a mean and moderate beauty and
co^^^nesse, than any unnecessary ^umptuousnesse.

Therefore to go on in our designed course and intended plot, this place
require^h, The Fruitgarden,
that next after the kitchen and flower gardens, with their appurten^^^^, we
make ready and trim up a green plot for fruit trees, containing in it as much
ground as both the other gardens, and that without any manner of other a^^eys
of (...) beewixt it and the gardens, or in the midst of it self, than such
distance and spare, as must of necessity be betwixt the trees, and whereof we
will speak more (...), and without also whatsoever other husbandri^, grass,
or other things, whereof you might hope to make some pro^it underneath, whether
of hay, or any such other thing which would grow there: for the fruit tree
would not have his sustenance pur^oyned or kept from it, by the ^^lling of
other plants which might be ^eared about it, neither does it crave to be kept
vva^me in Winter time, but only tilled and ordered according to his seasons,
because that otherwise it would yield no profit unto the owner thereof.

The situation of the orchard would be upon some hill top, or some little hill,
rather than in a plain ground: for besides that such seats have better air,
more ple^sant and delightsome for contentment of contemplation and view, and
diverse other all^rements which will there offer themselves; the tops of hills
are yet more apt to contain greater number of fruit trees to be planted
therein, than the plain gro^^^ possibly can: for such as stand in plains, if
they be planted any whitneere, do annoy one another with their shade: the
other on the contrary side (according as it (...) more and more from the foot)
causing every tree to ouer-looke his fellow, takes away the discommoditie or
inconvenience of such ouershadowing one of another. It must also be planted
somewhat more upon the North than upon the South quarter, that so it may
minister matter of rejoicing to such as shall behold it out at the windows in
his beauty and jolitie: Indeed if it be planted upon the South, it (...) more
open upon the Sun, whose heat is very requisite for fruit trees, but then
(...) would not stand so fair for prospect: besides, that it would be
offended and (...) of the dust and filth of the threshing f^oore when the
corn is thresh^, if in case it should stand near unto it.

In any case let it not stand upon the North-West quarter because it is a mo^^
deadly enemy unto all sorts of plants, but principally of flowers, which it
sings as if a fire had passed that way, and the cause, is, for that it
comes from the (...) side, and takes part with the North, which is very
rough and sharp, but yet not so dangerous as that North-West vvind which
blows once a year, chi^^ly (...) the Spring, and spoyleth the
cher^^e-tree-flowers and the vine more than any of the (...) Whereupon there
arose this Latin verse, Vae tibi galerna, per qu^m sit clausa (...) In any
case let not the ground vvhereon you plant your orchard be marshie or (...)
terish, for the fruits growing upon such grounds are not well relished,
neither (...) will they last long* it must likewise be enriched one year
before that it be cast and dug, to make any nurceri^ there, either of seeds
or steckes, and after it has (...) the second time dug and d^^ged, or
marled, you must let it rest and digest his dung and marle: and in like manner
pick out the stones that are in it most carefully* And as concerning the
natural disposition and goodness thereof, it must be ^at in handling, black
in color, and which murleth easily in breaking and stirring it with your
fingers, not being hard, clayie, chalkie, or sandy. Yet if it be so that the
situation of your Farm lies in such a soil as is marshie and vvaterish: for
(...) man cannot make choice of his abiding; and it is a brauer reputation to
the Husbandman to make a barren earth fruitful, than to make a fruitful
ground pleasant: therefore (as ^ said) if your ground lie low, and be much
subject to wet and rottenne^^e, you shall trench it diverse ways, almost in the
manner of a Labyr^th, cutting one ^rench into another, in such wi^e, that the
water may have a descent of falling away into some Brook, River, or other
Dike, which as a Sewer may carry away the wet, and keep^ the Orchard dr^^: and
also you shall bring from some other Grounds, Lakes, or Ponds, great store of
earth, mudde, and other compass, wherewith you shall raise and heighten the
banks between the trenches, in such ^ort, that they may remain and be far
from the danger of washing or ouerflowing of any water: and these banks you
shall stake well with strong Oaken stakes on every side, and plant great store
of Oziers also about them to maintain and hold up the earth from falling. Then
as soon as you see these banks firm, and beginning to grow to have a green
swar^h upon them, you shall plant your fruit-stocks, of every several kind,
upon the same, and without all doubt they will prosper and grow there as well as
in any ground whatsoever, as may be seen in diverse places both of this and
other Kingdoms.

The enclosure or defense unto the Orchard shall be either a hedge of Quickset,
which is in truth the most pleasant and convenient, though yet the wall be more
profitable, as being more strong, and built in less time, which also being
planted and handsomely dressed, affoordeth not much less pleasure than the
hedge: or else if you like it better, a ditch cast about it, with a Quickset
hedge set upon the raised side thereof: but in this according as the
sufficiency and revenues of the Farm will bear it (...): yet always
provided, that it be out of the way of the cattle, and where no man (...),
except he enter in at the gare^^ and granted, that the wall is the surest kind
(...) defense, as also the strongest, most profitable, and perfected in least
time. Besides, the wall, of all other ^ences, is most needful for the Orchard,
as well for the strength, indur^ance, and safe keeping of the same, as also for
the great profit which comes thereby to all manner of fruit which is planted,
and plashit up against the same, chiefly in those cold countries where the
Sun is not altogether so violent, nor so ready to (...) as in these our
(...) ^oyles of France, for it is most certain that by planting any dainty or
render fruit close to a wall, and spreading his branches open against the
same, which with loopes of leather, or felt, together with small nails, may
easily be done, ^a^^ning every principal branch and material twig to the
wall, it will doubtless put ^orth as early, flower, knit, and ripen, being in
a cold and hard ^oyle, as if it were in the war^nest and fertillest earth which
does best of all agree with its nature, as may be seen daily both in the cold
and barren countries of France, as also in other kingdoms much more Northerly
and less beholden to the Suns warmenesse. And herein you shall understand,
that the principal fruit trees which delight to be planted against a wall, are
pe^ches, abrico^s, nectaryas, all ^orts of sweet plumbs, ^herries, olives,
almonds, and such like, for the reflection of the Sun cannot beat or play
upon them too much, they are so infinitely in love with the same. And in as
much as the Orchard is altogether dedicated and appointed for the matter of
planting, grafting, and transplanting of trees in it: we will assign out
certain places wherein the ^urceri^ of seeds and the other of stocks may
conveniently be appointed: which nurcerie of seeds shall be as a well furnished
shop to afford new store of plants, to furnish the orchard at all assaies and
times of need.

We will first sow our nurceri^ of seeds on that side by which we go into the
Orchard, A brief of (...) which shall be (...) of in this third Book^.
and close unto it the nurcerie of stocks, where shall be planted wild ones,
re^^oued from out of the seed nurcerie, to be afterward grafted upon in their
time and season* On the other side, we will plant fruits upon nut kernells, and
transplant and gra^^ them after diverse ways. In those parts of the two great
void places where they are sundred the one from the other with a great path, we
will according to their kinds, ^ute out and set out great trees: and at the end
of them, we will prick out ozi^^^, so as they may for their better growth
receive refreshment from some small brook or wa^er course.

CHAP. II.
Of the seed Nurcerie, that is to say, of the planting of Trees on Pippins or
Seeds.
Certain it is, that Trees grow and spring out of the earth, either without
the work and industry of man, or else by his ^oyle and skill pain^ully
employed: of such as grow by the skill and industry of man, some grow of
seeds, that is to say, of kernells, commonly called Pippins, or of other seeds,
as of Nu^ kernells, cherrie stones, plumme stones, etc. being thrust into the
ground: othersome of shoots and small twigges, branching from the root at the
(...) of the Tree, having their nourishing roots, and drawing fibers from the
full grown roots of the Tree, or else of themselves. Some grow of buds and
blo^^omes, as ^^^^ces: or of young branches, or of boughs: some of the
multiplying of branches, if especially the Tree be yet young and pliant: others
are granted one upon another. We will first entreat of the making of them grow
in the seed Nur^^rie of their seeds, and so in order afterward we will
entreat of other means of making Tre^^ to grow.

For the ordering therefore of your ^eed Nu^ceri^, and furnishing of it with
Pear^-Trees, Apple Trees, Quince-trees, and others growing of seeds, you shall
cause to be dug good and deep, a great quarter in a good earth and
cherishing ^ould: and that if it be possible a Winter before you sow them, to
the end it may thereby become well seasoned, and you shall almost mix amongst
it half as much dung as the earth comes to that you turn up, that so it may
ripen and rot with the (...), and so be kept in great ridges, unto Cider time,
which is in September and October. At which time take the dro^^e of the said
fruits as it comes out of the press, or a little after, so that it be before
the seeds be rotted or corrupted, and chase and wipe them very well betwixt
your hands, then lay flat and square your plot or quarter, and (...) good and
close, and make it out into borders of the breadth of four sector the^^^bout,
and making paths, by casting up the ^ould betwixt ^uerie two, to the end th^^
they may be wed upon the one side and the other without treading upon them.
This being done, sow your dross there in such sort as that the earth may
therewith be lightly covered, and then afterward cover it again with the
earth which you have cast up in making of the paths or hollowed furrows
betwixt the said bord^^, and rake them over afterward, that so the dross of
the Apples may be well broken and spread, not lying together on heaps. This is
an excellent way for the sowing of much ground, and a great deal of seed,
because if one pippin come up of a (...), yet the husbandmans labor is saved,
and his profit sufficient: but in case where such plenty is not, but that a
man must from an Apple or two get all the seed ^e must ^ow, or that by chance
lighting of some few especial pippins, whose like ^^ockes ^e is desirous to
be master of, in this case you shall by no means bestow them into the earth
thus rude and carelessly, because it is to be understood that the kernel of the
Apple is a pleasanter and more sweet seed than any other whatsoever, and
thereby inti^^th worms, and such like creeping things, sooner to devour and
eat them (...) any other: therefore to keep them from that miscarriage, and to
make them take soon, you shall take a common garden pot, such as you use to
plant Gillo-flowers in, and filling it with fine mould within three fingers
of the brim, lay in your seed, and then (...) upon them other fine mould till
the pot be full, and so let them stand where they may receive both Sun and
Rain till they sprout, and be grown at least half a foot above the earth:
then having dressed a piece of earth, and manured it well for the purpose, you
shall take those young plants, together with the earth and all which is about
them, and place them orderly in the new dressed ground at least (...) foot
distance one from another, and these also you shall place in comely rows, so
(...) every eye may distinguish the several alleys that passes between
them: Other ways there be also of sowing of pippins, as on the banks of
ditches new cast up, or else amongst the quick-set, or in small ^urrows dug
and turned up for the purpose, and such like, but yet none is so certain as
this already rehearsed.

Otherwise; dri^ the for^said pippins, and keep them to the Winter following,
and afterward about the later end of November, or the beginning of the Spring,
^^ow them in manner as has been said, without casting up any earth out of the
passage ^urrowes betwixt the borders when you shall measure them out: but rake
them in a little with your rake, and thr^w thereupon good store of thorns and
boughs very shortly after you have thus sown them, that the hens or hogs
may not do^ them any injury. When the pippins are put forth of the earth, and
grown for the space of a year, take away the thorns, and weed away all the
weeds from amongst them as often as you can, and suffer not any one to grow up in
height with them, for fear that when you shall come to pull up a stiff and
strong grown weed, you pull not up therewithal the little pippin and seed of
the Tree. Water them if the Summer shall fall out dry, and begin to weed and
lop them, to acquaint them with the hedgebill, and to keep them still so bare
of branches, as that their sap may be employed wholly in the making of one
fair and lusty body and stock, and not many: afterward, pull them up toward
Winter, before they have begun to blossom, to transplant and remove into the
nurcerie of stocks. To cause them to shoot and put the sooner out of the
earth, you must steep their kernells in water or milk, for the space of two
or three days. And you are here to understand, that the (...) of the
Mulberrie-tree does not grow so ha^^ly, or bring forth so good fruit as the
seed of the Fig Tree.

For to sow the Elm, you must gather his seed before the tree be covered with
leaves, To sow the (...).
which is in the beginning of March, at such time as it begins to be yellow:
afterward, they must be dried two days in the shadow, and after that sown in
a suff^cient firm ground an inch deep, and watered often, if there fall no
rain.

The Bay Tree must be sown a foot deep in the ground, and four seeds
togeg^ther: transplanting and removing it a year after into some other place:
and in like ^ase you are to deal with all such like seeds, whether they be of
Cypres trees, My^^^^ trees, or others.

CHAP. III.
Of plants coming of stones.
FOr your plants of stony kernells, as of Oliue-trees, The setting (...).
, Cherrie-trees, Plum-trees, Almond-trees* Peach-trees, Chesnut-trees,
Pomegranat-trees (if so be that Pomegranat-trees be rather to be reckoned
amongst them which have stone-kernells, than amongst the other which have the
soft kernells) Abricots, and Date-trees; you must dry the stones, as they come
fresh out of their fruits, which you mean to set in the ground at such time as
the Sun is not v^^ie sharp, and in the shadow thereof: and see that it have
been s^eeped in milk or water three or four days before, and then thrust
it into the earth. But this must not be done but in the beginning of Winter,
that so they may first break forth in the Spring; for and if you put them into
the earth before Winter, they may also sprout and put forth before it come, and
so finding them young and tender when it comes, may prevail against them to
kill them, they not being able to resist the rigor and rough^^esse of the cold
and frosts. But and if for your avoiding of (...) labor, you will grant them
in their nurcerie, that is to say, in the place where you first (...) them, and
where they have put forth, without removing of them to any other place, then
se^ in eueri^ hole, three, four, or five stones: and if all of them spring
spring up and take root, yet you must let none but the fairest stand and (...)
to grant upon in the place, and as for the rest, they would be pulled up and
removed into some other place.

In what season soever it be that you set your stones, Ground for the (...) of
stones.
yet see to it, that the ground be good, and dug very deep, but put much
small dung amongst it, either alone, or mingled with dust gathered out of the
high ways, and see them three fingers within the earth, and half a ^oot one
from another, watering them three times every mon^^^, especially in Summer when
it falls out dry, and weed them once a month. Especially see they be set in
a fair soil, and open upon the Sun, if so be you would (...) a well-^ed and
pleasant-tasted fruit: for otherwise, if you set them in a shadowed place,
though it be of a good soil, indeed the fruit may be fair to look to, but
(...) enough to eat. When the stones are set, and have taken sooting, and are
become (...) what pre^ily fed, pull them up about Aduent which you mind to
transplant, and break off the points of their roots, and strip them of all
their branches, before you set them down again in their new appointed
standing: and know, that a double remove does make the wild to become free
conditioned and better, bringing unto them great advantage.

And as concerning particular properties belonging into every stone, Great and
gross^ Nuts. Peaches. P^^^^-plums. Almonds. Chestnuts. Abr^cot^.
and how it must be set, it is to be known, that gross Nuts, all manner of
Peaches, wild Figge^, Almonds, Che^nuts, small Abricots (but especially and
most singularly well the branches) becomes free and reclaimed, being set of a
stone, foreseen that they find as good and as fair a soil, as the trees
enjoy from whence the fruit of the said (...) were taken.

The stone of the Peare-Plum-tree must be set in a cold place, a foot deep in
the ground, the point downward, every one a foot from another, and this in
November in high places, and in January in low places.

The stone of the Iu^ube tree Iu^ub^-tree.
must be set after the manner and fashion of the stone of the Peare-plum-tree,
but it is long and slow in growing out of the earth.

The stone of the plum-tree Plum-tree.
must be set a fat ground, a foot deep, and that in November and February,
and they are to be removed the same time of the yea^^ making their holes and
pits neither too wide, nor too deep.

The stones or nuts of the Pine Tree Pine Tree.
must be set in cold places, in February and March, or about the fall of the
Pineapple, or shortly after, in pits well dug and of a good mould: the
apple may not be broken by violence, or with any (...) to get out the kernel,
but you must attend till it be opened, and set upon (...). And the Pine-nuts
must be steeped three days before you set them, and then you must set seven
together. Some lay them in little baskets, and cut them when they are sprung
up. They need no remove, but and if you do remove them, you must look^ in the
taking of them up, that you hurt not the chief and principal roots.

Small nuts Small Nu^s.
and plums of all sorts, peaches Peaches.
the small and great, A^^trges.
and great abric^^^, Great Abrico^s.
in whatsoever good ground and pleasant soil their kernells be set, yet they
grow not altogether like unto the fruit of their trees whereof they were
gathered: and therefore they delight rather to be grafted upon their young
stocks.

The stone of the Date, The Date stone.
which brings forth the Date-tree, must be set the great (...) downward, two
cubi^^ deep in the earth, and in a place enriched with Goa^s (...), and the
sharp side upward: it desires to be watered daily, and that there should (...)
year be salt sown about it, and withal it must be removed.

The seeds of Limons, Citrons, Oranges, Assyrian Citrons, and such like, as
(...) bin said in the second Book, must be pricked down upon beds well
prepared and (...) about the month of March, and the sharpest end downward,
half a ^oot (...) from another, and a finger and a half deep in the ground:
they love to be much (...) after, when they are grown a foot high, remove them
to the foot of some wall, op^^ upon the South: and in Winter, when the time is
hoarie, cover and favor th^^ in such manner as we have spoken of in the
second Book. As much may be said of Pomegranat kernels, and Bay Berries, as
you may understand by the second Book.

Pistaces Pi^^aces.
do require greater diligence and delight to be sown; as well the male as the
female, in a very fat ground and well ^ared, the back turned to the East,
and this about the first day of April: and at the same time of the year you
may gra^^ them upon themselves, notwithstanding that some do graft them upon
the almond-tree.

The peach stone would be set presently after that the fruit is eaten, The
Peach plant.
there remaining still some small quantity of the ^lesh of the peach about the
stone: and for the longer lasting and keeping of it, it loves to be grafted
upon the Almond-tree.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the nurcerie for stocks.
IF you would have a beautiful and pleasant fruit of your trees, it is not
enough that you should only sow or set your seeds or stones in a good soil,
but it stands you as much upon to remove them after one year into another
place: for this translating of them does so delight them, and revive their
vigor and spirits, as that they yield more pleasant leaves, and a (...) ^ed
and liking fruit. For and if you will bestow this favor upon vvild (...), you
shall find them to become of a gentler nature, and far more exc^^ling (...).
Wherefore when the Trees which shall have sprung up of seeds or stones, (...)
or sown, shall have come by some little nourishment, and grow in the seed
(...), take them up upon a new Moon, at night, with as many roots as possibly
may be; and if it happen that any of them be spoiled or broken, cut it: look
unto it al^^, that you do not pull it up when the Northern wind blows (for
this wind is an enemy unto new set plants) and set them again presently,
least the roots should spend themselves, it must not be in a hot, or cold
vveather, nor in an excessive vvind, nor in rain, but at such time when it is
calm and very fair, choosing rather a cloudie day, than when the Sun
breaks out hot, and the Moon being in her (...): but and if you should not
have the leisure to remove them so soon; or and if you would send or carry
them somewhat far, bind them up in their own earth mingled with dung, and
make it fast thereto with vvoollen cloth or leaves. When as you take them up,
mark what part stands upon this or that quarter, to the end that you may set
them down again upon the same quarter and coast of the heavens, for and if in
removing them you set them in a contrary ^oyle and situation, in respect of
the heavens, they will not thrive so well: and that is the cause why those
that buy new plants, most diligently inquire in what manner of ground they
stood, and what aspect of the Sun they were most open unto, that so they may
set them down again in such like ground, and in the same aspect. True it is,
that this obser^^tion seems too ceremonial unto me, and exceeding hard
continually to be k^pt, seeing we buy trees at Paris sometimes to plant, whose
first situation we do not know, neither can we learn, and yet
notwithstanding being planted, they cease not to thrive and prosper. And
again, what cause is there of any such ceremony, seeing the Sun which is
the nursing father of all plants, does visit every day all the sides of the
Tree, and that the ground wherein it is planted, is no less nou^^shing upon
the one side than upon the other? These things weighed, about the third of
December, you must lay flat another plot, and make a furrowed quarter, where
you shall lodge according to the order of a hundred, the small wildings, which
you shall have taken up out of the ^eed nurcerie, cutting off the end and
beards of all their roots, and which may be in any place about their slender
little stocks, and that in a good ground, yea much better if it be possible
than that is of the seed nurcerie. It is true, that the furrows must be made
according to the goodness of the ground, and the nature of the tree: for in a
clayie or hard ground, you must make your furrows the depth of three cubits:
in a watrie and marshie place, of three feet (...)* Some plants, as the Ash and
Olive tree, grow better in the upper face and top of the earth, than in the
depth and lower parts of the same. Set in order your young ^^^dings in the said
furrows half a foot one from another, and there cover them, and leave the
space of a foot betwixt one furrow and another, that there you may make paths
to go^ about vveeding with ^ase, and pass betwixt every two furrows. When
thus your wildings are set, you must cut off their stocks close by the earth,
and fill up the paths with dung, without ever going about to hide or cover the
pla^^^ in the earth, and so soon as they grow, they must be well wed round
about, and (...) from weeds, and vnderdigged, or lightly dug sometimes in
S^mmer round about, not coming over near the roo^s in any ^ase: and they must
be vva^^^d also on euenings, when it has been a very hot day, and when they
have put forth ^^^ces for one or two years, then going over them all, leave
not more than one (...) to every plant, and let it be the ^^eekest, best
liking, tallest, and com^liest of all the rest, cutting the other off close by
the stock. As these ^^^nces shall grow on so (...) pick off clean from them
the small superfluous wood growing upon them upward, and even close also unto
the stock: and this must be done in March, or April, and then must some small
prop or stay be pricked down at the foot of every wilding, for to ^^rect and
guide it by, tying them both together with wreaths of gra^^e, but (...) mo^^e
or some soft thing betwixt them, that so the hardness of the prop may not gal
it when it shall be grown thick. And thus you shall order and husband then
til the time come when you must remove them* if rather you make not choice to
gr^^^ them upon the place as they stand. When through forgetfulness you shall
have (...) your wildings or planes grown up of feeds for two or three years
untaken up, (...) must furrow them as has already bin said, but with deeper
dug furrows, and th^^ you shall not break the roots so much: and it will be
^it and convenient to cut off their branches upward, as occasion shall require.

There are found kernels of pears or garden apples that have been gathered
(...) trees that were sometimes wild ones, Fruits growing of grafts do (...)
keep^ a better form and f^shi^^ than the other coming of plants.
or grown upon trees, which have already (...) oftentimes grafted, which
bring forth very straight trees, and also of comely wood, as if they had been
grafts from the beginning, not having any pricks or (...), to argue them ^uer
to have been wild. Such young trees if you will remou^ them (...) they are, or
plant them out of their nurserie, without other manner of grafting them, they
will not fail to bring you good fruit for the taste and eating, as also to
(...) Cider of, but the best fruit does always come by grafting: for the fruit
coming upon grafting, does always retain a better form, and grows more
and more kind, and withal much the greater: Fruit coming of a (...) p^ant.
but that which grows of a kernel does chaung^ (...) often as the tree is
changed which bears it. And besides you must note, that (...) all trees which
have a strong fruit, grow better of kernels than of boughs* ye^ so it (...),
that a late ^eed does bring forth but an ill-fauoured plant, especially the
said ^eed being put besides his familiar and well pleasing ground.

CHAP. V.
Of Plants, Siences, and Shoo^^.
THe little siences of Cherrie-trees grown thick with hairie (...), and those
also which grow up from the roots of the great Cherrie-trees, Plants of cherrie
(...) upon (...).
being removed, do grow better and sooner than upon stones: but then they must
be taken away and planted whiles they are young, (...) whiles they be but two
or three years old: for when they are grown thick they thrive not so well:
again, if you stay till they be grown gro^^e, in removing of (...) you must
then ^op them, and strip them clean of their branches, setting their great
end in the earth the depth of a foot, and after treading down the earth, and
pricking down withal at the foot of every plant a little stake to hold them
fast, and to let the winds and whatsoever other thing from harming them. But
especially you must see that you cut not si^nces at any other time than in
Winter: for that moisture and coolness (during the time of Winter especially)
is a means to conserve and keep them, and thereupon also they grow and bring
forth their fruit the better afterward.

The Mulberrie tree The Mulberri-tree.
grows after the same manner of little ^iences, although the best way of
planting it be by taking a twigge thereof from the great branches which are cut
from the old tree, of the length of a foot, and setting it good and deep in
the ground, and that in such sort, as that the ground may cover it, three or
four fingers, and this done, you must see that in Summer it be watered
diligently.

F^^berts in like manner do grow of small shoots, which grow forth of the roots
of good Filbere-trees Plants of Fil-berts.
that are well rooted: these ^iences must not have their branches cut off when
they are removed, except they be grown great and full of branches: but three
years after that they are removed, if they do not prosper and grow fair, you
must cut them close by the ground, and they will put forth a bush of straight
siences, very smooth and neat, and of these you may choose whether you will
suffer the fairest only, or all together, to grow up and continue.

The siences of the Oliue-tree which you intend to transplant, Plants of the
Oliue-tree.
must be long and fair ones, and full of gross and thick moisture, so as
that they may be taken and grasped in the hand, and the bark thereby nothing
hurt. They must be drawn over with dung mixed with ashes, the head and the
foot, and after laid in the earth, as they were upon the Tree, the lower end
more downward and into the earth, and the higher end more upward and looking
into the air, for else they will not take at all: and this must be a general
observation in transplanting of all manner of siences.

The siences of a well stringed root of a good plum-tree not grafted, do
yield, being transplanted, Plants of Plumme-tree^.
a fruit no whit inferior unto that of the chief and principal plum-trees,
from which you have taken them. But and if the old plum-trees be grafted, you
must also take grafts and graft them in other plum trees, or wild
cherrie-trees, or upon ^oure Cherrie-Trees, and not to vngra^t siences to
transplant them.

Garden plummes and hartlike cherries do not grow naturally, French (...).
being planted of siences, but desire rather to be grafted of grafts.

CHAP. VI.
Of pricking down or fastening in the earth of small or great branches.
SPrigs or plants taken from boughs or branches do grow more speedily, and
come to better perfection, than the ^eed of kernels, or the setting of stones,
especially if it be put a little besides his own ground and soylie, and of
this sort are ^ig-trees, quince-trees and pom^gran^t-trees.

When a man is disposed to prick down some small sprig of a Mulberrie, Fig,
The (...) of sprigs of Mulberrie, Fig, (...) Pom^gran^^^, and Plumme-tre^^.
Quince, Cornell, Pomegranat, and Plum-tree, or many sprigs of all these kinds,
and their diverse sorts, he must cut them off betwixt the first of November, and
the later end of December, or a little after: and he must see that these his
sprigs be fair and well favored ones, having a sound bark, full of little
eyes, and as thick as a stick, or thicker. He must choose such as be straight
and full of moisture, consisting of one only rodd, and of young vvood, as of
some three or four years old, and that they have also as much old vvood as
they have young: and they must be sharpened like a stake for the value of the
length of half a foot, but the bare must be left on upon one side, that their
end which you mean to put into the ground, must be writhen and steept in
water: or else you must cleave it a little in quarters, and make it stand
vvide open and gape, with a bean in the cleft; or else some (...) little
small stone put in the midst thereof, and so prick it down in the earth a
foot d^^pe: or else let it in a little-boxe of pease full of water, and so put
them all into the ground together. The branches must be gathered upon a tree
that is a good handful thick, and has borne fruit: they must likewise be
very ^ound, and they may be watered with a pipe, which goes down unto the
root. Observe and mark (...) the place, nature of the soil, and aspect or
situation of the tree from whence you have gathered the branch, to prick it
down on the same side, the like soil and the same situation, and lay upon it
some Elder-tree, if so be that you would not have it (...) shoot up into a tall
tree, but to continue always low: the branches being such, they will take the
better, and not break in the gathering.

To plant the Fig Tree after the manner of the Genowais, To plant the fig
tree after the manner of the (...)
which shall bear fruit within three years after (and it may be thus planted
all Summer time) there must be taken a Fig Tree branch that has borne fruit
two or three years, and that (...) having leaves and fruit upon it or not: it
must be sharpened and cut biace, and p^icked thick about that end which shall
be set into the ground, and afterward planted in a pit half a foot deep; in
such sort as that the top of it may abide above the ground with three or four
of the little eyes, and be cou^^ed with straw for (...) days, and watered
every one of those six days: afterward let it be uncovered, because by this
time it will have put forth, and in the end of the year, toward the month of
February, you must cut off that which is put forth close by the earth, and
after that (...) will shoot so mightily as that it will bear fruit the second
year.

CHAP. VII.
Of the manner of making Siences for to plant.
FOr to make Siences of diverse sorts, which you may plant and set ^^^^ding as
you shall have need, cut in the Winter some great tree, if it begin to be
yellow, or wax bleake and pale, and whereof you (...) have increase: saw off
some stocks of the thickest branches into ^^^choons about the length of a
foot, and make a furrow in some very far ground, and of that depth as that you
may set your ^^uncheons in them endwaies, the earth cast upon and courering
them some three or four fingers, and providing that being thus (...) in this
furrow they may stand half a foot one from another: cover them well and water
them in Summer if there be need, and weed them very well: its space of time
they will put forth ^iences, which you may remove when they have taken root^^^
two or three years: but and if they have not as then any roots, set them good
and deep into good earth, that so you may cause their roots to grow. And these
^iences will p^^ forth other which will likewise serve. Mark it, that all
trees that put forth (...), if you cut them in Winter, they will shoot out
abundance of ^iences, all which will be good to be planted.

The barberie, (...)
read corant, and goose-berrie-trees, are planted likewise in Winter upon
^iences that come out of their roots, and they must have some hairy (...) but
and if they have no roots, there must some be procured to grow out of them.

CHAP. VIII.
Of planting of shoots of a years growth.
PRopagating or planting of Trees is fittest for such as have been planted of
siences, and such as do put forth siences and small shoots from their roots:
for this causes them to bear a more beautiful fruit, and more abundantly,
and more durable, because they attract and draw a greater quantity of juice
out of the earth. For this cause, Plum-trees, Cherrie-trees, Pomegranate-trees,
and all other Garden-trees, that are wont to be grafted upon wild ones, would
be propagated or planted: for in as much as the wild one does not draw such and
so much juice as the grafted tree does require, it is necessary that it should
be planted. As and if a sweet Cherrie-tree should be grafted upon a wild
Cherrie-tree, or one that bears very sour Cherries, such a Cherrie-tree
would not continue and last long, neither indeed will it bear any sweet
Cherries, if it be not planted a year or two after that it is grafted: and the
reason hereof is, because the wild Cherrie-tree draws not juice enough to
cause the tree to grow, and withal, the juice which it does draw, is not so
familiar or fit to bring forth and nourish sweet Cherries.

There are four sorts of planting or propagating: To plant (...) manner of
ways.
as in laying of shoots or little branches, whiles they are yet tender, in some
pit made at their foot, as shall be said hereafter: or upon a little ladder: or
in a basket of earth tied to the bottom of the branch: or in boaring a Willow
through, and putting the branch of the tree into the hole, as shall be fully
declared in the Chapter of Grafting.

There are likewise di^ers seasons for to propagate in: The time of propagating.
but the best, is in the Spring and March, when the trees are in flowers, and
begin to grow lusty. The young planted siences, or little grafts, must be
propagated in the beginning of Winter a foot deep in the earth, and good
manure mingled amongst the earth, which you shall cast forth of the pit wherein
you mean to propagate it, to tumble in upon it again. In like manner the
superfluous siences must be cut close by the earth, when as they grow about
some special impe which we mean to propagate, for they would do nothing but
rot.

For to propagate, you must dig the earth round about the tree, that so the
roots may be in a manner half laid bare; afterward draw into length the pit on
that side where you mean to propagate, and according as you perceive that the
roots will be best able to yield and be governed in the same pit, so use them,
and that with all gentleness, and stop close your sience in such sort, as that
the wreath, which is in the place where it was grafted, may be a little lower
than the sience of the new wood growing out of the earth, even so high as it
possibly may be. If the tree that you would propagate, should be somewhat
thick, and thereby the harder to plie, and somewhat stiff to lay in the pit,
then you may cut the stock almost to the midst betwixt the root and the
wrythen place, and so with gentle handling of i^, to bow ^owne into the pit the
wood which the grafts have put forth, and that in as round a compass as you
can, keeping you from breaking of it; afterward, lay over the cut with gummed
wax, or with gravel and sand.

If there be many siences and impes in the plant which you would increase,
multiply, and propagate, and that all of them by hap or casualtie do break
in propagating of them, the remedy will be, to set the tree straight up, and
to cover the roots ^gaine with the earth that was about them before, and which
you had taken away, and then to cut all the broken siences a little under where
they are broken, and to lea^e them so until another year, when they shall
have put forth new shoots, which the Winter following you may propagate: but
and if of all those siences there remain some one not broken, go forward and
propagate it, cutting close by the ground some of the wrythen place, and of
those shoots which are not broken. In propagating of them, see that you lay
good quantity of the siences of your branches into the pit, couch them there
very round, covering them with the earth which you cast up in making the pit,
after that you have first mixed it with good fat ^ould, and tread it down by
little and little above, and look that none of the said siences do rise
again after you have so trodden them down. This being done, (...) right up all
the ends which shall come out of the earth, and that so high as you can, and to
(...) them rest for three or four year before you furrow them, even until
the (...) taken earth, and be already become full of hairie strings: you must
prickestickes about them, for to handsome them, taking heed that you break
them not. Three or four years after you must do the earth from them, and
that in the beginning of Winter, and having cut in sunder all the branches that
have put forth haine (...) together with the stock, that is above the wrythen
place, you may plant every one of them where you please, to abide and continue
there for ever: not but that you may leave some one of them still standing in
the same place, if it be fit and good (...) it, and then you may not pull from
it his hairie roots, as you do from the other. If these plants of grafts be
grown thick already, and full of branches, then when you have taken them up,
you must cut off the brauches before you plant them, and then (...) they have
been removed, they are free and reclaimed, and all those which shall grow of
them afterward, will also become free and reclaimed. Again, if you would
prepare the stock from whence you propagated your siences, and (...) it (...)
after that you have cut off all his arms, let it alone with his cuts and
grafts, and out of those cuts it will put forth other siences, of which you may
make other free and reclaimed trees propagating them, and taking them up at the
end of three or four^ years. No siences are propagated, Siences fit for
propagat^^n.
but such as have no roots of their own, for and if they had roots by
themselves, then they should be taken up and planted again with the spade, and
not propagated.

CHAP. IX.
Of grafting young Plants, and other Trees of diverse sorts, diverse ways and at
diverse times.
ALthough the transplanting and propagating of trees makes them and (...)
fruit both very fair and great, yet grafting does excel both them in this
kind; for by grafting, not only wild trees are f^attered and overcome, and
those which were barren, made fruitful; those of an ill ^aft, become delicate;
the late bearing, bringing forth an early fruit; and those which were (...), to
be late; but also the fruit growing thereby, are fairer and better fed: add
(...), that grafting does oftentimes bring forth and beget trees and fruits of
great admiration; as we ^ee in Apples, Pears, and many other fruits, which
do alter both in color and taste by the skill and cunning showed in grafting.
Furthermore it causes, that not only one kind is changed into another, and
that diverse ^ruits do agree together, and that upon one tree; but that strange
and foreign trees do come unto us, and (...) conveyed unto other Countries.

There are five principal sorts of grafting: There is one way to grast in the
(...), that is to say, betwix^ the wood and the bark; and this is but in trees
that are (...) and of a good age, having a hard and firm bark: There is a
second way to graftin^ a cleft, that is to say, upon a stock that is cloven;
and this must be used in young (...), for old ones do not easily admit any
cleft in their stock: The third way is to graft in a whistle, or pipe; and
this is by taking the bark of one tree, cut in manner of a p^pe, to be
fastened to the bough of another tree: The fourth is to graft the (...) in
manner of a soutch^on: And the fist is also to graft in the bud; bu^ of these
in (...) in his proper and fit place. Before we go about to graft any thing,
we must consider whether the ground or country be fit for Pippins, or stones,
and what trees are best laden there.

The best is to grant the same kinds together, although grafts and buds may
take as well in trees of diverse kinds, but then such grafts come not to so good
an end, seeing it is impossible, that two differing sappes should agree, suit,
and carry themselves so well in all points the one toward the other, as and if
it were in (...) that are (...), of like sort: Add hereunto, that the fruit
does retain and follow the nature of the tree whereupon it shall be grafted,
rather than the graft, and so, after a sort, becomes degenerate and estranged
from his own nature: which makes me, that (...) regard not the grafts which
are wont to be made upon Elmes, for the fruit that grows thereon, does keep
the taste and favor of the Elm, which is not verse toothsome: and yet I set
less by the grafts chat are grafted upon the Colewort stalk, or the white
Thorn, or Gooseberrie tree, Vine branches, Rose trees, or such like: for
besides that such grafts are nothing durable (as being made upon a subject of a
more feeble and vnfirme nature than the graft it self which is set to them,
wherefore the contrary course is that which is to be followed at all times in
grafting) the fruits that come thereof, will be either of no ^ast, or else
very vnfauorie in the eating. Notwithstanding, although the hardest and most
solid young plants be to be preferred in the matter of grafting: yet so it is,
that if you graft in young stocks of a soft and moist nature, as upon the
Poplar and Beech tree, and such like, the graft will grow the sooner, but there
is not any profit arising: and such grafts are not dealt in by any but by
Gardiners, which either affect curiosity or deceit, as desiring to have grafts
often, rather than for any thing else. It were better therefore to graft in
trees of the same kind, or else if you should graft in trees of diverse kind,
yet to choose those which (...) unto the nature of the graft, which is the
commanding party, and whereunto the plant should very nearly assist and be
commanded by, notwithstanding that it is the feeder of the other. And in any
case you must graft the trees that bear timely fruits upon others that bear
timely fruit, and the late fruits upon the late fruits.

And although that by the assistance and help of grafting, men bring in
infinite m^mbers of monstrous things as well in trees as in fruits, mingling
diverse kinds together, yet we must not think, that we may graft all sorts of
grafts indifferently upon all sorts of trees: for neither will the Oak admit
the Pear tree, nor the Fig tree or Olive tree: and on the other side, the
Pine tree, Fur tree, Cypress tree, or generally any other kind of tree that
yields Gum, Oil, Liquors, Pitch, or Rosin, will not admit the conjunction
or grafting of any tree upon them, as Plu^arch teaches in his second book of
Table-talke, because they are fat, and cast out an oily humor, which (as all
other sorts of oils) is enemy to all manner of plants: insomuch, as that
there is no readier a means to kill such a tree as you would have to die, as
likewise Bees, than to anoint them with oil: add further, that the trees
which yield the Petro^ine, have so thin a bark, as that they cannot procure
any firm or (...) footing or means to receive the sap, or to incorporate
themselves with the grafts, which should be set into them, as it falls out
with all wood which has a very moist and soft bark; for thereby is hindered
the growing of the graft unto the parts which are under the bark. I add yet
further, that as men and women which are very fat, do not beget or bear
children, because that spending the greatest part of their nourishment in the
gros^enesse of their body, they leave no profitable superfluirie to make seed
of; in like sort, trees which drop Pitch and Rosin, spending all their
substance and nourishment about the making of themselves great and thick, they
accordingly grow tall and thick, but they bear no fruit at all, or else but a
very little, and that late in the year before it come to his full ripeness:
wherefore it is no (...) for a stranger, not to be able to live there, where
the homebred is scarce able to feed and maintain himself. Trees that have a
very hard and solid wood, as Box and such other, or which have a very tender
bark, are not fit for grafting: for the one by reason of their great
tenderness, cannot hold the graft fast and close enough, (...) the other
through their great hardness do wring and choke the same.

It is good to graft about the beginning of December, or somewhat later, (...)
January, The time of grafting.
according as the weather is enclining unto coldness, or otherwise, especially
Hart-Cherrie-trees, Peare-trees, and such as bear early fruit. As for
Apple-(...) and Medlar-trees, it is better to stay till from the end of
January unto the beginning of March, at such time as they begin to bud, for
they are not so forward as the other* And at the same time also it will be good
to graft the thicke-growne young (...), betwixt the bark and the wood, with
late grafts, or such as have been (...) ^o the ground. All months are good
and ^it to graft in, whether it be by graft (...) months of October and
November excepted: but the graft is commonly (...) in Winter, as has been
said, at such time as the sap rises up into the (...) they begin to bud, for
then the grafts do grow and take a great deal (...) may graft likewise in
April and May, if the gra^^s be full of little eyele^s, and that they have
been kept buried, and their tops out of the ground in cold and (...) places.
It is true, that the time of grafting must be measured and judged of, according
to the country and quality of the Region; for in a cold Country* it must be
later, and earlier in a hot: notwithstanding, to speak generally of all (...),
the fittest time to graft, is from the first day of February unto the first
(...) May, taking regard to the nature of the plants: for such as have most
juice, (...) grafted; and those later which are the drier, the Pomegranate and
(...) which al^hough they be dry, will notwithstanding be grafted (...) in the
year.

It is certai^e, that grafts must be gathered in the decrease of the Moon, to
be grafted at the same time of the old of the Moon, or else in the new, or
when you shall think good, always foreseen, that the grafts be gathered in
the old of the Moon, even all the grafts that may be. It is true, that the
graft and the bud do take better in the new than in the old of the Moon, for
the Moon is the (...) of sappes, as of all other juices, marrowes, and
humors, or moist things; which sappes run betwixt the plant and the graft,
and bind the one to the other, being of more force and power in the new of the
Moon than in the old: by the like reason there is a precept to be observed and
kept in the matter of grafting, forbidding to graft, the wind blowing at South,
because such winds are sharp and drying. On the (...), shoots must be cut in
the end of the Moon, if so be you will have them to bring forth much more
fruit: for being cut at this time, they have their sap drunk^ (...) with
settled abode, and by being notched only, they do not spend themsel^^^ so much
as when they be cut off, their sap then being in his full course and (...).
Notwithstanding we try it daily by experience, that the gathering and grafting
of grafts may be done at any time of the Moon, as we will declare hereafter.

Some hold them for the best days to graft in, which are the next three or
four^ days before and after the increase of the new Moon: but their reason
taken from the sap binding, and joining together of the grafts with the plants,
and from the dominion and rule of the Moon over the said saps, does shut out
the first part of that opinion: it being certain and true, that the weaker the
Moon is, so much the (...) also are those inferior bodies which she has power
and government of. To graft upon the wild stock, To graft upon a wild stock.
has more hold, and is more durable than that which is (...) upon the
reclaimed tree: but the fruit of the reclaimed tree is of a better taste, as
likewise the fruit of the graft will be which is grafted upon a tree which
blossometh and flowreth at the same time, and has a living and moist bark,
and the reason thereof is very apparent.

It is used to graft in the bark from mid-August, unto the beginning of
Winter, and also at such time as the Western wind begins to blow, To graft
in the (...).
being from the seventh day of February, unto the eleventh of June: but there
must care be had not (...) graft in the bark in a rainie season, because it
would wash away the matter of joining together of the one to the other, and so
hinder it.

It is usual to graft in the bud in the Summer time, from about the end of May
until August, as being the time when the trees are strong and lusty, and full
of sap and leaves, To graft in the the Scutche^^, or Bnd.
as in June and July: that is to say, in a hot Country, from the midst of
June unto the midst of July; but in cold Countries, unto the midst of
August, after some small showers of rane. And if the Summer be so exceedingly
dry, as that some trees do detain and keep back their sap, then you must
wait till that it be returned, and then to graft thereupon so soon as the
grafts are gathered, without having any regard either unto the new Moon, or
to the old, whether it be in grafting in the stock, or unto the stock. It is
true that is spoken, that we can never have hope of much fruit by grafting in
the new of the Moon, but in the old, beginning the first day of the full of
the Moon.

You may graft in the Cleft, without having regard unto rain, To graft in the
Cle^^.
when the time is good and cool, as from mid August unto the beginning of
November, for the cap and warming stuff which is laid unto those grafts, do
put away the wast and spoil which the rain and blasting would otherwise bring
upon them. It must likewise be considered whether the tree use to bear timely
fruit, or not, and so to fit it with a graft of the like condition and
quality. Again, the time and season must be considered whether it be forward,
or backward; for the seasons are not in all years governed and carried by an
unchangeable and vnvariable line and measure, for either they are more forward
or backward, and participate oftentimes one of another quality. And in all
the sorts of grafting, it is a singular thing, and of great preservation for
the graft, to keep the plants with Cowes dung mingled with straw.

As concerning the particular time of grafting, To graft in the (...).
it is better to graft at the evening than in the morning, and nearer unto the
roots than unto the boughs, because by how much lower the graft is set, by so
much the greater strength and force it receives from the moisture of the earth.

The furniture and tools wherewith a grafter should be furnished, when he is
disposed to graft, Gr^fting (...).
are a Basket to lay his grafts in, Clay, Gravel, or Sand, or some such Earth
as is strong, to draw over the Plant where it is cut or cloven, and for the
ioining of the Graft unto it: Moss, Woollen clothes, or barks of Willow, for
to join and tie upon the lute or earth before spoken of, that so they may
keep both it and the graft fast: and Oziers to tie again upon the barks, to
keep them firm and fast: gummed Wax to dress and cover the ends and ^oppes
of the grafts newly cut, that so the rain or cold may not hurt them, neither
yet the sap, rising from below, be cons^rained to return again unto the
shoots: a Hand-saw or little Saw to saw off the stock of the Plant: a little
Knife or Penknife to graft, and to cut and sharpen the gra^ts, that so the
bark may not pill or be broken, which often comes to pass when the graft is
full of sap: you shall cut the graft so long, as that it may fill up the
cleft of the Plant, and therewithal it must be left thicker on the bark side,
that so it may fill up both the cleft and other incisions, if any need to be
made, which must be always well ground, neat, burnished, and without all rust:
two Wedges, the one broader, for thick^ trees, the other narrower, for the
less and tender trees, but both of them of Box, or of some other hard and
smooth Wood, or of Steel, or of very hard Iron, that so they may crave less
labor in often making of them sharp, and they must serve to fet wider the
cleft of the Plant: a little Hand-bill, to set the Plant at more liberty, by
cutting off some of his superfluous boughs, having a handle or helm of
Inorie, or Box, or Brasill, or some other Wood which is very hard.

Trouble not your self with maruelling at them who graft their trees so soon
as they have planted them, or very shortly after: for the young plant which can
attract and draw but weakly and at hand any substance for it self, will
hardly bestirre it self in such strong manner as to feed both the graft and it
self, and therefore the graft cannot but dry up: and again, in very deed the
poor plant has injury enough to be taken up from out of his place, and to be
removed to another, without heaping upon it this new or double charge* and
therefore it would not be till a year after that it has been transplanted,
and then the next year it will bear fruit; for it never thriues well of his
grafting, if it thrive not the first year: and when as it has sped thus
ilfauouredly, (...) will be best to cut it off, and grat^ it again, but lower.

CHAP. X.
How to choose, gather, and cut Grafts, to graft in the cleft, ^tocke, and rind.
YOu must choose your Grafts of shoots that are a year old or two as the most
(especially if you would graft them upon old trees) which are very new, and so
thick as ones little finger, full of sap, having grosle and ^hicke set
eyelets, one of them being near unto another, for else they will not bear
fruit so plentifully: They must also take some part with the old wood, that is
to say, part of that which was a sience the year before, and part of the new,
that is to say, of the present year, so that it must be a piece consisting of
two several years: and you must, if it be possible, gather them from on high,
even from the top, or at the least from the midst of the tree, and not of the
lowest and thickest of the boughs of Fruit Trees: and they must be in their
sap, and taken from that side of the tree which stands upon the South, for
the East is not so (...) and convenient for us in this cold Country. They must
also be grafted in the same situation and goodness of soil that they enjoyed
when they were gathered; for (...) you graft them in the contrary to either of
these, it will fall out with them as with plants, so unadvisedly transplanted
or translated out of a hot Country into a cold. Notwithstanding, we daily
perceive, that such ceremonies are of small effest, seeing that the Sun,
which is the Nurse-father, visits every day all the sides of your tree, and
that the Earth, wherein it is planted, is not less nourishing on the one side
(...) on the other.

You must not gather your Grafts to plant, at such time as the trees begin to
flower, especially if the trees whence they be gathered be timely fruit, as
Cherry-trees, Plum-trees, Medlar-trees, Almond-trees, Peach-trees, and such
like: but the time together them, is about the four and twentieth of December,
and not sooner, for then the trees are full and well slcred of a mild and sweet
humor. But and if you should be constrained to gather them sooner, whether it
be upon occasion to carry them from one Country to another, or such like,
stay at the least till October, at which (...) the leaves will be fallen from
the trees. The men of ancient time obser^ed and made great ceremonies (as some
do as yet) in gathering of Grafts upon the ending of the Moon, and for the
grafting of them presently after the change: but we find by experience, that
upon all manner of days they may be gathered and grafted, in what quarter
soever the Moon is found in, as well for Frui^s of stone, which are more
difficult to graft, as also for those of Seeds, or Pippins, which (...) more
easy.

If you purpose to keep them after they be gathered, To keep grafts
especially such as you mind to graft in the bark (for such Grafts may be
gathered without eyeless about the month of October) stick them down in the
ground at the foot of a tree, lay (...) in a pit of half a foot depth, cover
them well with earth, marking the place so, (...) that you may be sure to find
them when the time of grafting comes. Some (...) them in earthen pots well
stopped and covered, which afterward also they bury in the ground. But and if
you would carry them far, you must prick their ends in a Tur^ep that is new
gathered, for by this means their natural juice and hu^^e will be preserved:
or else wrap them about with earth, and with a cloth, or other thi^^, that they
may be fit to be handled, as that they may be grafted, and not dried ^ay by the
wind and force of the Sun: or else shut them close betwixt two (...) or
Reeds, putting them thereupon in honey. Some, the better to keep them, lay
them betwixt two Tyles, near unto some River, and covered well with earth. If
they be sent you from afar, look that you go not about to graft them,
before you have first sleeped them a certain time in water, somewhat to
refresh their juice, and to set in strength again their ^eebled and appalled
force.

For to gather them, To gather grafts.
you must cut them off betwixt the old wood and the new, in such so^t as that
there be some of the old wood under one of the old eyelets of the graft* and so
also, as this eyelet or little eye may be behind the graft, when it shall be
set out of the cle^^ of the plant: but and if this eyelet or little eye be
very small, then it were better to cut it away. You may make of one long
graft^ two or three trunchions, of which also you may at any time make very
good grafts, and so let go that other with party woods, beginning at the
greatest eyelet of the same, and making incision close under it, to fit it, for
to be set in the ^tocke.

In cutting your graft, To cut grafts.
make incision upon the one side and upon the other upward on high: let it be
well taken down and squared, that so it may the better close to the stock of
the plant: and likewise, let it be so flatted, as that by measure it may be all
one in length with the elest of the plant, when it is put down into it; and
yet it is not required, that it should join close with the same in all places.

When you cut the grafts of hart-Cherrie-trees and Plum-trees, To cut the
grafts of hart-^herrie-trees and Plum-trees.
do not flat them so much as you did the others, for they have a thicker and
greater pith, which you must beware not to come near unto, neither upon the
one side, nor upon the other, save only that at the e^ds they must be very
flat. And further, if the same incision be not made for the taking down and
diminishing of any more than one side, it will be better than and if it should
be so ordered also on the other side, and cut byas, as wedges are which are
made for to cleave wood withal; and so at the end you should take down both
sides, after the manner of the head of a Spear.

In cutting your graft, you must look well, that you raise not the uttermost
bark from the wood, and that withal, you leave it thicker than that which is
on the other edge within.

CHAP. XI.
Of the preparing of the young Plant whereon you mean to graft.
NOw when you have chosen your Graft, you must likewise make choice of your
Plant: which, that it may be a fair one, must be right and straight, round,
not wreathen, of a beautiful color, a sound, near, and smooth bark, without
knots, very flourishing and moist, and of a tree that has borne fruit. It
must also enjoy the like good soil and situation it did before in the place
where you gathered the graft, if it be possible: it must bud and blossom at
one and the same time, to the end that the new sience may take the more easier
footing and kinder nourishment there. And if in case the Plant were wreathen,
join the graft cunningly unto it, and be sure, that in fitting of it you make
them both join well together, and ever matching the grossest Plants with the
grossest Grafts.

And in as much as the Plants are very little, therefore you must cut them low
and near unto the earth, and that rather with a Knife than with a Hook or
Saw. Some say, that a Saw does so shake and loosen the bark, as that afterward
it does not take so easily with the graft: but that makes no matter, because
neither the bark nor wood do ever take with the graft; but the skin or
bark, which grows and swells up from the foot of the tree, is that which
coupleth it self unto the graft, works all, and by it self increases,
making a body of the said foot; not that the sawed wood does join it self
with the said graft, but abides dead. If it be of the thickness of a ^inger,
or thereabout, you must cut it to the length of a foot, or half a foot, from
the earth, byas-wise, like the fashion of a Goats foot, for to cleave it and
for therein only one graft.

If it be as thick as a cudgel, cut the stock round with a Saw up on high, a
foot or two from the ground, to put two good grafts into the cleft thereof: of
which afterward you shall cut away the least and weakest when they begin to bud.

If the plant be as thick as an arm, cut it likewise round some two or three
foot high from the ground, for to cleave it and set therein three grafts, two
in a cleft, and one betwixt the bark and the wood, and that upon the side that
b^h the most room.

If it be as thick as a leg, or more, cut it four of five foot high from
the ground, and cleave it cross, and set therein four grafts: or cleave it
with one only cleft, and graft two in the cleft, and two betwixt the wood and
the barke^ or, which is better, graft them all betwixt the stock and the
bark, when the sap shall be up, for the wood of such great plants does pinch
and wrinch the graft mightily, if you put not a wedge of green wood into the
cleft.

After that the plant is cut either with a Saw or with a Knife, cleanse the
wound either with a little Saw-knife, or with some other thing: then make it
plain with a knife that is clean, and not infected with any evil smell; and
again make it clean again the second time, that so it may not be infected
any manner of way with theyron, because the sap of the tree may be corrupted
by it: then choose out the best place in all the stock to fasten your graft
unto, without any care of making the cleft, on what side soever it be. I
speak this, because it pleases some to affirm, That the tree ought not to be
cloven on that side that the wind stands, at such time as they go about to
graft it. It is true, that and if the wind should prove great, and with all as
North-east, that then you must turn your back upon it, and stand betwixt the
wind and the cleft, at such time as you are sitting and putting in your graft;
because it is sharp and scorching, very dangerous unto all sorts of plants,
as also fruits, of what condition soever they be, but chiefly when they are
blossomed.

Before you make wide the cleft with your wedge, bind and tie with two or three
turns about with a wickar, drawn very strair, your tree foot upon the place
where you intend to make your cleft, that so your tree foot may not cleave too
far: which is oftentimes the cause that grafts take not, the cleft being so
open, that it cannot (...) shut again and grow together, and so by that means
breaths out whatsoever it has of life in that place, and both the graft and
the foot do thereupon also per^^^ but this happens oftest in Plum-tree
stocks and branches of trees, because they are more subject to cleave thus than
any of the other sorts. Great trees, and such as yet go beyond the forenamed
measures, cannot be grafted by a cleft in the stock, b^t very well in the
branches, as we see accomplished in great Apple Trees, and wild Peare-trees,
for they would be rotten before that the grafts could shut and close up the
wound in the stock.

If the small branches be dry and without any sap, you must cut their
stocks or arms: and after two or three years, when they have put forth new
siences, graft the best, and cut away the feeble and starued ones. And
afterward, when the grafts (...) put forth very well, you must strengthen and
underprop them, or else wrap them one within another, and tie them with wood
amongst, for fear that the wind should break them: or else if it be a good
and well reclaimed tree, let new siences grow (...) of it. And this thing we
see much practiced in Normandy, Bretaigne, and other Countries, where they
esteem of Apples and Pears to make Cider of.

CHAP. XII.
To graft in the cleft.
THe manner of grafting in the cleft, To graft in the cleft.
that is to say, in the stock, being cloven, is proper not only unto trees
which are as great as a man's leg or arm, but also unto others which exceed
these in greatness. It is true, that in as much as these trees cannot easily
be cloven in their stock, that therefore it is expedient to make incision in
some one of their branches, and not in the maine body, as we see to be
practiced in great Apple Trees and wild Peare-trees, and as we have already
declared here before.

To graft in the cleft, you must make choice of a graft that is full of sap
and juice, but it must not be till from after January unto March: and you must
not thus graft in any tree that is already budded, because a great part of
the juice and sap would be already mounted up on high, and risen to the top,
and there dispersed and scattered hither and thither into every twigge; a
news nothing welcome to the graft. You must likewise set down and resolve not
to gather your graft the day that you graft it, but ten or twelve days
before: for otherwise, if you graft it new gathered, it will not be able easily
to incorporate it self with the body and stock where it shall be grafted;
because it will come to pass, that some part of it will dry, and by this
means will be a hinderance in the stock to the rising up of the sap, which
it should communicate unto the graft for the making of it to put forth: and
whereas this dried (...) will fall a crumbling and breaking, through his
rottenness, it will cause to remain a cauitie and hollow or void place in the
stock, which will be an occasion of the like inconvenience to befall the
graft: and on the other side, the graft being as yet new and tender, might
easily be hurt of the bands, which are of necessity to be tied round about the
stock, for the keeping of the graft firm and fast. You must furthermore take
heed, and see, that the tree whereupon you intend to graft have been
transplanted and removed from out of your stocke-Nurcerie for a long time
before, that so you may assure your self, that his roots are long since well
insea^oned, and have fully taken with the earth, and thereby also has
sufficient store of sap and juice,

When you are minded to graft many grafts in one cleft, see that the incision
made upon their ends be alike great: which if you look not to, it may happily
come to pass, that the cleft of the stock shall be forced wider on the one
side than on the other. You must likewise foresee, that the grafts be of one
length, or not much squaring; and it is enough if they have three or four
eyelets without the wrench.

When the plant is once sawed and lopped of all his small siences and shoots
round about, as also emptied of all his branches, if it have many, then you
must leave but two at the most before you come to the cleaving of it: then put
to your little Saw and your knife or other edge-toole that is very sharp,
cleave it quite through the midst in gentle and soft sort, first tying the
stock very sure, that so it may not cleave further than is need, and then put
your wedges into the cleft until such time as you have see in your grafts; and
in cleaving of it, hold your knife with the one hand, and the tree in the
other, to help to keep it from cleaving too far; Afterward, with the same
hand wherewith you held your tree, put in your wedge of Box, or Brasill, or
Bone, at the small end, that so you may the better take it out again when you
have set in your grafts. If the stock be cloven, or the bark loosed too much
from the wood, The sappes of the graft and stock must be (...) the other.
then cleave it down lower, and set your grafts in, and look that their
incision be fit and ^erie justly answering the cleft, and that the two sappes
(that of the graft, and the other of the plant) be right and even set, the one
against the other, and so handsomely sitted, as that there may not be the least
appearance of any cut or cleft: for if they do not thus iumpe one with
another, they will never take one with another, because they cannot work their
seaming matter, and as it were cartilaginous glue, in convenient sort and
manner, to the glu^ng of their ioints together* You must likewise beware not to
make your cleft overthwart the pith, but somewhat aside.

The bark of the Plant being thicker than that of the graft, you must set the
graft so much the more outwardly in the cleft, that so the two sappes may in
any (...) joined and set right the one with the other: but the rind of the
plant must be (...) what more out than that of the grafts on the cloven side.

To the end that you may not fail of this work of imping, you must
principally take heed, not to ouer-cleaue the stocks of your trees: but before
you widen the cleft with your wedges, bind and go about the stock with two or
three turns, and tha^ with an Ozier close drawn together underneath the same
place where you would have your cleft to end, that so your stock cleave not
too far, which is a very usual cause of the miscarrying of grafts, in as
much as hereby the cleft stands so wide and open, as that it cannot be shut,
and so not grow together again, but in the mean* (...) spends it self, and
breaths out all his life in that place, which is the cause that the stock
and the graft are likewise spilt: and this falls out most often in Plum-trees
and branches of trees. You shall also be very careful to join together the
rindes of your grafts and the plants, that so nothing may continue open, to the
end that the wind, moisture of the clay, or rain, running upon the grafted
place, may not (...) in. When the plane cleaves very straight, there is not
any danger or hardness (...) sloping down the graft, if you leave it
somewhat uneven or rough in some, places, that so the sappes both of the one
and other may the better grow and be (...) together.

When your grafts are once well joined unto your plants, draw out your wedges
very softly, least you displace them again. You may leave there within the
cleft some small end of a wedge of green wood, cutting it very close with the
head of the stock: or else so soon as your wedge is drawn out, put some
small chip of green^ wood upon the cleft of the plant. Some cast glue into the
cleft, as it were to (...) and glue together the sappes of the two substances.
Othersome sprinkle into it Sug^^, or powder of Cinnamon, or some other such
spice, or some sweet smelling liquor, and withal dippe the ends of the grafts
in honey, or in some other sweet and (...) quor, hoping that by this means the
fruits of the trees will retain the taste thereof. But howsoever it is, cover
the cleft of the grafting all about with gravel or sand (...) on like a
causey: or else with gummed wax, which is better to cover withal (...) the
former, or any other thing that can be learned: and that the cleft may be very
(...) filled, it must be laid on two fingers thick, or thereabout, that so
neither wind (...) rain may enter or get in: and you shall cover it over with
Most, or Ryestra^, (...) Bark, or the thin rind of the Elm, prepared with
a little earth, and (...) of old Woollen clothes, or the bark of Willow, and
tie them on very strait with small Oziers; but in binding them, take heed that
the wreaths do not shrink to the one side or the other: and if you have not
clay, then arm and cover over, as has been said, the said clefts with gummed
wax: and for want of both these, mingle small hay and the earth of the place
where you graft in manner of lome or mortar. When thus you grafts shall be well
wreathed, ^asten some small boughs about them, for to keep and defend them.

Furthermore, To graft in by as like to a G^ats soot.
if the stock of the plant whereupon you intend to graft, be (...) so thick
as your graft, you shall graft it after the fashion of a Goats foot in (...)
manner: Make a cleft in the stock of the plant, not direct, but byas, and that
(...) and even, not rough; then apply and make fast thereunto the graft, with
all (...) bark on, and answering unto the bark of the plant: this being done,
cover (...) place with fat earth and moss of the wood, ried together with a
strong band. (...) to the end that the tree may not be hurt either of the
winds, or other things, (...) down, near unto it, some pole of wood, for to
strengthten and bear it (...) They are greatly to be blamed for their fault
committed, who having fair wild uses or others (the fruit thereof displeasing
them) do cut them verte low, having fair branches above, and a body of the
thickness of a man's leg, and there graft them, when as five or six years
will scarce cover the wound that they have made by such their kind of grafting:
whereas they might with as much eale have grafted upon the branches of the
same, and then they had not been above a finger thick, and would have grown
better, and brought more profit; because that and if you have four branches,
you may make as many grafts thereof, and these will bear fruit the second
year.

CHAP. XIII.
Of grafting in the ends of branches.
FOr to graft at the end of such branches as have goodly new wood, and great
siences on high, although the tree have been grafted before, and that it be as
yet not thoroughly grown, take grafts of what sort of tree you will, and cut
some of the siences off from the high parts of the tree where you mind to
graft: and if the grafts should be thicker than the siences, then graft them
after the manner of the Goats foot, as has been said already of small
Plants. And if the siences be of the same bigness with your grafts, then cut
them between the old and new wood, or a little higher or lower, and cleave them
a little, and cut the graft of the like thickness to the sience which you have
cut off, making but a short incision, and reserving the bark upon both sides,
and looking that both the sides be of equal thickness: then set your graft,
thus fitted, into the cleft, and that so, as that the barks of both sides the
graft may stand even with the barks of the branch. And for these grafts, it is
enough if every one of them have one good eyelet or two about the wreathing;
for to leave them any longer, would not be good: and you must wreath and wrap
them in earth and moss, and cover it over again with Woollen clothes, and tie
them unto the same very strongly, as has been said.

Also by this means you may procure, that one tree shall bring forth diverse
fruits, so that they be not such as the situation of the Country and quality
of the Air do refuse and reject: as I have seen sometimes at Padua, in the
Garden of Messire Gabriel, where one stalk of a tree has borne fruits of
diverse sorts. And there is nothing that should hinder or let us in this
Country from doing the like, if it be not (perhaps) that in some places the
favorable furtherance and mildness of the air is not so correspondent and
answerable.

Moreover, if you will graft little Plants in this manner, see that they be of
the same thickness of the grafts, and graft them near unto the earth, as some
three fingers off, or thereabouts.

This manner of grafting at the ends of branches, must be done in trees whose
branches have been formetly cut off, by reason either of some great want, or
else too great abundance of sap: and that there be put forth of their stock
some new shoots, which three or four years after may be grafted after the
manner we have spoken of: Thus Columella teaches us to graft the Oliue-tree
upon the Fig Tree.

CHAP. XIIII.
To graft betwixt the wood and the bark.
IT is usual to graft betwixt the wood and the bark, when trees begi^^^ put
up their sap, as about the end of February, and after until April, for then
the bark parts better from the wood: and chiefly this manner of grafting is
used in thick plants, which cannot easily be eleven in the midst, either
cross, or otherwise, and in the stocks and branches of trees that have a
thick and fat bark, as Figge-trees, Plumme-trees, Peare-trees, and Chef^x,
trees. The grafts that are thus to be grafted, must be gathered and kept long
before, as we have already said, least peradventure we should not meet with
trees of late bears about this time, which have not as then budded, and of
which there may be grafts gathered without buds; such as is the short-legged or
short-stalked Apple Tree, and such other like.

In this kind of grafting, the plant must be sawed up on high, and the grafts
our afterward, as has now already been said before: but the incision of
(...) grafts (...) not be of any great length or thickness, but the bark
must be taken away a little (...) the end of them, and fashioned after the
manner of the head of a spear, and as thick on the one side as on the other:
afterward the stock must be very well cleansed, to take away the roughness
and unevenness of the Saw, with a very shap (...), that so the grafts may
grow close thereunto: then thrust in a sharpe-pointed knife, or some Scizars of
Bone, or Iuorie, deept enough betwixt the bark and the wood of the plant, and
so much, as that when it shall be drawn out, the cut and fitted end of the
graft may inter therein, and that the graft may join unto the stock when it
shall be fet therein: this being done, it must be covered and wrapped well with
(...), or other strong earth and moss. After this manner you may prick in
many graft^ about your stock, according as the thickness of it will bear.
After this manner are Abrico^s grafted, and Apple Trees, Almond-trees,
Peach-trees, small Peach-trees, Figge-trees, Pear. Plum-trees, Chesnut-trees,
Peare-trees, and young and little Plum-trees, being the thickness of a little
finger, and the thickness of an arm, as also all such (...) have their bark
somewhat slender and tender; for in thick trees, which have (...) bark very
hard and thick, this cannot well be used, except it be upon some of (...)
branches, which have a daintier bark and better disposed for the doing hereof.

CHAP. XV.
Of grafting in a Pipe*
THe manner of grafting in a Pipe, as also that of grafting in the (...) after
the manner of a Scutchion, is very forward in bearing fruit, (...) weak and
cast to be hurt, because it is borne up only by the streng^^ of the bark*
and therefore it must not be practiced in any trees, (...) such as are full of
sap, as the Fig Tree, Oliue-tree, sweet Quince-tree, (...) Peach-tree,
Abricot-tree, Iuiube-tree, sour Cherry-tree, Cheery-tree, and (...)-tree, and
not at any other time, than after the beginning of April vpto the end of
June; or if the time be not too hot, in July, August, and September: but such
grafts are not profitable, neither yet coming so soon to perfection, as those
which (...) grafted in the cleft.

Choose therefore in a fruitful tree that is full of sap, a very fair branch
that is full (...) eyelets, from whence cut with the point of a knife that is
very sharp, a piece of (...) fashioned like a Flute, at the least three
fingers and a half, long, having one eyelet ^ound and entire. Then do as much
upon some branch of that Tree vvhereupon you mean to graft the same, in such
sort, as that the bark which you take away from the place to be grafted, may
be of the same breadth, length, and situation or aspect of the heaven, that that
is which was cut down from the place where the graft grew, and it must
likewise have one sound and entire eyelet as well as the other. When you shall
fasten it unto the place, beware that the bark which you shall fasten, be not
were or moist, and that it do answer and fit the window, whereout the bark
was taken, and that in such sort, as that the eyelet in the bark to be
grafted, may a^nswer justly vpto the knob which remains ^ound and
vndeminished in the vvood, and that this knob go into the eyelet, of the
pipe-like bark, which you are about to graft. By this means all will agree
very well together, neither will there be seen any chinker, gaping, or rise,
betwixt the commissures and joins of the two barks. This done, bind and
wreath above and below the said grafted bark with a band of very dry hemp,
being without any manner of moisture, that so the bark may cleave to the
better, and take the sap of the tree the sooner: but still you must look to
it, that your band do not touch the eyelet, or pinch the bark too hard, for
this would keep it that it should not take, and neither the bark, nor the
band must be we.

The Chesnut-tree may be grafted after this manner, and profit more by it than
any other Trees, because the bark thereof is more ap^ to fashion after the
form of a pipe, than the bark of any other Tree. This way is long in working
and taking, and withal nothing sure or certain: and therefore I would
counsel the Gardener to trouble himself but little at all with it.

CHAP. XVI.
Of grafting in the bud after the manner and form of a Scutcheon.
FOr to graft after the manner of a Scurcheon, you shall not vary and differ
much from the manner of grafting which is after the fashion of a flute or pipe,
save only that the Scutcheon-like graft having one eyelet as the other has,
yet the wood of the Tree whereupon the Scurcheonlike graft is grafted, has not
any knob or bud, as the wood whereupon the bark is grafted in manner of a
pipe: wherefore in both the sorts of grafting, we may follow the form and
order which follows.

In Summer when the trees are well replenished with sap, and that their new
siences begin to grow somewhat hard, you shall take a shoot at the end of the
branches of some noble and reclaimed Tree, whereof you would ^aine have some
fruit, and not mai^ne it of his old store or wood, and from thence raise a good
eyelet the tail and all, thereof to make your graft: but when you choose, take
the thickest and grossest: divide the tail in the midst before you do any
thing else, casting away the leaf (if it be not a Peare-plum-tree,) for the
Scutcheon graft of a Peare-plum-tree, would have two or three leaves) without
removing any more of the said tail: afterward with the point of a knife that
is very sharp and will cut well, cut out of the bark of the said shoot, the
pattern and resemblance of a Scutcheon or Shield, of the length of a nail, in
which there is only one eyelet higher than the midst, together with the
residue of the eaile which you have left behind: and for the lifting up of the
said graft in Scutcheon, after that you have cut the bark of the shoot round
about without cutting of the wood within, you must take it gently with your
thumb; and in pulling it away, you must press upon the wood, from which you
pull it, that to you may bring the bud and all away together with the
Scutcheon, for and if you should leave it behind with the wood, then the rest
of the Scutcheon were nothing worth. You shall find out if the Scutcheon be
nothing worth, if looking within it, when it shall be pulled away from the wood
of the shoot, you find it to have a hole within, but more manifestly, if the
bud be stayed behind with the wood in the shoot, when it ought to have been in
the Scutcheon. Thus your Scutcheon being well raised and taken off, hold it a
little by the tail betwixt your lips, without wetting of it, even until you
have cut the bark of the tree where you would graft it, and look that it be
cut without any wounding of the wood within, after the fashion of a (...), but
somewhat longer than the Scutcheon that you have to set in it, and in no place
cutting the wood within.

After you have made incision, you must open it and make it gape wide on both
sides, but in all manner of gentle handling and entreatie, and that with little
(...) of bone; and separating the wood and the bark a little within, even so
much at the Scutcheon is in length and breadth, you must take heed that in
doing hereof you do not hure the brake. This done, take your Scutcheon by the
end, and the (...) which you have left remaining, and put it into the incision
made in the tree, listing up (...) the two sides of the incision with the said
little Scizars of bone, and cause the said Scutcheon to join and lie as close
as may be unto the wood of the tree (being (...) has been said) in weighing a
little upon the end of the rind so cut, and let the upper part of the Scutcheon
lie close unto the upper end of the incision or bark of the said tree:
afterward, bind your Scutcheon about with a band of hemp, as thick as the pen
of a quill, more or less, according as the tree is small or great, taking the
same hemp in the midst, to the end that either part of it may perform a
little service in wreathing and binding of the said Scutcheon, into the
incision of the Tree, and it must not be tied too strait, for that would keep
it from taking, the joining of the one sap to the other being hindered
thereby, and neither the Scutcheon no^ yet the hemp must be moist or wet. And
the more justly to bind them together, begin at the backside of the tree, right
over against the midst of the incision, and from thence come forward to join
them before, above the eyelet and tail of the Scutcheon (crossing your band of
hemp so often as the two ends meet) and from hence recurning back again, come
about and tie it likewise underneath the eyelet, and thus cast your band about
still forward and backward, until the whole cleft of the incision be covered
above and below with the said hemp, the eyelet only excepted and his tail,
which must not be covered at all; this tail will fall away one (...) after
another, and that shortly after the ingrafting, if so be that the Scutcheon
will take, Leave your trees and Scutcheons thus bound for the space of one
month, and the thicker, a great deal longer time; afterward look them over,
and if you (...) them grown together, untie them, or at the least cut the
hemp behind, and le^^ them uncovered, cut also your branch two or three
fingers above, that so the impe may prosper the better, and thus let them
remain till after Winter, about the month of March and April. If you
perceive that the bud of your Scutcheon swell and come forward, then cut off
the tree three fingers or thereabout about the Scutcheon: for and if it should
be cut off too near the Scutcheon, a^ such time as it purtech forth his first
blossom, it would be a means greatly to hinder the flowing of it, and cause
also that it should not thrive and prosper so well: after that one year (...)
past, and that the shoot begins to be strong, beginning to put forth the
(...) bud and blossom, you must go forward to cut off in biace wife the three
fingers (...) the top of the tree, which you left there when you cut it in the
year going before, (...) has been said. When your shoot shall have put forth
a good deal of length, you must stick down there even hard joining thereunto
little stakes, tying the^ together very gently and easily, and these shall
stay your shoots, and prop the^ up, le^ting the wind for doing any harm unto
them.

In this sort you may easily graft white Rose-trees in red Rose-trees, and red
Rose-trees in white Rose-trees, to have Roses of diverse sorts upon one and the
same Rose-tree. You may graft after the same manner two or three Scutcheons,
provided that they be all of one side: for they would not be equally set
together in height, because that so they might all become staruelings: neither
would they be one directly over another: for the lower would stay the rising up
of the sap of the Tree, and so those which were above should consume in
penury, and undergo the foresaid inconvenience.

You must note, that the Scutcheon which is gathered from the Sience of a Tree
whose fruit is sour, must be cut in a square form, and not in the plain
^ashion of a Scutcheon.

It is ordinary to graft the sweet Quince-tree, bastard Peach-tree,
Abricot-tree, Iujube-tree, sour Cherrie-tree, sweet Cherrie-tree, and
Chesnut-tree after this fashion: how beit they might be grafted in the cleft
more easily and more profitably, although that diverse be of a contrary
opinion. As thus for example:

Take of the grafted of the sweet Quince-tree, and bastard Peach-tree, of the
fairest wood and best fed that you can find growing upon the wood of two years
old, because the wood is not so firm and solid as the others, and you shall
graft them upon small plum-tree stocks, being of the thickness of ones
thumb: these you shall cut after the fashion of a goats foot, you shall not
go about to make the cleft of any more sides than one, being about a root high
from the ground, you must open it with your small wedge; which being thus
grafted, it will seems to you that it is open but of one side, afterward you
shall wrap it up with a little moss, putting thereto some gummed Wax or Clay,
as has been said before, and bind it up with Oziar, to ^eepe it the surer,
because the stocks is not strong ynongh of it self for to hold it, and you
shall furnish it every manner of way, as others are deal withal. And this
kind of grafting is more profitable, and sooner grown up than that which is
done in the form of a Scutcheon.

CHAP. XVII.
Of other sorts of kinds of grafting upon all sorts of Trees.
YOu may graft in the bud, by taking up the bud of a young shoot or plant, and
putting it with a little bark in the place of another, which you shall have
pulled from the Tree, vvhereupon you mean to graft, binding it there above and
below in manner as has been said of the Scutcheon-like graft, and this may be
done at the same time, and upon the same trees.

You may graft all manner of grafts, upon all manner of trees after this
manner: Make two pits, four foot every way, and the one hard by the other, in
the one of these plant an Oliue-tree, and in the other a Fig Tree, or any
other such like sort of Trees as shall best please you: when the Oliue-tree
has taken root, you shall bow down such plants of the same as seems vpto
you the fairest of the rest, and bind them to the foot of the said Fig Tree:
this being done, cut away all the other plants of the said Oliue-tree, except
they be such as you mean in like manner to graft: then cut down the
Fig Tree, and make smooth and even the cut: after this, clause it in the
midst with a wedge, after which escape both the sides of the ends of the
siences of the Oliue-tree, such as the Tree bears, and put them in the cleft
of the Fig Tree, in such manner as that they may reach through, afterward ^ome
the said cleft of the Fig Tree on the one side and on the other with tough
^ome, and tie fast within the stock of the said Fig Tree, the said plants,
in such sort as that a man cannot pull them away. Thus three years after, the
Fig Tree and Oliue-tree will grow together, and the fourth year when they
are well grown, you shall cut and vnco^ple the plants of the said Oliue-tree
from it, as is done in propagating, so they shall seem not to appertain any
longer unto the Oliue-tree. This manner of grafting is very usual in the
Country of Man's, where I remember I have rasted of a grape which had the cast
of a nut: because the vine that bare this grape, had been grafted into a
nut-tree, and after that manner that I have now spoken of.

To graft in a Canon, To graft i^ a canon.
Flute, or Cornet, is thus per^ormed: You must raise a long Gun or Canon having
two or three eyelets, from often a new and reclaimed plant, that is a finger
thick or thereabout, and cleave it casily the whole length of it: after, you
must raise of the bark of some branch of a plant, of the like thickness, a
Canon of the like length to the former, and in place of this later, you must
make fast the foresaid Canon of the said bark of the new branch, as forward
and close as it can be set, and the superfluous bark of that wherewith there
is nothing intended to be done, is bestowed upon this thus grafted to defend
it: after this, it is tied above and below the eyelets so carefully, as that
they may not be hutt, then you must cut away the wood which is above the root,
and work it over with gummed wax all along the seames, and at the end.

To graft in the body of a Tree is thus: To graft in the (...) of a Tree.
You must pierce the stock of a Tree with a wimble even unto the pith, and
afterward cleansing the hole of the wimble (...) well, you must by force put a
graft thereinto, which has two or three eyelets within, and then after that
close up the hole very sure with wax.

To graft upon a Willow, To graft upon a willow.
or Colewort: Make in the pole of a Willow, or stock of a Colewort, two holes,
reaching to the marrow or pith, either half a foot from the other, set therein
as it were by force even in either of them, a graft of such fruit as you your
self will, having their barks seraped off, and this in such fo^t as that the
holes be stope all of them therewith: after this, you must stop the same holes
very will with Wax, pricking down the said pole within half a foot of some
water, after such a manner as that the grafts may be three fingers under the
earth, and at the end of the year when it has taken root, cut the plant in
pieces, and plant every graft where you your self will.

Thus you may graft in the Crown: To graft in a Crown*
You must cut often the body of a great Tree, rather than a little or thin one
up on high, but yet it may not be old, though it may have a hard bark rather
than a soft and thin: afterward, you must open it up above on high, in three
or four places, in the cut of the bark of the said s^ocke: which done, you
must with the helue of a penknife of bone being very sharp^ pointed, put into
every one of those opened places a graft, gathered from the most Easterly part
of his own Tree, then you must stop and cover well with to^gh (...) or clay
the wound that is above, and lay a good cap upon it, so as that neither the
rain may be able to wash and corrupt it, neither yet the air to dry and
chinker it: after this, you must tie the Tree with a coard or band near unto
the place where the Tree was sawed of^, that so it cleave not, then you must
thrust in your wedge betwixt the bark and the wood, after which, it remains
that these grafts be (...) to set round about the body of the Tree, one
distant from another, no less than four fingers: then, for the shutting up of
the matter, taking away the coard or girth, you must tie the bark with a
company of Oziers, being of that length as that they may go about the body
of the Tree three or four turns and doubles, that so by this means the
grafts may be guarded, and stand fast against the winds and whatsoever other
violence: and against the body of the Tree you must set a stake or prop, for
to beat it up and stay it, taking away all the shoots that are about it:
because that by how much the number shall be the less, by so much the more
will the sap proout the strength and grouth of boughs.

Some do graft in a Sience after this manner: To graft in a (...).
They make way into the Tree, and that to the very pith thereof with a
penknife, and after grafting a plant therein, stop it up close with Wax.
Otherwise, and the likelier, some take a sience of one joy^^, and writh it,
afterward taking from it his joints and bark, and so graft it upon a sheet as
thick as it self, and it takes quickly.

To graft in a morsel, To graft in a Morsel.
you must take in the month of March a piece of the thickness of ones thumb,
and sufficient broad and long, together with the eyelet and sience belonging
thereto, and so very speedily graft it altogether upon the branches of
another Tree, cleaving the bark into three or four, and fastening it thereto
very close and strait, and unto the head of the stock, if so be that the
morsel go into the bark of the other, without hurting of his own bark: it
being thus grafted, will take without any other thing or preparatiue:
notwithstanding it would do no evil to put tough ^ome or earth tempered
thick upon the said joint, and to tie it well with some little piece of
Woollen cloth about the morsel, not touching the eyelet in any case. In June
and July you may graft in this manner on high upon branches without using of
any band thereto: and when this morsel has well taken, some do use to cut
off that part of the branch that is above.

Some graft upon poles after this manner: To graft in poles.
with a French wimble they pearce a pole of Willow, or other white wood in
many places, but with this caveat, that the holes be half a foot one from
another: afterward, they put in these holes thus pierced great store of shoots
of such Trees as they are disposed to graft, and thus they set them in the
ground, in such sort as that nothing but the end of the shoot is seen: alter
which, if so be they take, the pole is broken, and they removed into other
places.

Some there are that make impes of Peare-trees and Apple Trees in a green lath
of vvitch-bazell, where they put their grafts, betwixt the bark and the wood,
and going afterward to choose a moist place, therein they bury the said green
lath half a foot deep, leaving the shoots a foot long, of which they gather
some impes, which they cut away, as also the band of the lath where they are
grafted, and transplant them (...) other places, where it likes them best: but
this is not counted the surestand most infallible way.

In Normandy likewise they make plants of sprigs and new branches growing up
from the ^eet of the Peare-trees and Apple Trees, these they cleave in four
quar^ers and in the midst of them they put the end of a Barley care, or else a
Bean, and (...) reported by that means to breed good and natural trees,
without any other manner of grafting of them: but I am of opinion, that neither
the Beans not yet the Barley do any good for the helping of them to take root,
because that commonly ^uch s^ockes as are planted do not put forth root at the
end of the foot, but higher, (...) almost even at the top of the earth, there
being the most nourishing part of the ^arth.

Some put young branches and sprigs into the ground, yea and the thin rindes
of ^lum-trees, which afterward take root, and thereupon they plant abricots,
but this ^ommonly happencth in a moist, good, and fruitful soil.

Some do ordinarily plant stocks of the Garden-quince-tree, and graft
Peare-^rees thereon, as also Apple Trees and great Peaches, the fruits whereof
taste as if they ^ere Peach-plums, but they must be grafted half a foot within
the ground, because ^hey never have any fair trunk, and being grafted thus
low, the graft will put forth ^oots of it self, which will make it endure and
continue the longer time.

Some have likewise found out a way to graft the vine, To graft the vine.
which is a very singular and profitable thing, for having a vine that is not
of a good plant, you may by graf^ing of it, soonet come to have fruit, than by
pulling of it up, and planting another (...) the place.

Some graft upon the foot of a plant, which is a great fault, because that at
the most from thence they cannot gather abo^e two or three impes, putting
things also in ad^enture, as well by reason they are not sure that they will
take, as also because that the ^ranch is not strong enough to defend it self
from the wind. Notwithstanding see^ng that the vine takes root of it self,
you may make a trial what it will do by graf^ing it upon a branch after this
manner:

Make a great pit, like as if you would bury some Tree, then make your choice
from the foot or stock of some vine which pleases you not, of certain
branches which you shall find fit and meet to receive grafts, whither they be
new wood, or of two or three years growth, cut them off and cleave them some
three or four finge^, even up unto some joint: then sharpen the other branch
which you mean to graft, and stick it in the cleft of the other, joining
together the rind of the cloven one (...) every side, in such sort, as that
they may seem to be but one, wrapping round above some moss, and after
binding it up with some pack-thread, or else with Ozie^^, (...) well. Having
thus done, prepare a place where you will set it, and lay don^^ your your
graft, after the manner and fashion that you use in propagating: then lay alide
Horse dung, not thoroughly rotten, upon the place where you have joined the
(...) branches. By this means, of one Vine-stocke you shall make many,
turning in the earth upon your grafts of the stock of the Vine, as is done
when one lay^^h Vines in the ground. Afterward acquaint your grafts with little
stakes, as is used in propagating, and these impes do thrive and grow as well
as the propagated, and (...) fruit as soon.

You may likewise make the like kind of grafts upon Pomegranat-trees,
Nut-trees, Rose-trees, and other such like low and little trees.

CHAP. XVIII.
Special observations of grafting, planting, and sowing of Trees, for to have
exquisite fruits thereof.
IF you graft a graft that brings forth a late fruit, Forward or late fruits.
upon a tree that brings forth an early fruit, the graft will bring forth an
early fruit in his kind: as and if you graft a Peach upon a reclaimed
Mulberrie-tree, it will come two months sooner: The same will come to pass,
if you graft upon a Vine stock, or a black Vine upon a Cherrie-tree, or a
Medlar-tree vpon^ Goose-berrie-tree, or reclaimed Mulberrie-tree. The cause of
this hastened (...) is the nature of the tree whereupon you have grafted, which
being the only (...) to the graft, and being of a timely fruit in respect of
the nature of the graft, does (...) and bring forward the fruit. On the
contrary, if the tree be of a late fruit, and the graft of a timely, the graft
will afterward bring forth late fruit in his kind: and staying after his due
and wonted time, as if it be an Apple Tree upon a Quince-tree, (...) Apples
will prove to hang on the tree till November, and will take so much after the
nature of the Quince-tree, as that they will keep two years. By how much the
(...) you graft upon a tree of the same kind and condition that the graft or
bud is Apple Tree upon an (...) an Apple Tree, a reclaimed one upon a reclaimed
one, or a wild (...) upon a wild one: by so much the fruit becomes greater,
and is of a better rast, as has been said.

Graft one Apple Tree upon another, The graft of the Apple Tree.
and likewise in Goose-berrie-trees and reclaimed Mulberrie-trees, and you
shall have fruit all Summer time, till the beginning of November.

To cause fruit to grow that shall be half Peach and half Nut, Half Peach
and half Nuts.
take an eyelet of the one and of the other, and cut them as near the eyelet
as you can, both the one and the other, and scrape their buttons a little; then
joining them, bind them also very and together, and after cut away their
tops: the fruit growing from these, will be half Peaches and half Nuts.

You may make one fruit to have the taste of four fruits of his kind after this
(...) Take four shoots or grafts of four differing sorts, One fruit having
the rast of many fruits.
but of one kind of tree, as of four sorts of Peare-trees, or Apple Trees: As
for example; of the Apple Tree take the short stalked Apple, the Globe Apple,
sharp tasted Apples, and Apples of Paradise (because that the shoots or grafts
must be of one sort of trees) tie them very well together, in such sort, as
that their bark may touch one another: afterward cover them with glue, or with
sand, or some ^at earth, so close, as that they may seem to be all (...) put
them thus in some well dug ground that is full of manure, that so they may
take root: the fruit that will grow upon these, will have the taste of four
sorts of apples. It proceeds of the same cause if you take two grafts, the
one of a sow^e apple tree, and the other of a sweet, and coupling them together
so close and nee^e, as that they may seem to be one only; use them as before,
and look as the grafts were, so will the apples be. In like manner if you
couple, join and close together in such close and fast manner two small
fig tree boughs, the one of a black fig tree, and the other of a white,
and so set them, and after that they have put forth and blossomed, tie them
again, to the end they may incorporate and grow together, making but one
stock, the figs that come there of will have a red flesh on the one side,
and a white on the other. Some to work the like effect, do put into some
linen cloth the seeds of two sorts of figge-trees, and having tied them very
strait, dig them in the earth, and when they are grown up, they remove the
fig tree which is grown up upon them.

Some do likewise make grafts to bear half Pears, and half Apples,
cleaning one Apple-tree-graft, and one Peare-tree-graft, and after joining the
one half of the one to the other half of the other, and tying them close
together, and ^oming the joints and seames very well with Gum and Wax mixed
together, in such manner as that the water cannot find any entrance at their
joints, and when this is done, they graft this double graft upon the stock of
such a Tree as shall fall for their purpose: But you must think that this
manner of planting is very hard to bring forth fruit. Wherefore they which
take pleasure therein, must be contented with two sorts of grafts, and not to
plant them, but rather to graft them upon another Tree of the kind of the said
grafts, binding them close together, and sharpening them very ^itly for the
purpose at the lower end, in manner as if they were but one only graft.

If you hollow the branch of a Cherrie-tree taking away the pith, Cherries
without a stone.
and after set it again, it will bring forth fruit without any stone: or else
thus better: cut off a young Cherrie-tree within a foot of the earth, cleaving
it also even to the root, take out the pith both of the one side and of the
other, afterward join them together again, and tie them close with a strait
band, and a year after that this Cherrie-tree has taken, graft therein a
graft of a Cherrie-tree which never bare fruit, and the fruit which comes of
such a graft, will be without any stone. Otherwise, cut off from such
stone-fruit-tree as you desire, a graft which may be easily bended: sharpen it
on the two ends, and graft it likewise on the two ends upon two parts of the
Tree, make close the two grafted places with the moss of fat ground, and tie
them carefully with a band: the year following, if you see that the two ends
of the graft have taken some force and strength from the stock, putting forth
some buds, then cut the graft asunder in the midst, and take clean from it
the thickest sprig that it has, and let the other grow, and it will bear in
his due time fruit that has no stone. The same will come to pass, if you
propagate the ends of the smallest boughs of the young Cherrie-tree, plum-tree,
or other stone-fruit-tree, and after that you see that they have taken root, if
you cut off the thickest and fairest twig, and let alone the leanest and
slenderest. The reason and cause of this is, for that the stone cannot grow, if
the tree lack his pith, but in the tops and ends of little boughs there is no
pith: therefore the fruit that comes of them, whether they be planted or
grafted after the manner that has been said, will have no stone, even no more
than that which grows of trees whose pith is taken out.

If in the vine, Laxatiu^ fruit^ Fragra^^ fruit. Colour^dfruits. Fruits having
the virtue of trea^le. Wine against the bi^ings of (...).
fig tree, cherrie-tree, or apple tree, you cleave a branch which has borne
fruit, and take the pith out of it, putting in steed thereof some laxatiue or
soluble thing, and binding it well and straight, you shall make the fruit
laxatiue, according to the nature of that which you have put in: and if you put
therein some sweet smell or pleasant color, the fruits will smell of and show
the same: and if you do this in a rose-tree, the effect will appear in the
rose: and who so shall put ^^tacle or my thridate in the vine, wine made
thereof will cure the bitings of serpents, and not the Wine only, but the
grape, vinegar, branch, and ashes of the branch, will be good against all
manner of biting of venomous beasts.

To graft speedily, take a graft of one knot and writhe it, and take away the
(...) with the kno^, and after inuest and deck up therewith some shoot that is
of the like thickness with the graft, and it will take.

To graft a Vine upon a Vine: To graft a vine upon a vine.
you must cleave it as you do other Trees, (...) to say, even to the very
pith, and afterward putting the graft into the cleft, you must stop it up with
Wax very well, and tie it about very close: but you (...) observe, that it
is no fit time to graft the vine, except it be in the month of Febr^^rie in
vvarme places, and in March in cold places, and that when the Wineshed* death a
kind of thick liquor, and not thin like water: the like may be done in May,
and in the beginning of June, when the sap or juice of the (...) is all
fallen, but in the mean time, you must keep the grafts that you would graft
in cold and shadowed places, that they may put forth buds and spring. See more
hereof above.

To have plums of diverse sorts all the Summer time, Plums at (...) times.
and unto November, graft diverse sorts of plums upon the Goose-berrie. bush,
reclayined Mulberrie-tree, or upon a Cherrie-tree.

To make Medlars, Peaches cherr^e, and madlar^, eating lik^ spice.
Cherries, and Peaches, that they may be aroma^icke in eating and smelling like
spices, and that they may be kept until new come, graft them upon the
reclaymed and well husbanded Mulberrie-tree, as I have told you, and in
grafting of them, wet the grafts in Honey, and put therein a little of the
powder of small Spice, as of Cloves, Nut^^eg, and Cinamome, and the fruit will
have a taste of them.

To cause Medlars to grow without stones, Medlars without stones.
and withal to be sweet as honey, graft them on Eglantine, and in the grafting
of them, wet them in honey. But to have (...) in their grea^nesse two months
before ordinary, and that one may be better than twenty others, graft them in
a reclaymed Mulberrie-tree or a Goose-berrie-bush, and at the grafting thereof
wet the graft.

To have Pears of Augusta, Pears of Augusta Pears of Parm^ made to be (...)
ripe.
of Parma, or of S. Rieule, a month or two sooner ripe than others, graft them
in a reclaymed Mulberrie-tree, and if you would that they should endure and
keep good until new, graft them upon a quince-tree, that they may come late,
and on a reclaimed mulberrie-tree for them to come (...).

To have reclaymed mulberries early ripe, To me mulberries early and late.
graft the mulberrie on the peare-tree, chesnut-tree, or goose-berrie-tree: and
to have the late ripe, as toward November, graft The time of grafting them.
them upon the medlar or quince-tree. They must always be grafted in the (...)
crease of the moon, and yet better three or four days before the first
quaner, for how many days the moon is old when it is grafted, so many years
will it be (...) the Tree b^ing forth fruit, as we have touched before.

To have nuts without shells, Nuts without shells.
you must take a keruell which is very found and not any whit hurt, and wrap
it in wool or the leaves of a vine, or in plane-tree (...), that it may not be
eaten of Auts, set it thus inwrapped, and the nut-tree coming thereof will
bring forth nuts without shells: the like may be done in alm^^d-trees, if you
oftentimes put ashes unto the foot thereof, or unto the roots under the ground,
and this also holds generally in all other fruits which have an outward shell
if they be let in this order.

To have great nuts, plums, and almonds, Nuts, plums, and great almonds.
take four stones of the foresaid fruits, and put them in a pot or other
vessel full of earth, joining the one to the other as near as may be, and
turning the pot and the bottom upward, make a hole in the said bottom, and
the stones shall be constrained to put forth their ^prout upon high through the
said hole, and by this const^aint the four sprou^s will join and incorporate
themselves together in such sort, as that they will all make but one stock of
a nut-tree, which according to his season will bear fairer nuts than any other
trees of the same kind and nature. But for the more easier doing hereof, you
must after the fruit is once shaped and fashioned, take away from the nut-tree,
almond-tree, plam-tree, and such like, all the small and rascallie sort of
fruit which you shall find upon them, and so the juice of the Tree will give it
self wholly to the remainder: which also by that means will be the better fed
and nourished, as having be^towed upon them all the substance which was
provided for the others that are taken away if they had not been gathered.
Wherefore the case stands plain in the whole matter of nourishment, whether
it be in things that have life, or those which are without life, that the
starued or rascally sort does come, by the juice his conversion and being
turned unto the nourishing of other fruits which are greater: and it cannot be
otherwise seeing the distributive virtue of the Trees being occupied about
many, must needs have the less for every one, whereas when it has but a few
to feed, it deals the more bountifully.

To cause an oak or other tree to continue green as well in Winter as in
Summer, To keep an oak or other Tree green at all times.
graft it upon a Colewore stock.

Write what you will in the eyelet of the fig tree, Written Figs.
which you mean to graft, and the fig growing thereof will contain the
said writing.

The fig tree will not loose his fruit That the Fig Tree loose (...) his
fruit.
if the stock be rubbed over with Mulberties; or if you cause it to be cast
about with pits while the seven stars do appear, watering the foot with
salt brine and water mingled together equally.

The Cherrie-tree will bear a pleasant and sweet smelling fruit, The
Cherrie-tree grafted upon a Pay tree.
and will not be subject unto the eatings of snailes, cat^rpillers, and other
small worms if it be grafted upon a bay tree.

The peare-tree that you will graft, The Peare-tree of sweet roses or musk
(...).
will bear a pear smelling like roses or musk if you cleave the graft which
you mean to graft, and put into the cleft thereof a grain of musk, or a
dried leaf of a sweet smelling rose, and so graft it. And the like may be done
in other fruit Trees to have well perfumed and sweet smelling fruit: by this
piece of cunning skill, Roses become to smell of musk, and the eyelets have
the smell of cloves.

It must stand for a general rule, that neither any graft after the blossom,
as neither that which is laden with fruit, is to be grafted.

If the white Poplar be grafted upon the Mulberrie-tree, White Mulberries.
it will bring forth white Mulberries.

The Cherrie-tree will bear his fruit more early, Grap^s in the Spring.
and before his ordinary time, if you lay quick lime unto the roots: or if
they be watered often with vvarme water: some say likewise, that if you graft a
black vine upon a Cherrie-tree, that then the vine will bear grapes in the
Spring, the reason whereof we have set down in the beginning of this Chapter.

Graft Citron-trees upon Pomegranat or Mulberrie-trees, and the fruit thereof
will be of a red color.

If you would transform fruits from their natural shape, To fashion fruits
after what shape that one will.
into some other diutrs and artificial shapes, put the said fruits when they
begin to be some what big, betwixt two mouldes of plaster or baked earth,
within which there are portraiures of diverse forts, cut and tie them sofely,
for the fruits as it grows will take the stamp and impression more and more:
but in the mean time, you must convey air into the moulds at little holes:
for else the fruit would rot within.

The graft that is made upon the Alder-tree or Oak, brings forth a very
strong Tree: but if it bear fruit, yet the fruit is of no savor or raste.

To have Peaches or Almonds to grow with letters written upon them: Peaches or
Almonds written upon.
after that you have eaten the Peaches or Almonds, steep the stone two or
three days, afterward open it softly and take out the Almond, and with a
brass pen or otherwise write upon the rind of the Almond, what you please,
but do it not too deep, afterward put the Almond again into his stone,
vvrapping the said stone about with paper or parchment, and so plant it, and
the fruit growing thereupon will be written and engraven.

To make Peaches redd: Red Peach^^.
seven days after you have set the Peach stone, take it out of the earth
again, and within the opening of the shell put some Vermillion or Cinnabrium,
and then set it again: It will fall out likewise after the same manner, if you
graft the great Peach upon the red Rose-tree, or upon the Almond-tree, (...)
upon the red damask Plum-tree: you may also make the Peach of such other
color Peaches of one or other color.
as you will, if according to the manner aforesaid, you put such color as you
would have it of within the shell of the kernel.

To preuene that Peaches do not become withered and rotten, you must take away
the bark of the stock of the Peach-tree, that so there may issue out from
(...) some small quantity of moisture, after you must draw the place over with
m^tter, mixed with straw. Pearce the body of the Peach-tree below, and take
away the pith, and fasten within it a stopple of Willow or Corneile-tree, and
then you shall have Peaches without any stone. Peaches without stones.


Pomegranat-trees will prove very fruitful, Fruitful pomegran^ts.
if you anoint the stock of the Tree with purcelaine and spurge stamped
together.

Of an Almond-tree that is hard and bitter, To make bitte^ almonds sweet.
you shall make a soft and sweet, if you bare the stock even unto the roots
which lie shallowest in the ground: and water them often during certain days
with warm water, before that it bloslome, and thus the Almonds that before
were bitter will become sweet.

To make good Muscadell: To make good Muscadell.
Take an iron wyre and put it in the plant of a stock, which is cut with three
eyes, using the means to have all the pith forth: after which fill up the said
stock with Nurmegs, stopping it so therewithal that the water may not get in:
and the roots that these three eyes shall bear will be Muscadell roots.

That nut will have a ve. ie tender shell and a very thick kernel, Nuts with
thin shells.
in whose foot, stock and roots there are put ashes.

To cause a Nut-tree that bears no leaves before Midsommer, A nut-tree
bearing neither leaf nor fruit tiu Midsommer
upon Midsommers even to put forth both leaves and fruit together, and withal
to have his fruit ripe and ready to care as soon as any other: fill a pot
with green Nuts gathered the said Midsommer even, and make a hole in the
bottom of the pot, that the water may run out, putting it after that upon
the said Midsommers even into the earth. Plant the shootes that come of these,
and you shall find the thing before spoken of.

The grafting The grafting of Peaches*
which is performed to a graft upon a tree correspondent and (...) to the
nature of the graft, proves of most beautiful growth, and most fruitful, and
his fruit most durable: which falls not out when this correspondencie,
synpadne and fellowship is wanting: and this is the cause why the Peach-tree
though better being grafted in the plum-tree than elsewhere, and the
Peare-plum-tree in the Almond-tree, and there continue a longer time.

If the eyelet of the Peare-plum-tree, The grafting of the peaer-plum-tree.
and of the Almond-tree be grafted together, the kernel of the fruit which
comes thereof will be an Almond.

The Plum-tree grafted upon the Almond-tree bears a fruit like unto the
Almond, Plums like to the almond.
and if it be grafted in the Nut-tree, the rind or husk will be like unto the
nut husk or rind, but within it will be a plum. Again, if it be grafted upon
a quince-tree, it will bring forth a fruit of a diverse fashion, according to
the nature thereof.

Graft a Plum-tree graft or any other fruit trees graft upon the fig tree,
and you shall have your fruit to grow without blossoming. Fruit without
blossoms.


Graft the grafts of an apple tree upon a ^owre pear, and upon the Richardine
apple tree, and you shall have apples of a yel^^^ or straw color, Apples of a
yellow color.
and of the chesur-tree: and to have such as will last unto November, you must
graft them upon a quinc^-tree, and other late trees, and so they will be for to
keep two years.

Take two grafts of apple trees, Apples of two (...).
the one sour, and the other sweet, and join them close together when you
shall graft them: the apple will raste both of the one and other favor, as we
have said before.

If any tree bring forth his fruit late, Late (...).
or if it be altogether barren and without fruit, and yet full of both leaf
and vvood: set in the midst of his maine roots, (...) else in the midst of
his stock about Winter, a wedge of greene-wood, (...) year following it will
bear fruit. The reason is, because by the means of (...), the sap and
substance which wandered abroad and employed it self about the bearing of
leaves and increase of wood, will draw in it self, and go a closer and nearer
way to work, converting his service to the making of fruit.

You shall have Cherries on many Trees which will be good to eat unto November,
Cherries at all times.
if you graft the Cherrie-tree upon a reclaymed Mulberrie-tree, and upon a wild
one.

If you desire that the fruit of your grafts should increase in goodness,
Sweet Medle^^
and furpasse the taste of the common grafts as they are when they are grafted,
you must first before you graft them, steep them in honey tempered with
Rose Water, so long as till they be thoroughly moistened, and then grafting
them, draw them over afterward in steed of mortar with Virgins-wax, and other
things fit to lute withal: if after this manner you graft Medlar-trees on
Goose-berrie-bushes, and upon naturalized mulberrie-trees, and withal, in the
grafting wet your graft in honey, you shall have a hastier or earlier and
better fruit.

Graft Chesnur and Calio^-peare-trees upon a Goose-berrie-bush, Fotward pears
and late pears.
if you would have them to bear their fruit early: and upon the white thorn,
for to bear it late, or else upon the sour peare-tree.

To make apples red, Red apples.
you must water the tree with urine, or else plant Rose-trees near unto the
Apple Trees.

Pears will have no stones, if at the first you pick away the stones and all
other gravel from under them very carefully, Tears without stones.
making the ground where the Tree shall stand free thereof, and withal lay
upon it at the roots being planted good store of ^i^ted earth, watering it
afterward very diligently: but and if the peare-tree be already grown up,
and become a perfect Tree, you must lay it open to the lowest roots, taking
away all the stones and gravel that is underneath, and about it, and casting
in the earth again which you cast forth abroad, but after that it has been
^i^ted, and some dung put unto it, seeing that it be watered, after you have so
cast in your earth.

The pomegranat will become very red, Red (...)
if you water the pomegranat-tree with water and lee mingled together.

The sour pomegranat will become sweet, Sweet pomegranat^.
if you lay about the root of the pomegranat-tree the dung of swine, and water
it with man's urine.

Graft the graft of the Peach-tree upon the Quince-tree, Peaches and quinc^s
together.
you shall have Peaches and Quinces together: likewise if you graft upon the
Peach-tree, the graft of the Quince-tree.

The graft of an Almond-tree grafted upon a Peach-tree, Peaches and almonds
together.
or that of the Peach-^ree grafted upon an Almond-tree, causes the one tree or
the other to bring forth ^oth Peaches and Almonds, whose rind and kernel also
will be good to eat.

To have a pippin or kernel to bring forth a fair fruit and timelier than any
other graft upon the same stock, To have (...) fruit of a pippin or kernel.
take the branches of the Peare-tree or Apple Tree, and (...) the lower end
make little holes, but not clean through, and not within a hand-^redth one of
another: they must be one right over against another, and have a grain (...)
two of ^alt put into them, and hereupon the branch laid in the earth with a
few ^ats, cutting often the end as is used to be done with grafts when they are
grafted. If ^ereupon the branch take and wax green, it will bear a fairer and
timelier fruit than any other of that kind.

To have red Apples, Red apples.
you must plant Rose-trees or Mulberrie-trees near unto the Apple Trees. Or
else set some stake in the earth near unto the Apple Tree, and there ^eere at
hand set a vessel full of water, whereupon the Southern Sun beams may
^li^estly beat in such sort, as that the vapor which shall rise from the water
may beat against the fruit: or else uncover the Apple Tree at the foot in the
Spring time, and ^ater them sundry times with urine: coveting them again
above ten or twelve days after, and watering them with urine betwixt times.

To make apples sweet, Sweet apples!
you must water the roots of the apple tree with man's urine, ^herein has been
dis^olued goats dung, and the lees of old wine.

To have great cherries, Great cherries. A fruitful apple tree.
you must often break the cherrie-tree.

To have great quantity of apples, you must compass the stock of the
apple tree the height of a foot above the earth, with a plate of lead taken
from the pipe of asp^^^, and when the apple tree begins to blossom, you
must take away this band of lead. This banding may be renewed every year, to
make the apple tree fruitful: the like course also may be taken with the
peare-tree.

To make a tree to bear grapes together with the fruit of his own kind* A
tree bearing grapes and his ^oont natural fruit
Put the stock of a vine in the foot, and boring the tree clean through with
a wimble, you shall at this hole put through the vine stock, in such ^ore as
that there may be two joints remay^ing within the stock, and so much o^ your
vine stock at remay^^th within the stock of the tree must be pilled, and the
bark taken away, that so the substance of the tree and of the vine stock may
more easily grow together (...) this, you shall stop the holes of the said bore
very close, both of the one side and of the other, to prevent all danger of
water getting in, and at the end of three years, cut off the vine stock
behind, thus your tree will bear grapes, and his own natural fruit, and both
they will grow from the same trunk or body.

Graft the graft of an apple tree upon a peach-tree, Peaches.
and likewise the graft of a peach-tree upon a peare-tree; and on the
contrary, and you shall have a strange fru^^ called peach-apples, and
peach-peares. And thus likewise stands the case, if you graft (as has been
said) the graft of a peare-tree.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the time of planting and manner of transplanting of grafted trees, both
great and small.
SOme say, The (...) time of plant.
that it is best to plant in the Spring Equinoctial (which is the time about
the twelfth of March) because that trees at than time, (...) root, and bud more
readily, and put forth the sooner, espec^ally (...) places. The greatest part
of this our country of France, (...) transplant trees before and after the
four and twentieth of December, at which (...) we see here in the city of
Paris every Wednesday and Saturday great sale of (...) sorts of trees: and yet
in my judgment this is not the best time to plant and ^^^^plant, because that
trees would not be washed nor wet about their fee^, in such (...) as they are
planted: but for the time before and after the four and (...) of November
(which is called the dead Month) it does nothing but rain for the (...) part,
as we have observed for this ten years space: and although this (...) were
cold, as some commonly report that for three weeks before this day, and thr^^
weeks after, great cold do rule and reigns then if the cold be so great, how
should it be but that the roots of the Trees transplanted, as also other plants
should (...), especially the earth being newly stirred, as is most evidently
app^^^^ in (...). But the best time to transplant Trees, (...) Autumn, because
that in (...) there is as it were a shadow of Summer, S. Martins* Summer, and
in this time (...) ^^^meth as though Trees would make a new Spring, as the
blossoming of some Trees the same time does seem oftentimes to per^uade, and
for that in this (...) Trees (...) root much better than in Winter, in which
time there is nothing almost (...). And if the case so stand as that it is fit
for to plant great thick Trees, the (...) must be made six months before,
and that* because the earth should thereby be corrected, and as it were ren^wed
by the ayte and hear, as husband (...) workmen know very well which turn
their grounds before Winter, and all the time thereof let them lie thus tilled,
then by a far stronger reason, you (...) it is much better to plant^ trees
(...) Autum^^e than in Winter. But howso^^^ it be, when you plant any thing in
(...), it must be done some five days before the end of August: and in high
and dry places men plant at all times and seasons. It is good to sow or set
the first day of the first quarter of the Moon: but the 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13,
17, and 18, it is not good. If you plant in the decrease of the Moon, the tree
will yield the more profit, and fruit will grow the sooner thereupon; and by
how much your planting falls to be nearer unto the end and going out of the
Moon, by so much the tree will be of a more beautiful growth, and becoming
more fer^ile and fruitful: but and if you plant in the increasing and new
Moon, indeed your trees will take better, and become more durable and lasting:
they will spread in root, and wood, and leaves, but they will give over so much
the more to bear fruit. If constrained by some necessity, you plant in the
new of the Moon, then it will be best for you to break off the shoots that
they shall thereupon put forth about the later end of the Moon, and then they
will bear their fruits as others do. Notwithstanding, this limiting and
bounding of the time of the Moon is not of such warranti^e, but that the tree
may be as profitable at all other times of the Moon, as well as either then,
or else in the increase and new of the Moon.

Some plant in January the plants that have the shanke or foot of their shoots
^ut by as, as also the plant that is set of stones, and in a well tempered
place: but in a warm place, men are wont to plant in the months of October,
November, and December.

Trees that have a gross thick root, are planted in October, November, and
December: but the shoots or little branches are planted in March, when they are
in sap.

Trees that have a great pith, as Figge-trees, naturalized Mulberrie-trees,
Hazell, and such like, are planted without any root, from after mid September
unto the beginning of November: but other trees which you would plant with
roots, must be planted about the beginning of December, or very shortly after.

Gross trees are transplanted from one place into another in the month of
November, Gross or thick trees.
and they must be freed from Snailes, and lopt and cropped before they be
transplanted, for so they take the better, and put forth their siences very
powerfully: and if in taking of them up, or transporting of them, it happen
that the bark of their roots be broken, you must draw the pilled and uncovered
place over with good dung or earth, before that you put it into the ground
again, and stir up the earth very well round about where you intend to let
them down again, to the end that their roots may spread and seat themselves
to their good contentment, without being pinched or strait^ned.

Some do remove from after the beginning of November until March, when the
trees begin to enter into their sap; for the sap once drawing up aloft,
does forbid all removing of the tree: and therefore, in such case, the sooner
the better, that is so say, if presently after the leaves be fallen, which is
in the beginning of Winter, you go about it; but in waterie places it is good
to stay till January and February: but nothing must be done this way when it
raineth, or when the earth is wet; for it would so harden upon the drying, as
that the roots would be oppressed and choked.

The young grafts which you have grafted in the stocke-Nurcerie, (...) grafts,
or elsewhere, must be removed as soon as the grafts shall have closed up the
cleft of the plant, as some are of opinion: but yet this is hazarded ware, the
graft having not as yet taken almost any disposition or good liking of the
sap of the plant, which being thus again removed, it half a^tonished and
put out of the high way of his well-pleasing nourishment, and so begins to
wither when it comes to take a cast of his new dishes and provision: but and
if you stay till the graft have put forth a fair branch, before you remove the
graft, you shall shun the danger that might otherwise ensue.

You must plant your trees again as soon as you have taken them up, To (...)
trees.
if no other weighty matter let you: but if you be put off from doing it,
either because it is brought you from far, or upon some other occasion, you
must, so soon as they be taken up, cover their roots with the earth from
whence they were taken, new leaves, and slraw, that so the rain may not wash
them, and make them afterward to (...) when they become dry again; and to the
end also, that the air and breath (...) of the wind or of the Sun, or yet of
the Moon, may not dry them and (...) the moisture, which keeps their roots
in good hearr, and fit to grow, (...) things being very hurtful, but the
rain the wor^e of the two.

Sour Cherrie-trees cannot abide to be removed: for being transplanted, they
will hardly put forth any siences, especially if they have their chief and
principal root maimed.

Before you remove great trees, you must loppe off their boughs very
diligeraly, at has been said: but as for little ones, you need not crop them,
to take off (...) of their heads, neither yet to take any of their boughs
from them, if they have (...) too bushie a head: If you desire to know a reason
wherefore, it is thus* If you (...) the head and tops upon trees when they
are grown somewhat great and thick, they will still be lending of their sap
upward, not looking to the feeding of the roots, for that the air attracteth
the nourishment of plants: as may easily be proved by example, when there
grows any small tree under one that is very great, for there the small tree
will not thrive so well as if it were abroad in the air, and (...) under the
shadow; and so that which has his head cut off, will take root sooner than and
if it were whole and untouched. But if the tree which you remove, exceed not
the thickness of a great ynch, you shall let it remain whole because young
plants take root more easily than those which are old, and the reason is openly
known.

If the roots of the trees which you would remove, be much longer than is
needful, you may take off the ends thereof in setting them down^ again, and
that so much as may fit best for the hole wherein you mean to set them, for so
by this mean they will not be stopped up of the sides of the hole, but will
amast and draw moisture out of the earth for the nourishment of the tree a
great deal more abundantly.

When you remove any tree, you must lay his roots round about with (...)
earth, and take heed, that the weedie earth which you have dug or cut away
(...) pit whither you mean to remove it, do not fall in amongst the roots,
for it would put them in danger to be ouer-heated: or else, that they growing
up again, might diminish the nourishment of the tree. If it happen, that the
earth which you (...) taken out of the pit be full of worms, which might hurt
the roots, then (...) therewith some lee and ashes. When the roots have taken
foot, trample down the ground as hard as may be, or else beat it with a
Pauiers beetle, watering it afterward if it be dry, or else not.

CHAP. XX.
Of the place and soil for Trees in general.
THe principal point in growing of Trees, is to provide them of (...) air and
earth, because that these do cheer and season the^, and are the proper
subject of their nourishment. And as concerning the earth, that is recommended
into us, as to be had in regard and looked unto more than any thing else, as
that it be such as is very murlie, temperate in cold and heat, and of a mean
and middle sort of moisture and fatness, for such ground as exceeds in any
one of these things, is not so fit for any Fruit-tree. This is a rule to stand
general in and for all Fruit Trees: but as for particular kinds of Trees, it
is very well known, that every particular Tree craves his several (...)
particular soil, whence it may gather fit and agreeable nourishment for it
(...), as Theophrastus testifies. In like manner, one desires a diverse kind
of placing and situation from the other. Wherefore the trees which crave the
refreshment of having their stocks taken up, do commonly thrive better in
valleys than in high places, as well for that their seat must not be
altogether so drained of moisture as the higher places be, as also for that the
moisture which is in higher grounds conueyeth it self and distilleth into the
lower and hollow, whether it be rain or any spring rising from thence.

In watrie places you must not make your pit very deep, wherein you mean to
plant your tree; but in dry grounds you must set them somewhat more deep:
neither yet must you heap too much earth in upon those pits when you fill them
up again, that so the rain may the better stay about them and water them.

That which is commonly received, as that in good ground there grow good
fruits, must be understood with respect had to the natural goodness that the
fruit has in (...) self, if both the industry and skill of man to husband
and keep it neat, and deli^^er it when any inconvenience presses upon it, to
dry and to season it so as that it may yield his fruit in due time, be not
wanting* for these failing, the fruit will likewise greatly fail of his
goodness, taste, and durablenesse, and so will falsify the general rule above
named.

Set down with your self, to remove your trees into so good a ground, or
rather better, than that from whence you took them up, having respect to other
especial observations besides to be observed, according as will be required of
the particular natures of every one. And if it is be possible, remove them
into the like situation for the receiving of the Sunshine, unto they which
they were first set and planted in: and that you may not fail hereof, mark
their bark upon such or such a quarter, and set (...) upon the same again in
removing of it. But this observation (as I must confess) is not always kept,
for the reasons above named.

Also plant those of a forward Spring in a late soil, and a late soil in a
hot ^round.

The greatest part of trees do delight in the South Sun, and to be seated
upon ^ome Sunnie bank, from the Western wind, as being very contrary unto
them, ^specially to Almond-trees, Abricot-trees, Mulberrie-trees, Figge-trees,
and Pome^ranate-trees, but principally from the North-east wind, because it is
sharp and swith^^ing, very hurtful for all sorts of plants, even to all
fruits, of what quality soever that ^hey be, but chiefly when they are in
blossom, and that because it blows from off ^he Sea, as also for that it is
half North, which is very sharp, but not so dangerous (...) the North-east:
and some say, that this wind blows once a year, as in the Spring, and that
it spoyleth buds, especially those of the Vine: Vnde versus; Vae tibi Galerna,
^re quam fit clausa Taberna. On the contrary, Chesnut-trees, Cherrie-trees
that bear (...) sour fruit, Quince-trees, and Plum-trees, do not much affect
or sport and delight ^hemselues either with cold or much heat.

In watrie places trees commonly grow great, and bear much fruit and leaves,
but ^hey are not of any commendable relish, color, or durablenesse: yea,
they bear ^ruit commonly the year they are set, if they be accustomed to
bear. Trees must be ^et the thicker in a fruitful soil.

If you mean to plant trees in a cold place, and that yet the tree should not
be hurt of the cold, you must plant them on the Sunnie side of the bank, from
the North, ^ut toward the South.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the place and time wherein every Fruit-tree delights to be sown,
planted, and grafted in particular: and first of the Almond-tree.
THe Almond-tree The Almond-tree.
delights in hot places, looking toward the South or East, or where the air
at the least is moderate; as upon the tops of hills, or places near unto
hills, that are somewhat stony and grau^lie, stony or marlie: in which places
it does not only flourish well, being planted, and blossom abundantly, but
bears therewithal great quantity of dry Almonds, as also hard and
well-rellisht ones. But contrariwise, if it be planted in a moist and watrie
ground, and cold place, it neither grows well, not bears fruit well,
neither yet continues long. The fit time for the setting of it, is about the
Winter Sols^ice, which is the eleventh day of December, even unto the end of
the same month, or somewhat after: for the plant of this tree being forward
and early in putting forth buds, if it were planted in the Spring time, it
might let slip and loosen the time of the year, which might be the fittest for
the maintaining and comforting of his blossom. If you would have it to grow of
the stone unbroken, and if I may so say, of his seed, you must let it be in
January and all February, in such places as are temperate, or in October and
all the month of November in places that are hat. And thus to cause it to grow
of his fruit, you must take new Almonds, thick ones, having white shells,
very porous and spongie, and lay them in steep for the space of twelve hours
in honied water, and after this dig them in the earth four finger deep, the
sharp end downward, and after to water them three of four times a month. It
grows also of shoots and siences, but the sience must be taken from the top
of the tree, full of pith, sound of bark, and cut under the knot. And as
concerning the grafting of it, you must take the time of Autumn, for (as has
been said) this tree is a quick-spur and fore-rider: but and if you stay till
the Spring time, you shall break it off when the sience is fully put forth.
And for the choosing of graf^s that will take well, you must take them up on
high, and on the top of the tree, and not from the midst, much less from
below; and these grafts you may graft either in the bud, or in the cleft, and
upon a tree of his own kind, or upon the peach or Plum-tree: indeed the
Almond-tree that is grafted, is not of such growth, or so ^^^^full, as that
which is planted.

The good Farmer must plant and make grow great store of Almond-trees, The
profitable Almond-tree.
seeing they are not chargeable to maintain, neither yet their fruit to keep,
but rather of greater profit and lesser loss than any other, seeing that even
under them Come will grow jolly and fair, the Almond-tree having but a few
leaves, and those little ones.

The barren Almond-tree The barren Almond-tree.
will become fruitful, and bear, if you lay open the roots in Winter: or else
if you pierce some part of the stock close by the earth, and put through the
hole a wedge of Oak, watering it about with man's urine.

You shall make bitter Almonds sweet, Sweet Almonds.
if you lay round about the roots of the Almond-tree Swines dung, and Urine,
casting much earth upon it afterward, and this yearly: or if you bore a hole
in the stock of the tree, and put therein a wedge dipe in honey: or if (as
Pliny and Theophrastus say) you bore the stock through and through below, and
let the sap run out.

Of sweet Almonds you may make sour ones, Bitter Almonds.
if you let the beasts browse and crop off the first and tender branches.

The Almond-tree will be free from all annoyance of fogges, if so be there be
sm^ll gravel laid unto the roots before it blossom, and when it shall begin
to blossom, then to take it away.

You may have written Almonds, Almonds within printed letters.
if you break the shell of an Almond veri^ finely, without doing any harm to
the kernel, whereupon having written what you think good, wrap up the shell
and kernel in paper, and so set it well covered with dyrt and Swines dung.

Almonds are gathered The gathering of Almonds.
when their husks gape through the force of the Sun: and having beat them
down, if you shell them altogether, and wash them in salt brine, they will
become white, and will keep a long time, provided that before you lay them up
to keep, you dry them in the Sun. Their husks will be easily taken off
from them, if you spread them upon straw.

The place to keep them well, The place to keep them in.
must be dry, whether it be Coffer, Presses, or Garner: and if the number be
great that you would keep, you must see that the place have good store of
air, and be lying open to the North wind.

The bitter Almonds have power to resist drunkenness, Drunkenness*
as Plutarch witnesses, of a certain Physician, which did use to drink out
all comers, and not be drunken himself, and that by eating five or six bitter
Almonds before he did drink: but they kill Hens and Chickens if they eat
them. The bitter Almond bruised and rubbed or laid to the brows and temples,
do appease the headache, and procure s^eepe, especially if you put unto it
water of Veruaine.

The use of sweet Almonds is good for them which are troubled with clammie
fleame in their throat, Diseased (...)*
or which have weak lungs, and are subject to the gravel in the reins, or
difficulty of urine, as also to restore natures force, and to make men apt to
venerie. The gum of the Almond-tree does quickly stay the spetting of blood:
yea, the daily use sufficiently shows how profitable this fruit is, for it
serves all the year long for the making of Almond milk, Potage, Pennets,
Marchpanes, and other such dainty devises.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the Peach-tree, Abricot-tree, Spanish Peach-tree, Peach-Plum-tree, bastard
Peach-tree, and the small Peach-tree.
PEach-trees are planted of their stone, setting it two fingers within the
ground, and the small end thereof upward: it delights in sandy places, in
dry places, and where the Sun has his full force; but in cold, moist, and
windy places it dies presently, if it be not defended from ^he said
inconveniences. You must set the stone with the sharp end turned into the
^round, and when it is in the earth, dig it, battle, and stir up the earth
about it at ^he foot, at the least thrice a year: you must allow it dung, a
fat soil, and a small ^ould, and that a little before Winter come, and
especially Swines dung, which ma^eth it to grow more thick than any other
sort of dung or batling; by this means ^ou shall have good Peaches, thick
ones, and fleshie. You must likewise weed them ^ft: after, when it is two
years old, you must remove it, and lay it along in his pit, ^uen after the
manner that they use Vines, letting one only bough stand out of the ^arth,
which may grow to serve for the stock and body, and thus it will continue
^ong by reason of the great number of roots which it will have both to stay it
as a ^oundation, and to feed it: but you must cut off the longest branch, and
that which (...) the straightest of all the other, which is the thing that
would be diligently practiced upon all fruit trees, because that it is the
thing which keeps them from bearing ^ore and abundance of fruit. It is not
to be grafted out of it self, if you will have it ^xcellent: howbeit, to make
it last the longer (in as much as it soon waxes old) it is ^ood to graft it
upon a bitter Almond-tree, damask Prune-tree, or Quince-tree, but (...)
otherwise than scutcheon or flu^e-like.

It must be watered at euenings in hot weather, with cool water, and sometimes
with water mingled with the lees of wine, especially when it withers and
begins to fall away: as also to remedy it when it is in danger of fainting
and drying, you must lop it and cut away all the boughs, as is wont to be done
with Willowes when they are headed; for by that means they become lusty and
frolike, and to have as many boughs as they had before. It must also be
s^ayed upon some Pole or Willow, because his roots be very tender, small, and
not creeping far into the earth: likewise we see that the Peach-tree does
grow old and fall away incontinently.

It bears a diverse fruit, as well in color and taste, as in substance, and
this diversity comes, for the most part, of the ground, but principally of
the husbanding of them. And that it is thus, the Peach-trees that are planted
or grafted upon Vines, bring forth Peaches of a better taste and more solid
substance: the Peach-tree grafted upon a Mulberrie-tree, brings forth Peaches
that have red flesh: the Peach-tree grafted upon a Nut-tree, does bear Peaches
with husks like Nuts, whose tree is but small, and has leaves like unto the
Almond-tree, and a reddish flower. It is true, that such a tree may become such
a one of it self, as we see infinitely in France. The Peach-tree grafted upon
an Almond-tree, bears Peaches which have a kernel like unto the Almond, but
the rind and the flesh like unto the Peach.

There may as much be said of Abricots, The Abricot-tree.
called of the Latins Praeocia, or Armeniaca; of Spanish Peaches, Medlar-tree,
bastard Peach-tree, and small Peaches, which are kinds of trees agreeing much
with the Peach, all which are very tender in frost, especially the grafted
Abricot-tree, and it continues not past half the time of the Peach-tree: all
of them are subject to be spoiled of the cold, snowes, frosts, and fogges,
which happen after that they are blossomed: but to keep them from these
dangers, it will be good to graft them upon the Quince-tree or Almond-tree: all
of them will bear great fruit, if when they blossom they be watered with
Goats milk. Concerning the particular virtues of the Peach-tree, see more
above in the nineteen^^ Chapter of this Book.

The flowers of the Peach-tree are excellent good against melancholy and the
worms, Melancholy. Worms.
if you make syrrups thereof of seven or eight infusions to be taken fasting.
The gum of the Peach-tree is taken with good success in the spetting of
blood with the water of Plantaine or Purcelane: for the cough and difficulty
of breathing* with Hydromel, or the decoction of Folefoot: for the gravel and
stone with the (...) of Radishes, Citrons, or white Wine, the weight of two
drammes. The leaves stamped and applied unto the belly, do kill worms: the
juice thereof dropped into the (...), does the like: the kernels eaten, take away
the wringings of the belly: eaten to the number of six or seven in the
beginning of meat, they prevent drunkenness: (...) and boiled in vinegar to
the form of a broth, and after rubbed in place con^enient, they hinder the
falling of the hair: stamped and made in form of milk with the water of
Veruaine, and ^ubd about the brows and temples, they cease the headache: the
oil made by expression cease the pains of the ears; and (...), the
Collicke and Sciatica.

He that has regard of his health, must not use these fruits but as sparingly
as he can possibly, and fasting rather than otherwise, because they corrupt
easily in the stomach: but above all things, they may not be eaten dipped or
steeped in wine* because wine corrects them not, as some think, but rather
causes that their (...) pierces the more suddenly and easily into the
veins. The Peaches of Corbeil^^^ counted for the best, having a dry and
solid pulpe, and somewhat red, not sticking or cleaving any thing unto the
kernel. The Romans made great accoun^ of the Peaches which they called
Persica Duracina, Spanish Peaches.
as do also the Brittons: The least dangerous, least subject to be corrupted,
and most pleasant, are the Abricots; which also some have left out of the
number of the kinds of Peaches, and placed amongst the Plums, as well because
of their pleasant smell, as for their harmelesnesse, and (...) both within and
without they do rather resemble the Plum than the Peach. The oil pressed out
of their kernel, is marvelous good against the Hem^^^^ (...) and swelling of
ulcers, and is also used as a remedy against the impediments of the speech,
and pain of the ears.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the small Nut-tree or Hasel-tree.
THe Hasel-tree (which is called the small Nut-tree of the small fruit which it
bears, or the Filberd-tree, of the great fruit that it bears) grows in
any air or ground: but it best delights in a lean ground, that is sandy
and moist, near unto waters, or in places that men use to water, because this
helps them as well in the bringing forth of their fruit in great store, as
for to make them endure long: add hereto, that they put forth and spring in
such sort at the root, as that thereof one may set as many as he will in other
places. When they are sown, they must be put two fingers under ground: but
indeed they grow better of a plant that has root, or of a shoot cut by as, and
having old and new wood, as we have already declared in the sixth chapter. They
are planted in October and November, in a warm and temperate place, or in
February and March: and it is better to leave upon them some boughs when they
are set, than to set them of one single rod, for so they bear the more fruit.
They must yearly be dug anew at the Spring, near unto the foot, and round
about, and their shoots all cut away, without leaking any standing, save three
or four for to plant and make thick bushie shadow, and the same very neat and
clean for height, not leaving any branch or bough after three or four fadome
from the top. Wherefore, if they be often lopped, picked, and pruned, they will
grow the more straight, compact, and high, and will bear better and fairer
fruit: but otherwise, if a man neglect them, they run out all their
nourishment into wood and leaves, without fruit: Their fruit is called the
small Nut or Filberd. The Filberd of hot Countries (where such trees are called
Filberd-trees) is more round and fleshie than the French small Nut, and it is a
fruit very easily dried and made yellow. But and if you would keep it fresh
and white almost all the year long, shut it up close in an earthen pot, and
set them in the earth; and when it is thus kept, it brings not so much
annoyance with it as otherwise it would, for it naturally procures drowsy
headache and inflammation of the stomach. I know not by what observation of our
ancestors this speech has grown common amongst the people, That the year
which yields plenty of Nuts, does also yield many marriages. Both the little
Nut-tree, as also his fruit, have a certain contrary virtue against venomous
beasts; for if you hang a cluster of small Nuts in any part of the house, no
Scorpion or venomous beast will enter thereinto, but sly away presently. The
Country people have likewise marked in all ages, that the Serpent, Lizard, or
other venomous beast, dies presently, having been stricken with a branch,
staff, or rod of the Hasel-tree. And it is no marvel, seeing Nut kernels
eaten with Figs and Rue do resist venime and the biting of venomous beasts.
The best small Nuts and Filberds and those which have red shells, and which are
hardly broken. The raw shell finely powdered, and drunk with water of Carduus
Benedictus, does heal the pleurisy in the beginning thereof: being drunk to
the quantity of two drammes with red wine, it stays the flux of the belly,
and the whites. It is true, that for the flux of the belly, and whites, ^he red
part of the kernel which sticks unto the shell within is a great deal
better and more forcible. The Filberd nourishes a great deal better than the
Nut, as being ^ closer but not so fat a substance.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Of the Cherrie-tree, sweet Cherrie-tree, bitter Cherrie-tree, and the heart
Cherrie-tree.
IT is apparent, that common Cherrie-trees, sweet Cherrie-trees, bitter
Cherrie-trees, and heart Cherrie-trees, are sorts of trees agreeing in many
things, for they all delight to grow in a cold and moist ground, or else
altogether indifferent, betwixt hot and cold; for a hot air they (...) hardly
endure: and so likewise they refuse to have any dung, because it ouer-heatech
them, and is contrary unto them: and for this cause they must never be planted
in a manured ground. Notwithstanding, if you so temper the dung, as that it may
not be ouer-hot for them, it cannot ^urt them to be dunged, no more than (as
we will show by and by) to have vnquench^ (...) laid to their feet, to has^en
their fruit: but this is true, that if you dung them yearly, that then you
shall not have them of any long continuance. They delight rather to have their
roots compassed with small branches, and the broken parts of their own
siences, or small lumpes and gobbets cut from their own small branches, for in
these they greatly rejoice and profit mightily, ^^uing them in stead of dung.
You may either dig the kernel into the ground, and bury it, or else plant
of the siences near the tops of hills and mountains, whether (...) be in a
high or low place, in October, November, December, and January. You may graft
them in November, or (according to Palladius) from the twelfth day of December
unto the first of February. The best is to graft them in February and in
March: albeit that it be the best cutting of all trees that yield gum, when
the gum is not yet rising, or after it is quite gone down and returned from
whence it rise. Lastly, Cherrie-trees never thrive so well, being nothing done
unto but planted, as when they are gra^^ed: they delight to have their dried
branches often weeded out from themselves, and the siences growing at their
foot: they delight also to be set in hole^ and pits that are dug and cast,
and to be often dug about. And if you would haste^ and cause them to bring
forth their fruit sooner, you must lay Quick lime to the foot of them, or else
water their roots often with warm water; but then such fruit is (...) altered
and made worse, retaining but little of his naturally goodness: even as (...)
will prove and find by the hasty Cherries which the inhabitants of Poictiou
send (...) upon horseback.

They may be grafted upon the Plum-tree and Corneile-tree, but best upon one of
their own kind: in such sort, as that sweet Cherrie-trees being grafted upon
(...) Cherrie-trees, do bear a more soft Cherrie than those are which grow
upon sweet Cherrie-trees, grafted into sweet Cherrie-trees. Cherries grow
fairest upon small Cherrie-trees, and more plentifully also than they do upon
high and tall ones* Wherefore, who so shall graft the small Cherrie-tree upon
the great, shall procure greater store of fruit, and more thick ones, such as
are the wild Cherries, and also (...) have more store of great boughs, than
those trees have which do but as it were (...) on the earth. In like manner,
if when you graft them, you set the bud and the (...) of the graft below, the
boughs that grow forth thereupon will fall out after (...) like manner.

The Coeurs and Agriots may be grafted upon the common sweet Cherrie-tree, but
better upon wild ones than upon garden ones. We must therefore acknowledge
eight sorts of Cherries growing upon Cherrie-trees: that is to say, those which
are properly Cherries, having a very short stalk and round apple, being also
red, fleshi^^ full of juice, sharp, and having a sweet kernel: wild Cherries,
which have but a little flesh on them, but are red also on that side toward the
Sun, and white on the other side, the stone clea^ing to the flesh: black
Cherries, whose juice is so black, as that it colors the hands and lips:
bitter Cherries, which are somewhat of a bitter taste, whereof they have their
name: Guyens Cherries, so called, because their first original was in Guyenne;
they are long ones, and many hanging together at one stalk; they are also
very sweet: Piugarres, and these are gross thick ones, white, having a hard
flesh, but sweet, and cleaving unto the kernel: Coeurs, which are like unto a
man's heart, as well without as within their kernall, some do call these
Cherries Heaumes, and the Cherry-tree Heaumier, especially in the Country of
Aniou: Agri^ts, which are ripe last of all, are sharp relished, and endure
carriage far off, and they are also the same which are wont to be preserved.

Of the special properties and virtues of the Cherry and Cherry-tree, see the
nine^^enth chapter of this Book, wherein is declared how the Cherry may be
made to grow without any stone. If the Cherry-tree be hurt of Pis^^ires, you
must rub his stock with the juice of Purcelane: if it be too full of sap,
you must make a hole in the principal root.

Cherries how fair soever they be, yet they are of small nourishment, beget
^uill humors in the stomach, and worms in the body, and such are those
especially which ^re called Coeurs. The sharp sweet Cherries are very
delicate, fit to preserve with Sugar, as well for such as are found, as for
them which are sick. The bitter Cherries ^re good raw, but better dry, and in
sawces, pastes, and tart stuff. The sweet Cher^ies are chiefly commended, in
that they make the body soluble, as the sharp or ^ager ones do bind it,
cool it, and temper the heat of choler. The gum of Cherry-tree drunk with
white wine does break the stone as well of the reins as of the ^ladder. The
water of Cherries newly gathered being distilled with a gentle fire, and taken
at the mouth in the quantity of half an ounce, does put off the fit of the
^alling sickness; a thing very happily and with good success tried in many,
as Manardus assures us.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the Quince-tree.
ALl Quince-trees, as well that of the Garden as the wild one, and of the
Garden ones, as well the male as the female, desires a cold ground, and
especially that which is moist withal; notwithstanding that we have seen them
as well to grow in the places lying open to the Sun, as at Con^lans, a place
belonging to Monsieur de Ville-roy, near unto Paris, but yet indeed not far
off from a River: and this kind of tree does so much crave to have the company
of moisture, as that if the time fall out dry, the necessity thereof must be
^upplyed by watering of it: and if for want of moist and waterish ground, it be
set (...) a dry ground, or in a stony or clayie ground, it must then also be
often refreshed with water, and must also be vnder-digged and labored about
the foot, that so the ^^^et of the night may pierce and sink down unto the
roots, that so it may bring ^orth good fruit and good store thereof. When it is
planted of roots, it grow^^th so well, as that the second year it bears
fruit: but it bears not so soon, when it is planted of branches. It would be
planted during the increase of the Moon, in the months of February or
November. This tree is very commonly used to graft other trees upon, because
they being grafted thereupon, do continue and endure longer, and bear a more
delicate fruit, than if they were grafted upon trees of their own kind. The
best time for the gathering of this fruit, is in the month of October, when
that blasting comes, and it grows to be of a golden color, for this is a
sign that it is ripe; and this must be in clear and fair weather, and in
the decrease of the Moon: and then you must cleanse it from the mossie
hoarinesse that is upon it, and lay them out orderly in the Sun upon hurdles.

If the Quince-tree make any show of being sick, Quinces of diverse colors.
you must water it with the ^^^lings of oil, mingled with equal quantity of
water, or else with Quick lime and Fullers clay tempered together with water.
You may make Quinces of what fashi^^ you will, if you teach them to grow in
moulds of wood or baked earth. As co^^^^ning the means to keep them, we shall
speak of that hereafter.

The garden and reclaimed Quince-tree bears two sorts of fruits, the (...)
male, which is called the Quince Apple, the other the female, which is called
the Quincesse, thus differing: the male is less, more writhled and wrinkled,
drier, of a sweeter smell and of a more golden color than the Quincesse: the
wild Quince is very odoriferous, but of a very hard flesh. If you graft a
male Quince-tree upon a female, or the female upon the male, you shall have
tender Quinces, and (...) as may be eaten raw, whereas the other are not fit to
be eaten before they (...) prepared.

The smell of Quinces is contrary unto venime and poison: Venime.
also the Quin^^ (...) self does comfort the stomach, stay the flux of the
belly, and make men to (...) sweet breath. For which reason, wise Solon (as
says Plutarch) did (...) only the betrothed, but also the married women, that
they should never lie (...) their husbands, but that they should first eat of
the flesh of a Quince. And yet notwithstanding, the woman with child, when she
draws near the time of her deli^^rance, may not use Quinces, although that
in using of them in the time of her being with child, they will be some means
of her bringing forth of a fair babe, So^^ make a confection of Quinces,
called Marmalade, which is very sovereign against the flux of the belly, The
flux of the belly.
which is prepared and made in manner as we will show in the five and fortieth
chapter; according unto which pattern, we may make a laxat^^^ Marmalade after
this sort: Take of Quinces cleansed from their Pippins, cut the^ in quarters,
but pare them not, boil them thoroughly in water, then s^raine them through a
clean Linen cloth, and wring them out diligently, then boil them again with
Sugar, putting thereto a sufficient quantity of Rubarbe in powder. This
Marmalade purges very speedily, A laxatiue Marmalade.
and withal comfort the stomach and the liver. In stead of Rubarbe, you
may put some other laxatiue thereunto, as (...), Agaricke, or such like. The
Cydoniatum, or Marmalade of Lions, is (...) Scammonie.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of Oranges, Assyrian Citrons, common Citrons, Limons, and Pome-adams.
THe Orange, Assyrian Citron, and Limon desire to be set upon the South or
South-west wind: for being touched with such winds as are (...) and moist, they
become more abundant in juice, better colored, and thicker: which is the
cause, that the Seacoasts being haunted with (...) said-winds, do abound with
durable plants, and such trees bringing ^orth (...) fruitfully; for others, set
upon the North and North-east, are not thereby so (...) fitted. Some make
Nurseries of these kind of trees, sowing their seeds in (...). They will
affirm and give it out likewise, that they grow of siences set and (...) down
in small furrows, or stuck down in baskets: and some do^ (...) upon the
stock near enough unto the root, and that in April and in May: (...) some
say, that they may be grafted after the manner of the Scutcheon like graft,
(...) the months of Summer, putting their pippins in a pot or basket near
unto (...) tree where you would they should be grafted or half swallowed: but
the (...) certain direction and instruction about these Trees, is that which
is set (...) in the second Book, and whereunto also we refer you for the
same (...)

The Pome-adam-tree is much to be esteemed, even of the best Gardiners, not in
re^pect of his fruit (which indeed is more beautiful than profitable, in as
much as it is ^^either good to eat raw, nor yet to preserve, but only fit to
wash the hands, or else to (...) in the hand) but to graft Citron-trees,
Orange Trees, Limon-trees, and Assy^^an Citron-trees upon, as we have said in
the second Book, because they prosper ^^aruellously upon this tree, and bring
forth very quickly fair and great fruit, espe^^ally the Orange-tree. We have
entreated in the second Book, of the differences (...) Oranges, Citrons,
Me^ons, and Assyrian Citrons; whereunto we will further add, (...) the Citron
of Assyria is of a very good smell, but of little sweetness, or any ^^ther
taste: and therefore it is usual to eat his flesh with salt or sugar, or with
salt and ^^ineger. The Limon differs from this kind of Citron, because the
Limon is less, (...) color drawing toward a green, bunching out both above
and below, after the ^^anner of women's nipples.

As for Pome-adams, Pome-adams.
they are round, twice or thrice as great as Oranges, not ha^^ing a very
thick rind, rugged, uneven, and having many clefts or chaps, vary ma^ifestly
appearing like to the prints of teeth. Some think they had this name given, ^f
being the Apple which Adam did bite upon in this earthly Paradise. They are
^^ellished almost like Limons, but not altogether so pleasant. If you cut it in
the ^alfe, and season it with the fine powder of Brimstone, and after roast the
same vn^^er the ashes, and rub therewith the itching body, or any part
thereof, it will ^eale the same.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of the Fig Tree.
FIgge-trees are either white, carnation, red, pale, or green; and some also be
black. There are some that bear before the cold come; others are more late in
their fruit: and again, of all these, some bear a small fruit, as namely, the
white ones; and othersome a great and gross fruit, stan^^^ng out with great
bellies, as by name the black ones, of which yet further there (...) one kind
that bears long Figs, having almost no bellies, and these draw nothing
near in goodness unto the great bellied ones, and those which are more short.
All sorts, of Figge-trees love a hot air and country, a dry and stony
ground, inso^uch, as that it cease not bearing of excellent fruit amongst the
heaps of small ^^ones, provided, that there be good store of depth of earth to
spread and sink ^owne his roots into at ease. Such a tree, as many others, is
apt for hot Countries: ^ut he that would have of them to grow in cold
Countries, must make choice of ^^ose which bring forth their fruit before the
cold time of the year, and must cover (...) with some shield in Winter, and
compass it about the foot with fat ground, or ^ung of Oxen, or Asses, very
well rotted, for otherwise it will yield him no plea^ure. This tree is so full
of pith, and his fruit so moist, as that if you water it, the fruit will not
keep: but yet you may vnder-digge and dig it, to the end that the nights ^et
may enter into it. You must take from it all dead and rotten wood, not
suffering ^y it the water to find any standing upon the tree, for otherwise
the fruit would not have any taste or savor.

The Plant of the Fig Tree, which is of a branch or of shoots newly put
forth, (...) planted in October and November, in a warm and temperate air,
but in February, March, or April, where it is a cold air: and yet the
Genowayes do plant branches all the month of August, as they are laden with
leaves and fruit. As for the grafting of it, To graft the Fig Tree.
that may be done in April, as well in the body, or stock, as in the bark
or rind. Some say, that the Fig Tree planted amongst Vines, does it no
annoyance, which is in some part true, because there is some (...) and
agreement betwixt the Fig and the Grape, and both their woods are full of
thick pith; and Raisins or dried Grapes being wrapped in Fig leaves, do not
only keep well and sound, according to their nature, but amend and become
better (...) in taste and smell: and in part false, because the Fig Tree
casts one such large branches and broad leaves, as that the shadow thereof
does hurt the Vine. There are some low dwarfish Figge-trees, like unto the
Peach-tree, the fruit of which Peach-trees is somewhat agreeing with the Grape:
so as that the Peach being (...) into red wine, does most highly content and
please the taste; and these indeed (...) do small harm unto Vines standing
amongst them: but he that troubles (...) the Vine stocks with any kind of
tree at all, shall do better than he which (...) otherwise.

If you desire to have low Figge-trees, and such as may be kept in (...) under
your windows, to satisfy your desire with their pleasant sight; cut in the
Spring time a shoot of the Fig Tree before it bud, wrythe his top with your
hand, set it, the wrythen top down in the earth, and the end, where it was
cut, upward, and out of the earth, it will put forth many small boughs all
about the (...) which will bear pleasant fruits, the tree continuing to
remain always low. You shall have early Figs, if you water the Fig Tree
with oil and Pigeons dung: and o^ the contrary, late ones, if you take away
the first buds when they are grown to be as big as Beans.

The Fig Tree the elder it is, the more fruitful it falls out to be. It is
very subject to be eaten of vermin, and the means to free it from this
mischief, is to set by it some Onions: or else for to kill the vermin, you
must scatter Quicklime, or (...) old Urine, or the lees of Oil there about the
place. It will not be cost soft to anoint the stock with the juice of
Mulberries: or if you spread and loame it over with red Fullers earth when it
is a full Moon: or if you hang at the branches of it young Figs newly put
forth. Furthermore, Figs will grow with letters upon them, and garnished with
what shape you desire, it when you graft the (...) you write in the eye of the
Fig Tree such proportion as you would have that (...) Figs should bear:
and besides; without using any such curious course, (...) delights to sport
her self with this fruit, in such manner, as that she (...) an infinite
number of figures and indented notches full of pleasantness to (...), and
these are tokens of the goodness of the Fig: for as it is very (...), the
(...) does constrain the skin to fall into wreaths, and to quarter out a
thousand shapes. This is a marvelous thing, that although the fruit of the
Fig Tree be very (...), yet the leaves thereof are of a sharp and bitter
taste. Likewise the wood being (...), does yield a sharp smoke, and the ashes
a very scouring lee, and (...) strong, because of his sharpness; as if the
Fig Tree had bestowed and (...) all the whole substance of his sweetness
upon the Fig, and had le^t (...) a (...) for it self. This is also a
marvelous thing, that the Fig Tree is not subject unto the Thunderclaps.

We have oftentimes tried, that if you steep two or three Figs in (...)
night, that such Figs eaten in the morning do cure the shortness of breath.
(...) milk of the Fig Tree dropped into the ear, kills the worms therein.
The (...) the Fig Tree rubd, do provoke the Hemorrhoids. Look for a more
ample discourse of Figs and the Fig Tree in the second Book.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of the Apple Tree.
THe Apple Tree which is most in request, The Apple tree
and the most precious of all others, and therefore called of Homer, the Tree
with the goodly fruit, grows any where, and in as much as it loves to have
the inward part of his wood moist and sweatie, you must give him his lodging in
a fat, black, and moist ground; and therefore if it be planted in a grauelly
and sandy ground, it must be helped with watering, and batling with dung and
small mould in the time of Autumn. It lives and continues in all desirable
good estate in the hills and mountains where it may have fresh moisture, being
the thing that it searches after, but even there it must stand in the open
face of the South. Some make nurceries of the pippins sown, but and if they be
not afterward removed and grafted, they hold not their former excellency: it
thriueth somewhat more when it is set of branches or shoots: but then also the
fruit proves late and of small value: the best is to graft them upon wild
Apple Trees, Plum-trees, Peach-trees, Peare-trees, Peare-plum-trees,
Quince-trees, and especially upon Peare-trees, whereupon grow the Apples,
called Peare^ maines, which is a mixture of two sorts of fruits: as also, when
it is grafted upon Quince-trees, it brings forth the Apples, called Apples of
Paradise, as it were sent from heaven in respect of the delicateness of their
cote, and great sweetness, and they are a kind of dwarffe Apples, because of
their stock the Quince-tree, which is but of a small stature.

The Apple loves to be dug twice, especially the first year, but it
needs no dung, and yet notwithstanding dung and ashes cause it prosper
better, especially the dung of Sheep, or for less charges sake, the dust
which in Summer is gathered up in the high ways. You must many times set at
liberty the boughs which entangle themselves one within another; for it is
nothing else but abundance of Wood, wherewith it being so replenished and
bepestred, it becomes mossie, and bearing less fruit. It is very subject to
be eaten and spoiled of Pis^nires and little worms, but the remedy is to set
near unto it the Sea-onion: or else if you lay swines dung at the roots,
mingled with man's urine, in as much as the Apple Tree does rejoice much to be
watered with urine. And to the end it may bear fruit abundantly, before it
begin to blossom, compass his stock about, and tie unto it some piece of
lead taken from some spout, but when it begins to blossom, take it away. If
it seem to be sick, water it diligently with urine, and to put to his root
Asses dung tempered with water. Likewise, if you will have sweet Apples, lay to
the roots Goats dung ^ingled with man's water. If you desire to have red Apples,
graft an Apple Tree upon a black Mulberrie-tree. If the Apple Tree will not
hold and bear his fruit (...) it be ripe, compass the stock of the
Apple Tree a good foot from the roots vp^ard, about with a ring of a lead,
before it begin to blossom, and when the apples shall begin to grow great,
then take it away.

Apples must be gathered when the moon is at the full, Gathering of Apples.
in fair weather, and about the fifteenth of September, and that by hand
without any pole or pealing down: because otherwise the fruit would be much
martred, and the young siences broken or bruised, and so the Apple Tree by that
means should be spoiled of his young vvood which would cause the loss of the
Tree. See more of the manner of gathering of them in the Chapter next following
of the Peare-tree: and as for the (...) of keeping of them, it must be in such
sort as is delivered hereafter.

You shall (...) frozen Apples if you dip them in cold water, and so restore
them to their natural goodness. There is a kind of wild Apple, called a
Choake-apple, because they are very harsh in eating, and these will serve well
for hogs to eat. Of these apples likewise you may make verjuice if you press
them in a Cyder-presse, or if you squeese them under a verjuice millstone.

Vinegar is also made after this manner: Vinegar.
You must cut these Apples into gobb^^^, and leave them in their pieces for the
space of three days, then afterward cast them into a barrel with sufficient
quantity of rain water, or fountain water, and after that stop the vessel,
and so let it stand thirty days without touching of it. And then at the term
of those days you shall draw out vinegar, and put into them again as much
water as you have drawn out vinegar. There is likewise made with this sort of
Apples a kind of drink, called of the Picardines, Piquette, and this they use
in steed of Wine. Of others sorts of Apples, there is likewise drink made,
which is called Cider, as we shall declare hereafter.

An Apple cast into a hogshead full of Wine, Neat Wine. Mingled Wine.
if it swim, it shows that the Wine is neat: but and if it sink to the
bottom, it shows that there is Water mixed with the Wine.

Infinite are the sorts and so the names of Apples coming as well of natures
own accord without the help of man, as of the skill of man, not being of the
race of the former: in every one of which there is found some special
quality, which others have not: but the best of all the rest, is the short
shanked apple, which is marked with spottings, as tasting and smelling more
excellently than any of all the other sorts. And the smell of it is so
excellent, as that in the time of the plague there is nothing better to cast
upon the coals, and to make sweet perfumes of, than the rind, thereof. The
short stalked Apple has yet further more one notable quality: for the
kernells being taken out of it, and the place filled up with Frankincense, and
the hole joined and fast closed together, and so ros^ed under hot embers as
that it burn not, brings an after medicine or remedy to serve when all
other fail, to such as are sick of a pleurisy, they having it given to eat:
sweet apples do much good against melancholicke affects and diseases, but
especially against the (...): for if you roast a sweet apple under the ashes,
and season it with the juice of lico^ice, starch and sugar, and after give it
to eat evening and morning two hours before meat unto one sick of the
pleurisy, you shall help him exceedingly.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of the Peare-tree.
But the Peare-tree (being the most in request and precious (next unto the
Apple Tree) amongst all the fruit trees that are) is ordered for the most part
after the manner of the Apple Tree, The Peare-tree.
although the vvood and fruit of the one be more firm than that of the other,
and that the Peare-tree bring forth his fruit late, as not before the end of
Autumn, when as all the great heat is already past: notwithstanding you
shall set it in the same ground with the Apple Tree: and in the first four or
five years of his grouth, you shall lay it open at the foot, a litte before
the end of December, uncovering it even unto the root^^, which you shall shave
and trim with a knife bowed again: and in the end of Ia^^arie you shall cover
it again with his own earth mingled with good made mould, keeping from thence
forward his place well weeded, the foot very neat and clean, and the stock
very well freed from intanglements of boughs so far as the hand can do it,
and throughout very carefully cleansed from moss, snailes, and caterpillars,
husbanding and ordering the earth at the foot of it every two years at the
beginning of Winter: for the fruit which the Peare-tree thus husbanded shall
bear, will be both more fair and better relished, and keep longer. The
Peare-tree that is planted in a lean, dry, chalkie or grauelly ground, is but
of a starued growth, bearing a sharp, small, and ordinarily a stony fruit.
The kernels are sown in the Nurcerie, as those of the Appletree, but the hoped
fruit is long in coming, and scarce attained throughout the whole life of a
man, for it is far longer time in coming to perfection than the Apple Tree.
It grows also of a branch well chosen: and he that will have it so grow, must
plant it in September and October in hot Countries, but in cold Countries in
February and March, and in temperate Countries it may be done in either of the
two times, as it shall best please him. But the Peare-tree that is most sure
and likeliest to bring contentment of it self, is that which is grafted upon
the young plant in the Nurcerie, and in such curious sort maintained and
ordered, as has been said, as also if it be removed some three years after,
affoording it a large and deep room in a good mouldring earth. It may also be
grafted in a Peach-tree, Quince-tree, and Almond-tree, but yet better upon it
self than upon any of these, for so it becomes of a better nature. It is
known by proof, that the Peare-tree, grafted upon a Mulberrie-tree brings
forth red Pears: and if it happen that your Peare-tree bring forth a stony
Pear, you must remove the earth from the foot, and power in upon the roots
every day, for the space of fifteen days, the lees of good old wine.

Pears must not be gathered before the later end of Autumn, To gather Pears.
when the great heat of the year is past, because their moisture being weak,
and in small quantity, the Sun suffers not that it should come unto any
good consistence, before such time as the air begin to turn and change into
coldness: and therefore (says Theophra^^us) this is the only fruit-tree that
ripeneth his fruit best and soonest in the shadow. Such gathering of Pears
also must not be taken in hand but after that the Autumnall blasting and dew be
fallen at the least three or four times upon them, because it strengthens
them greatly, to their better enduring and lasting, and increases their
goodness. But in any case they may not be gathered in rain, but rather in
dry weather, being themselves well dried by the Sun; and that in gathering
they be not hurt by any manner of means whatsoever, but to choose them one
after another, by cutting them down with a good knife made fast to the end of
a pole: or else to make them fall into a cloth spread underneath for the
receiving of them, and in it separating the rotten, spoiled, or hurt, from
amongst the fair, sound, whole, and unhurt ones, that so they may be laid up
to keep in such sort as we will declare hereafter in his place.

Although generally, and without saying any thing of any particular by way of
comparison, the Apple be far fuller of juice, and for the most part more
sound than the Pear, notwithstanding, if one should stand upon the taste, the
Pear is commonly more pleasant and better relished, and more contenting and
agreeing with ones taste, eaten in his season, raw, roasted, or preserved, than
the Apple: wherefore I am ashamed, that men give not themselves to plant more
Peare-trees than Apple Trees, seeing that besides the reasons alleged, the
Peare-tree, of all other fruit trees, is the fairest, streightest, and covering
no whit so much ground with his shadow as the Apple Tree does, bearing also his
fruit almost every year, where the Apple Tree is but a iourney-man, bearing
one year, and not another.

There is a drink made of Pears, Look in the Treatise of Perrie.
called Perrie, whereof we will speak: as also vinegar of wild Pears, as has
already been said of Apples.

The Pear has this special virtue above the rest, that the often use of the
kernels should be marvelous profitable unto such as are troubled with the
inflammation of the lungs; as also for them that have eaten many Mushromes,
that they may rid their stomach of so great a load, there is nothing better
than to eat Pears: for the Pear by his weightinesse and astringent juice,
makes the Mushromes, eaten and lying in the bottom of his stomach, to
descend and fall down from thence.

CHAP. XXX.
Of the Medlar-tree.
Certain it is, that the Medlar-tree The Medlar-tree.
grows into a thick stock: it endures the cold air easily, and yet
delights best in a hot or temperate air, and in a sandy and fat ground. It
is planted either of roots or of branches, and that in November: and some sow
it of stones in a ground mixed with dung: it will bear fruit in great
quantity, if there be laid to the foot of it earth mixed with ashes. It may be
grafted upon it self, or upon the Peare-tree, Apple Tree, or Quince-tree: and
that it may be well grafted, and with good grafts, you must provide your self
of those, which grow out of the midst of the Medlar-tree, and not of the top:
and it must be grafted in the cleft or highest^ part of the stock, not in the
bark, because the leanenesse of the bark would not be able sufficiently to
nourish it.

If you graft it upon a Quince-tree, the fruit will be very fair, and the
reason is very manifest, because the stock which receives the graft, and
nourishes it, is given naturally to bring forth a thick gros^e fruit: and yet
it will yield a fairer without all comparison, if you graft it upon the
hawthorne, with which it is joined in exceeding familiar and friendly league,
also the fruit that comes thereof is more beautiful and plentiful: it may
also be very fitly grafted upon any other thorn, it self being pricklie: if
you graft the Medlar-tree upon any other Tree that is not of his own kind, the
Medlar will have either no stones, or very few, or else very little ones. If
the worms assail the Medlar-tree, you must water the stock with vinegar, or
throw ashes upon it.

Some hold it for certain, that the flesh, and especially the small stones of
the medlar dried either severally and alone, or else together, made into
powder, and drunk with white wine, wherein has been boiled the roots of
Parsley, do break and consume the stone as well of the reins as of the
bladder. Look into the second book in the Chapter of Turnips, as concerning
this remedy. You may make a cataplasme of dry medlars, cloves, white and red
coral, and nutmeg, all incorporated with the juice of Roses, to lay upon the
belly in the great fluxes of the same, and upon the breast for the spitting of
blood.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of the Mulberrie-tree.
MVlberries grow upon a certain kind of Tree which has a firm wood, but a
brittle fruit and leaves, it buddeth the last of all other Trees, after that
the cold is ouerpassed, vvhereupon it is called by the name of sage or wise,
witty, and provident; it puts not forth his leaves till all other Trees be
laden with leaves, if at the least you hasten not forward his budding* by
giving unto it fresh and new dung in the new of the Moon of February. This
Tree is of two sorts, the one white, because of the white Mulberries; the
other black, because of the black or red Mulberries which it bears and
brings forth: which though they resemble one another in this, that both of
them do put forth their leaves later than any other Tree, yet notwithstanding
they are unlike in flowers, leaves, and other considerations. For the black
does not only bring forth a far fairer and better relished fruit, and that
of greater abundance of liquor than the white: but it has besides a thicker
stock, and a greater and harder leaf, it grows very hardly and with much
ado being planted, and it is a great while in growing before it become great,
and therefore is no shame that there are so f^w, it being so unapt of it self
to grow being planted of plants and siences, as also propagated and multiplied
under the earth, with the stock that bare it, even as is used to be done with
the white ones, which yet do grow infinitely every where, as well planted of
shootes, and propagated, as sown: both the one and the other do love a hot
air, or at the least a temperate, a ground that is fat, and well battled with
dung, and labor at the foot, and to be kept clean from mos^e and
caterpillars, and without any dead, wood. They are planted, especially the
white, either of shoots or of roots, or buds, and that in October and November,
even in like manner as the fig tree. In planting of them, you must make them
deep and large pits, and cover them with earth mixed with ashes: they may be
grafted upon the chesnut-tree, apple tree, wild peare-tree, cornaile-tree,
elm, or white popler (and then they will bear white mulberries) and this must
be in the cleft; and upon the fig tree in the scutcheon-like graft: they may
also be grafted upon themselves, and the one upon the other, as the white
Mulberrie-tree upon the white, and the black upon the black, and that
chiefly and principally after the pipe or flute-like fashion: in what manner
soever you graft them, the grafts must be chosen of a good thickness, and from
such Mulberrie-trees as bear fruits full of good seed and kernells. It would
be but labor lost to sow them upon kernells in the nurcerie in this cold
Country, for besides that but a few Mulberries have seed, yet those which
have, do bring forth neither tree nor fruit almost that is any thing worth.
But whatsoever it is, or in what place soever you plant, graft of sow them, let
it be far from houses, to the end that the infinite number of flies which
flock thicker when the fruit is ripe, may not become tedious to the
inhabitants, but yet let it be in such a place as that the hens may eat them
when they fill down, because this victual does fat and feed them very
mightily. It buddeth the last of all Trees, as we have said, but for a
recompense it becomes ripe by and by.

The mulberrie-tree has always been of great request and great profit in
countries where cloth of silk is made, as at Luckes, Geynes, Almerie, Granado,
Auignion, and afterward at Tours and other places, because the small worms
making silk, are brought up and nourished of the leaves of this tree: which
for the same purpose are carefully sought of them which do make account to
draw silk into a fleece: whereupon it is come to pass, that there are to be
seen in many places about the said towns of great Mulberrie-trees, as it were
little wings of forests, the said Mulberrie-trees being planted after a just
and due proportion and level of line, and most exquisitely maintained and
looked unto by them which owe them: for from hence they reap large sums of
money, selling the leaves yearly for the purpose before spoken of; for as for
the fruit, they make no great purchase of it, because the Mulberrie-tree will
not be robbed of his leaves, for so it would come to pass that it should not
bring forth fruit, of the value of three half pence.

The wood of the Mulberrie-tree is good to make chests, forkes, and compasses
of; and such other works as must yield and be pliant: it is also good about
ships and boats.

Mulberries must be eaten before all other meats, and that without bread, or
else but with a very little, because if they be mixed with other victuals they
do but cause them to corrupt: it is true that they cool and moisten very
much, and do also loosen the belly.

Mulberries put into a glass vessel well stopped and covered with their juice
may be kept a long time.

The juice of Mulberries half ripe mingled with honey of roses, is a singular
remedy for the inflammations of the mouth and throat, as also for the
pu^rified teeth and exulcecrated gums.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of the timely Peach-tree.
But now to speak of the timely Peach-tree, The timely Peach-tree.
it bears a very small fruit, but earlier than other Peach-trees do, and
having his name thereupon* it is of a very good relish, and no way harmefull,
in every thing else it is like unto the other Peach-tree, both the one and the
other delighting in cold grounds, and open upon the wind: they likewise crave
no other manuring, than that of their own leaves, and content themselves to be
planted three or four fingers deep in the ground: but and if they lie very
much open to the force of the wind, they require either to have some wall, or
else some other trees to stand in the forefront betwixt them and the wind to
break it off. The timely peach craves such a ground as the Plum-tree, and
grows either of the stone or of a plant. It is to be planted in October or
N^uember, or else in January or in February. It may be grafted very well
upon it self, or upon the plum-tree, peach-plum-tree, and almond-tree, and in
dry times it must be oftentimes watered and dug: it craves the like
husbanding and ordering that the other peach-tree does. See more above in the
Chapter of the Peach-tree.

If you fill up a great company of the new leaves of the timely Peach-tree,
Oil of the flowers of the timely Peach.
or common Peach-tree into a glas^e viole or earthen pot, and after stop it and
(...) it well, so as that no moisture can get into it, and so set it a foot or
two within the ground near unto some brook, or else in a heap of horse-dung
for the space of a month, and after strain out the said leaves with a press,
you shall draw a sing^lar oil to temper the rage of agues, anointing the
wrest of either arm, the temples, and back bone of him that has the ague
therewith, before the fit take him.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of the Walnut-tree.
AS for the Walnut-tree, The Walnut-tree.
it is a tree very common, and sufficiently known in all parts, so called by
reason of the annoyance that it works others which are near unto it, as also
the places where it is planted, men, yea and the very beasts: in so much as
that it is proved by experience, that if a man do sleep under it, at his
awaking he shall find a great heaviness in his head, and withal become so
light and giddie, as that he will not be able to stir: yea the shadow thereof
is so malignant, as that no good thing can grow under it, and the roots (as
well as the shadow) stretching and spreading themselves far, do hinder and
trouble all the ground where the same tree is seated and planted: so that it
must not be planted in arable ground, but especially not in fat and fertile
ground, but rather upon the North quarter by the high way sides, or elsewhere,
so that there be no other fruit trees by to take harm by it. This tree is for
many causes to be gotten of the husbandman: in as much as it needs no great
dressing or provision for the maintenance of it, it suffers and bears
injuries of those which oppress it, and yet nevertheless extends and
yields his fruit in liberal sort even with it own loss, it prospers both
above and under the earth, and there is neither leaf, fruit, shell, or gristle
betwixt the kernel, but there may profit and commodity be raised of it, both
night and day, as shall be declared in every of his particular properties. It
especially delights in a fat, mouldrie, light, and (in a word) in a good
corn ground, the husbandman likewise delights in such a ground: but the
Walnut-tree refuses no kind of air or ground, for it can very well endure to
bear and suffer much. For the planting of it, you must make choice of such
walnuts and trees as bear abundance of fruit, having thin shells, and a
white, full, and thick kernel. And to make it grow, you may dig the nut
into the earth, the pointed end downward, or else plant it of the shoots that
are fair grown, To plant the Walnut tree.
and that in November, and throughout all December in hot countries; but in
February and March in cold countries; and in temperate countries, in which of
the two seasons you will. But such as would have it to grow of the nut in
November and all December, must observe and see that the nut which they would
bury in the earth for this purpose, be but a year old, of a fair^ shell,
sound, and dry: and, if it be in the month of February, or any part of
March, the nut must be steeped, as some are of opinion, for four or five days
aforehand, in some child's urine, or else (as I guess) in cows milk: for the
tree that shall grow thereof, will bear his nuts as little displeasing either
in eating or in the oil thereof, as if it were the fruit or oil of sweet
almonds.

If you would have this tree to grow fair, To remove the Walnut tree.
and full of nuts of a good taste, you must remove it, but let it be possessed
of the earth where it grew either of a graft or otherwise: and in removing of
it, some find it not good that the small roots should be cut away as it is
used in other Trees: both because the Maister-rootes do gather footing and
strength thereby, as also for that being as it were relieved by such shootes,
would become more strong and more able to pierce the earth, and to suck and
suppe up greater quantity of the moisture of the same. I could be of mind,
that when it is removed (which must not be but when it is two or three years
old) there should be taken from it at that time whatsoever surplusage and
surcharge of roots, even so many as may be termed bastard or by-roots, and
not of the master or maine ones: for as for the cutting off of the ends of the
great roots, Pits to set the Walnut tree in, or to remove them into.
that is done but for the opening of their mouth, that so they may the better
suck in the moisture and juice of the earth (if one may so speak of the new
nurse which you have appointed and assigned it.) In respect of his pits and
holes whereinto you remove it, they must be dug of a great depth and
wideness, and be well stirred round about, and set distant thirty or forty
foot one from another, that so it may the better spread forth his branches,
which are wont to cover and occupy a great deal of room round about it: and
if they should be any nearer one unto another, their boughs would grow one
into another, whereas they crave to have their sides free and open. And this is
the reason why they should be planted upon the borders of grounds lying upon
high ways: for by this means the great compass which their branches take,
do not hurt seed grounds, or not above half, and by this means the
looking-glass wherein the husbandman may behold such hinderance and
disadvantage as might come by scarcity that year, shall not be far off from
him or his hinds, A sign of plenty or otherwise by the Walnut tree.
who hold it for certain, that great store of Walnuts does prefage great
spoil of corn. To set a Tree of some other kind amongst them, is no more
profitable than to lay the inheritance of some base and mean fellow, betwixt
the demaines of two great noble men: for the Walnut-trees which are naturally
great spreaders in the earth with their great roots, Walnut-trees must stand
alone
will rob it and eat it out of food and sustenance even home to his own
doors, and covering it above will take from it both the Sun, and the
liberty of the air. But in as much as the things of this world are so
framed, The Oak an enemy to the Walnut tree.
as that there is nothing which has not his enemy, you must beware of
placing the Walnut-tree either upon seed or plant near to the oak, as also
not to set it in the place where any oak has stood at any time before:
because that these two Trees have a natural hatred one unto another, and
cannot couple or sure together.

The Walnut-tree is grafted in February upon it self, The grafting of the
Walnut tree
and upon the Plum-tree in a cloven hole: howbeit, the Walnut-tree does not
profit much, or thrive, when it is grafted upon any other tree than upon it
self, because it abhors the company of all other trees. It must be dug
about, that so it may not grow hollow by reason of the grass. It must be
removed in hot and dry places in October, when the leaves are fallen, and yet
better in November: but in cold places in February and in March* and at either
time in temperate places.

This is a marvelous thing of this tree, The beaten Walnut-tree becomes
fruitful.
that the more it is beaten yearly, the more fruit it bears the year after
following, although the boughs be bruised and broken: for which cause good
farmers are careful to geld and weed out some of the boughs of such a Tree,
and withal do make great and di^ers incisions with some edge-toole in the
stock of the tree.

If you cast and spread ashes sundry times, Tender walnut shells.
and often at the root, and upon the stock of the tree, the nut will have a more
tender shell, and a more brittle kernel. It will grow fairer, and bear fruit
sooner, if you strike a copper nail into it even to the midst, or else a
wedge of vvood. It will not let drop any unripe fruit, if you hang at some of
the branches, or tie upon his roots white mullem, or some rent and (...)
fustian taken out of a dunghill.

Walnuts will grow without shells, Walnut without shells.
if you break the shell without brusing the kernel, and afterward wrap the
said kernel in wool, or in the fresh leaves of the vine, and so put it into
the earth. If the Walnut-tree displease you in respect of the harm it may do
unto his neighbor trees, you may cause it to die, and presently dry away, if
you strike into the root thereof a very hot nail, or a wedge of
Myrtle-tree-wood, or if you put beans to his roots, or a cloth dipped in the
(...) of women.

Walnuts must be gathered when they begin to cast their rind, The gathering of
walnuts.
and when they are gathered, they may not by and by be laid up, but first
dried in the Sun.

The profits that the Walnut-tree yields unto his master are infinite: The
profit of the walnut-tree.
for of it he may gather to make excellent preserues, taking his nuts about
Midsommer: it yields wood for the kitchen, by being lopt of dead boughs,
wherewith it is oftentimes troubled: The wood.
but in cutting off this dead vvood, care must be had not to cut it off round,
because it would be a means for to make way for the rain to enter in, and the
wet of the night would settle therein, and in tract of time rot it to the
heart, but it must be cut biace, and with a ridge, that so neither rain, nor
the wet of the night may get in, The rind, shell, kernel.
or rest upon it. It gives a rind which is good for the things spoken of
hereafter: it affords shells, which make good ashes: it affords a kernel
to be served at the table, serviceable in the kitchen, and in lamps: and
furthermore, of the dross of the kernel some make candles, in such countries
as where the oil is much in request, as in Mirebalois, and thereabout: it
affords a gristle betwixt the two halfes of the kernel, The gristle of the
kernel.
which being dried in the shadow (after that the kernel is once perfected) and
afterward made into powder, and drunk with a (...) draught of red wine, does
by and by assuage the pain of the colicke: as also, the fruit coming of it,
when it is worth nothing but to make refuse and outcastings of (as the nut
grown old and all hoarie) ceas^th not notwithstanding to do good service: for
and if you burn it lightly, or squeese it out easily with a hot yr^^, the oil
that then will come forth of it, is singular good to take away blewnesse of
strokes, whether about the eyes, or elsewhere in the face or other part of the
body: the old (...) serves also for other uses as shall be said by and by.
The wood of the walnut-tree.
The wood of the walnut tree is good and handsome to put in work, when you
would make any fair and (...) work, because it is listed and smooth of his
own nature.

The small buds of the walnut-tree (called of he Latins Iuli) appearing in
March, being dried, and after powdered and drunk with white wine, the weight
of a French crown, are exceedingly good in the suffocation of the matrix. The
oil of the nut drunk to the quantity of five or six ounces, does cure the
colicke: if you mix a little quick lime amongst the oil of nuts, it will
make a singular liniment for the swellings and shortness of the sinews. The
old oil of walnuts cures the falling of the hair called Tinea.

If you pill off the green pillings of the walnuts, The rind^ of walnuts.
and cast them into water, and after cast this water upon the ground, there
will grow from thence great store of worms, good for fishers: if you boil the
pillings in a c^ldron after they be fall^^ from the Tree, as opening of
themselves, and rub any kind of white wood whatsoever with this water, it
will turn to the color of the Walnut-tree, but more fair and beautiful.

Some steep the bark of the roots of Walnut-trees in vinegar, The bark of
Walnut-trees.
and after lay it upon the wrests of such as have the ague. This draws out
all the heat of the ague: but it swells the skin of the wrest.

Some make a sovereign mithridate Mithridate.
against the plague (as we have said in the chapter of rue) with two old
walnuts, three figs, twenty leaves of rue, and one grain of salt.

The walnut closed up in a hen or capon set to the fire to roast, The boil
(...) capon.
causes the said hen or capon to be the sooner roasted.

The distilled water of unripe Walnuts, Tertian agues.
gathered about Midsommer, is singular good to drive away tertian agues, if one
take about some four or five ounces of it.

The Walnut either new or dry (but yet the dry somewhat less) is of hard
digestion, causes headache, and hurts the cough and short breath, and
therefore it must be used sparingly: steep whole walnuts, pillings and shells
and all, in a sufficient quantity of water, until such time as that their
shell be sufficiently softened and moistened, and that the kernel may be pilled
easily from the thin filme that covers it over, as it falls out in green
walnuts: this done, take the kernells so pilled, and let them steep in a pot
well covered in very good Aqua-vitae; give two days after, two or three of
these kernells whole to a woman that cannot have her terms, for the space of
eight or nine days before her accustomed time of having her terms, and that
in the morning, and after that she has purged. This medicine has never a
match in provoking of the terms that are stayed, and it is a thing well
proved. And as for the manner of keeping and preserving of them, we will speak
in his fit place.

If the same day that you have been bitten of a dog (which you doubt to have
been mad) you put upon the biting an old nut well brayed, The biting of a
mad dog.
and after take it away, and cast it to a hungry cock or hen, if the same
eating it die not, it is a sign that the dog which did bite you was not
mad, but and if it die, then it is a sign that he was mad, and therefore
the sore must be looked unto as is meet within three days.

CHAP. XXXIIII.
Of the Oliue-tree.
NOw we come to speak of the Oliue-tree, which is for the most part small,
thick of leaves, and round, for there are some sorts also that have great
branches dispersed here and there out of order: both the one and the other sort
are contented with a shallow ground, for in many places they grow upon the thin
green swarth or turfe that covers the rocks, and upon the ground hanging upon
the sides of some great steeres; thus you may see how the oliue-tree disposes
of it self every where, how unfitting and unlikely soever that the ground be,
provided that it have a warm air, and Easterly or Southerly wind at command.
He that would carefully appoint it out such a plot, as the vine would require,
might err in many places: for the oliue-tree is not so much to be regarded in
respect of his soil and seat at the vine, for it contenteth it self with a
great deal less than the vine will. If you give it ground that is good and
fat earth, and the Sun and Winds, which it delights in, in other places,
doubt not but it will do as the Spaniard, who pleases himself with as good
as nothing, when he knows not how to amend himself, or do better, and
performs his service therewithal: but if he come where he may but have the
smell of it, he is stuffed as full as the greatest (...) in all Lymosin: so the
Oliue-tree being once seized in his tallance of a good piece of ground,
contenteth it self, and bears fruit handsomely. As concerning the planting
of it upon the North in hot Countries, and there searing it upon the tops of
mountains, or lesser hills or upon the South in cold Countries, these are but
troubles and pains without any great foundation: for as concerning cold
Countries, there is no talk to be had of growing of Oliue-trees in them; and
as concerning hot Co^^tries, there is neither taking nor leaving of quarters or
coasts in respect of this tree.

The Oliue-tree does increase it self by shoots which it puts forth at the
soot^ for being pulled up unhurt, To plant the Oliue-tree.
and planted elsewhere, they grow up very speedily. And to prepare them a
fair place to grow in, you must dig them pits where you mind to set them, a
year before hand, of four foot depth: and if you cannot have holes made
ready for them so long before, but must be constrained to set them down in
new dug ones, then you must season and purify the said holes, by burning of
the leaves and some small branches of the Oliue-tree therein, or else some
straw at the least; for the fire dries up the evil juice of the earth of the
said hole in the same manner as the Sun should have done by little and little
all the year long. Some would, that it being pricked down of a branch, it
should not be set in so fat a ground, because the oil would not be so
excellent, as and if it were planted in a ground betwixt fat and lean, and
that not without appearance of truth. But whether it be planted in the one or
the other, it will be husbanded every year for the space of a great circle
round about the foot: for indeed, he that tilleth and dresseth his Olive ground
yearly, does a great deal better than he that does not. In any case it would
not have the roots scanted of liberty, but to spread and lie at large. And if
you bestow any manure upon it, being the thing it loves well, then bestow upon
it Goats or Horse dung well rotted, and that after you have dug it about the
foot, to the end that the dung may mingle well with the earth so dug. After
you have once set it, remove it not thence for the space of four or five
years: neither then must you dare to be so bold, if that it have not gotten a
stock as thick as a man's arm: and taking it up, take up therewithal the
green turfe of the ground where it stood, and whereunto his roots stick fast,
and when you set it down, give it the like situation for coast and quarter
that it had before.

You may graft it upon it self, To graft the Oliue-tree.
and it will bear more thick and kinder fruit: or el^e upon the wild Olive,
but then the profit is not like, as when it is grafted upon the garden and ^ame
one. The Italians graft it upon the Vine, boring the Vinestocke near unto the
earth, and putting into this bored hole a small Olive branch, that so it may
take near at hand, and at the first offer, both the nourishment and vinie
quality of the stock of the said Vine: along the which must be set a stake or
thick prop to help it to bear up the weight and burden of the graft when it
is great, and these Olives will taste both of the one and of the other, and
become as it were vined Olives. Such a proof is not to be misliked, in as
much as the variableness of nature is showed thereby, which is content to
suffer her self to be drawn to bring forth a mungrell fruit or second
hermaphrodite, by the coupling together of two natures in one: but the end of
such experiments turn not to profit, neither for the preserving of the Olive,
nor for the drawing of oil Omphacine, nor yet any other, for which ends God
ordained and gave us the Oliue-trees. And to speak the truth, the mingling of
kinds and differing roots of Trees, (if it be not according to, and jumping
with the natural virtues of them both, and according to an agreement in some
good measure of perfection, and yet furthermore well and thoroughly allowed and
approved by reason:) becomes rather a monstrous birth, and an inforcement of
nature, than any profitable impe either for the health of man, or for the
saving and sparing of it self. Hereof are sufficient vvitnesses, I know not
how many sorts of Apples, Pears, and Cherries, this iumbled together by
offering force unto nature without judgment or reason: and but that they
become somewhat admirable unto the eye, they yield no profit unto the body of
any man, more than to draine his purse dry: except there be advised judgment
in making choice of that thing and way which may be both for the advancement
of the yearly profits of his ground, and for the good preservation of his
health. But leaving off these discourses, let us return again to the
Oliue-tree, which has both more beauty in it self, and more profit for the
master, if it be contained in a reasonable sta^^^e for height, and spread it
self abroad, than and if it should shoot up and become very long and tall.
For if it exceed the height of ten foot and a little more, it is abated and
hindered in the putting forth of so many blossoms as it would, and has his
boughs crushed in pieces which grow up at that pitch, when the wind blows
strong, and thereupon also it casts his fruit in untimely sort, even when it
is very full. For this cause in many places there are some found which
perforce do turn downward such boughs as grow so high, not regarding their
standing out like bosses and bunches, provided that they be low and lurkingly
couched: because that being so trussed up, they are free from storms and
tempests, and abound the more in fruit: and if yet the Oliue-tree would be
climing higher, then you must cut off such aspiring boughs or branches* and
this must be done after the gathering of the Olives is past. It is true that
the Oliue-tree must be eight year old, before you reform it in the boughs
growing over high, by cutting them off with a saw: but as for the shootes
putting forth at the foot and along the stock, you must not refuse the cutting
of them off how young soever they be. The profit coming both of the one and
the other, is, that it abounds more in fruit: and this is the cause why some
commonly say, That he that husbandeth and orders it with care and taking of
pains about it, helps it forward in the bringing forth of his fruit; as also
he which manureth it, as it earnestly craves: but he that cutteth down some
boughs off from it, compels it by all manner to means to become fruitful;
seeing the nature of the Oliue-tree is such (as Quintilian says) as that it
being cut off and made bare of boughs and high mounting tops, it spreads
rounder and broader, and putting forth more boughs, does also bear the more
fruit, because the property of the Oliue-tree is to be rank either in boughs
or in fruit. It happens sometime to the Oliue-tree, that it brings forth
but one only bough exceeding all other in beauty and height: when this
falls out, it must be cut off without delay, for this is a sign that the
tree in space and time will convey all his whole workmanship that way, and
will leave nothing for any thing else; and upon this, will barrenness come in
the end. And whereas the Oliue-tree craves to be left bare and thin of
boughs, and then bears more fruit, yet if the boughs be stricken down with
poles when the Olives are beaten down, it grows much worse, and goes
backward, forsaking and for^lowing his former fruitfulness. So that hereupon
you see, that in gathering of Olives, you may not beat them down with poles,
but rather you must have ladders borne up upon a Goats foot, to lift you as
high, as that you may gather the Olives with your hand. There are some
Countries where the Oliue-trees do rest and give over bearing for one year
after that they have borne, and then the year after that they bear out of all
measure, as in Portugale, and the oil that is made of those is good in the
highest degree. You must in any case look to the inconveniences and harms
that the Oliue-tree is subject unto. Oliue-trees full of Moss.
Many times in dry or moist places Oliue-trees are spoiled, and become all
ouergrowne with moss, which must be taken away with one tool or other: for
else the Oliue-tree will neither abound in leaves nor fruit.

Sometimes the Oliue-tree, although it be fair, The barren Oliue-tree.
yet bears no fruit, and then you must bore through the stock with a wimble,
and put in good and deep the graft of a green bough of a wild oliue-tree, or
of some other oliue-tree that is fruitful, and that upon either side of the
hole: then afterward, to close up both the said holes with mortar mixed with
straw, and the tree as a new made thing wit become fruitful by the grafting in
of this graft. Others in such case do uncover the root, and renew the seat
that it stands in* Again, it may be remedied, and the foot not uncovered,
with the lees of unsalted olives, with man's urine that is old, or with the
stale urine of hogs.

It falls out many times that the fruit is spoiled and lost by the
naughtiness of the ground where it is planted: The fruit spoiled.
and then it must be thus remedied. The Tree must be uncovered very low at the
^oot round about, and quick lime put into it, more or less according to the
greatness of the Tree, for a little tree craves but a little. The Oliue-tree
sometimes bears much fruit or flowers, and notwithstanding by a secret
disease that is in it, it cannot bring them to a good end to ripen them: when
th^^ happens, the stock must be uncovered round about, and the lees of oil
mixed with sweet water afterward applied thereto.

Sometimes the Oliue-tree becomes all withered, The withered Oliue-tree.
and falling into a consumption, which thing may happen through worms or other
vermin which spoil and eat the roots, and the remedy is to water the foot
with lee of Olives. It sometimes also falls out that the fru^t of the
Oliue-tree falls before it be ripe: for a remedy whereof, take a bean that
has a weeule within it, close up the hole with wax: afterward take a green
turfe from near unto the root of the Oliue-tree, and put the bean in it, and
so cover it with earth, and the fruit of the oliue-tree will not fall.

Above all things, you must keep oliue-trees from Turtle-doues, Stares, and
other such like birds which are exceedingly given to ^^corishnesse. As
concerning the Oliue-tree and olives, you may see more at large in the second
book, and of the oil in this third book.

CHAP. XXXV.
Of the Date-tree.
COncerning the Date-tree, The Date-tree.
it has much a do to bear fruit in this co^^trie, but and if it bear, yet
it is very late: it craves to have a hot air and country, or at the least
well tempered, and the fruit which it bears, is ripe before the Oliue-tree be
good. It delights in a light, sandy, and untilled or champian ground: and it
is a plant either for April or May, to be planted of a small plant with the
root. The stone is set new in October, and there must ashes be mingled with the
earth where it is planted: and to make i^ grow and bear goodly fruit, it must
be watered often with the lees of wine. Look in the second book.

Who so is careful of his health, let him not eat any Dates, or else as few as
possible he can, because they cause the headache, obstructions, wringings in
the belly, and in the stomach. And yet notwithstanding this, they stay the
flux of the belly, and put into gargarismes, they cure the frettings and
cankrous ulcers of the mouth.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Of the Chestnut tree.
Leaving the Date-tree, we come now to treat of the Chesnut-tree, which grows
very great, high, and thick, differing but a little from the walnut-tree, it
bears a profitable fruit, and has not his like, whether you respect the
shape, his nature, or the nourishment it yields (...), as is to be seen in
Auuergne, Sauoy, Perigu^ux, and Lymosin, and especially in Lyonnoyse and
Daulphinie, where the great chestnuts grow: in which countries, especially in
Parigord, the greatest parts of the forests are of chesnut-trees, and an
infinite (...) of people live not of any other thing but of this fruit, eating
it sometimes boiled, sometimes roasted, sometimes made into bread, sometimes
into broth with (...), sometimes in meal baked after another sort. Likewise,
nature seeing the profit (...) redounded unto men from this so profitable a
fruit, has fenced and armed it with strong harness and such mighty armor,
as that it goes for proof both against the tooth of the beast, and beak of
the birds, so long as it is kept within his uppermost cote and prickly
covering; yea, and furthermore, under his rind and pilling, when it is taken
away, with another rind that is good and hard, and with another that is more
soft and fine, for the better preserving of it. This tree pleases it self
with such a ground as is lying upon the North, and being moist rather than
dry, or standing upon the South, for as much as it loves the shadow better
than the open Sun, the valleys better than the mountains, a soft ground
better than that which is hard and massy, and a light ground, and yet not a
sandy or clayie. To have good store of Chestnuts, it is better to sow them than
to plant them, and that in a well dug and stirred ground, being also neat
and well batled, and that in the month of March, ^etting them in the earth a
foot deep, the sharp end upward, four or six of them together, taken out of
great and ripe Chestnuts, and every hole distant from another the space of a
fadome; and two or three years after to plant them in some other places,
forty foot asunder every one from another, and that in respect of the great
compass which they take with their branches on every side. If you would have
it to grow of a branch, it must be such a one as has root: for to make it grow
of it self, by pricking down into the earth some sience, it will never be.
Wherefore the most certain way is to make it grow of the fruit it self,
pricking it down into the earth, as has been said: notwithstanding it may be
propagated or multiplied, burying and sinking some of his new shoots in the
earth. It takes likewise, if it be grafted in the cleft or in the Canon or
Gun-like graft, and that in March, April, and May, upon it self, or upon the
Beech-tree, or upon the Willow, but it then ripeneth very quickly, and bears
a fruit of a sharp and unpleasant taste.

Chestnuts must be gathered in Autumn, The gathering of Chestnuts.
and kept till their rindes be become of a very bay color, and cast out their
fruit. Howbeit, if one would keep them a long time, it were better to beat
them down with poles whiles they be green, and not to tarry till they fall
to the ground, for those will not keep above fifteen days, if they be not
presently dried in the smoke.

The manner of keeping Chestnuts, To keep Chestnuts.
is to cover them with common Nuts; for the common Nut has power to dry and
invade the excrementous moisture of all things whereunto it is applied: or else
to gather them reasonably ripe in the decrease of the Moon, and to put them in
a cool place in sand, or in some vessel; but let in stand continually in the
cool, and so well stopped, as that no air may get in, for otherwise they will
be spoiled and rotten in a short time.

The fairest, best fed, and most pleasant Chestnut of all others, is that which
grows in the Country of Lyonnoise, and are called great Chestnuts of Lions;
or else I know not as yet from whence they have taken their name. But howsoever
it is, besides the profit of the nourishment and sustenance which the Chestnut
yields, the Chesnut-tree is of great use to make Vessels of, as Caske to put
wine and other drinks into, to build Bridges withal, as also Conduit-pipes,
Pillars, and infinite other things about Buildings, Engines, props for Vines,
Pales and Railes for Parkes, Gardens, and other such places.

The leaves of the Chesnut-tree, The leaves of the Chesnut-tree.
after they be fallen, are gathered up before any rain come to touch them,
and serves for litter for Cattle; which being thus turned into dung, serves
to manure withal. Many use them to fill featherbed-ticks withal, and call
them mockingly by the nickname of Parliament-beds, because the leaves make a
noise when you lie down upon them, when you rise up from them, or when you
move your self any manner of way to or fro.

The ashes of the wood of Chesnut-tree is not good to make lee of, The ashes of
the Chesnut-tree.
, because it spott^^h and staineth the Linen so mightily, as that such stains
will never be got out.

Chestnuts with vinegar and barley flower applied in manner of a Cataplasme unto
women's breasts which are hard, do make the same soft: stamped with salt and
hon^y, The hardness of (...).
they are applied unto the bitings of mad dogs: the rinds or skins thereof
are put many times in lees, which are made to color the hair yellow: their
red inward rind, which lies next unto the white kernel, being drunk the
weight of two drammes, stays all manner of fluxes of the belly, and of blood,
as also the whites of women, with equal quantity of Iuorie. Chestnuts, in as
much as they be wi^die, they provoke men to lust: being eaten excessiuely, they
cause the headache: they swell and harden the belly, and are of hard digestion:
such as are roasted under ashes, are less hurtful than the raw or boiled
ones, especially if they be eaten with pepper per and salt, or sugar.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Of the Pine Tree.
THe Pine Tree craves a sandy, The Pine Tree.
light, and stony ground: and therefore it grows willingly in outcast and
contemned plots, such as there are many of by the coasts of the maine Sea. It
is planted in the month of October and November, and it is not to be
translated till after that it has been three years planted, and then it must
be seated in a well dug place, and in an earth well manured with Horse dung.
This tree has a nature contrary unto the Walnut-tree, because it causes to
thrive and prosper whatsoever is set under the shadow of it: again, it is not
so combersome as to keep away the Sun and the wind from the things that
join next unto it, or under it. The Pine kernes (for to be kept) must be put
in new pots full of earth, together with their shells.

Such as have weak lungs, or are grown lean by some long sickness, must go
a taking of air into the Forests, where there are good store of Pines, because
such air is very profitable for them. Their kernels steeped in warm water,
to take away their oily quality and sharpness, being often eaten, do cure
the ach of the (...), the ach of the back, the palsy, benummednesse,
trembling of the parts, weakness of the lungs, shortness of breath, ulcers of
the lungs, ulcers of the reins and of the bladder, the scalding of the urine,
and make fat such as are lean and wasted, (...) up lust in such as languish
and are weak unto the work^ of venerie. They cure the gnawings of the
stomach, taken with water of Plantaine, or juice of Purcelane. The new Nuts of
the Pine Tree distilled in a Limbecke, make a singular water to take away the
wrinckles of the face, and to stay the excessive great growth of wome^^
breasts, if you apply a Linen cloth steeped in this water vpto them. Set in
the second Book.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Of the Plum-tree.
AS for the Plum-tree, The Plum-tree.
it is a common and ordinary tree, agreeing with (...) Countries of whatsoever
conditions: howbeit the Damask Plum-tree is more cheerful, and pleases it
self better in a dry Country and hot air than it does elsewhere. The
Plum-tree will grow easily, and encre^se infinitely: for and if it be once
brought into a plot of ground, in a short time it ^eiseth it self upon the
whole place: and if it be planted on the one side of a wall, it will leap
within a short time after vpto the other side of it, and so places the wall in
the midst. It desires not to be dunged, because the dung makes the fruit to
mould or rot, and easily to fall down: but it would be often dug at the foot
round about, as f^rre as the compass of his roots stretches, and watered in
dry weather. It growth upon a stone buried a foot deep in the earth that is
fat, and that in November or February, having sleept the said stone for three
days space before you sow or set it in lee, or longer in a composition of
Cinnamon water, if you would have it to yield any aromaticall smell: or else
of a mere plant, having a root in a pit a little dug, because it graspeth
not much ground with his foot, but yet it must be good and light and easy to
be pierced round about, for the affoording of an easy and plentiful seat unto
it. It grows also in prosperous sort, if it be grafted after the Scuti
h^on-like fashion, either upon it self, or upon the sweet Cherrie: or else in
the cleft, and that besides the two former, upon the Apple Tree, Almond-tree,
Peach-tree, and Ceruise-tree: of all which sorts of grafts, that is the best
which is upon it self, or upon the sweet Cherrie-tree; for all the rest are
but means to cause the Plum to degenerate from his nature, and to become
bastardly, as well in their shape as in their taste. The fittest time to graft
them, is in February or in March, and then rather in the stock than in the
bark.

There is a certain kind of scab which does take hold of it, and that either
by letting the gum to stand and hang about it, and to wax old, which it
casts forth, or else by reason of the mos^e which it gathers, and for that
cause it would have his gum taken away at the beginning of cold weather, and
the mos^e rubbed off with a rough Linen cloth, or a mos^e rubber of
Horse-haire, and this at all times.

There happens likewise unto it an vindisposedesse through the fault of the
Gardener, The Plum-tree out of frame.
not casting the ground about the foot, or cutting off the rotten and corrupt
wood; whereupon it turns in and rowleth it self up into small balls,
sometimes in one place, sometimes in more: and this is a disease which being
neglected, does spread it self in the end all over the tree, from one end to
another, and brings it wholly to destruction: and therefore so soon as you
shall see the sick tree in this sort to crumple and run upon heaps, you
must cut off very clean all the boughs thus diseased, whereof it would be
murdered and killed, even to the sound and whole branches, and withal to order
and husband it in all good sort about the foot, to the taking away of this
euili humor, which in this manner crooketh and causes to turn round his wood.

There happens also sometimes, The languishing Plum-tree.
by reason of some secret cause, that it so languisheth, as that it gives over
to bear fruit: for the putting of it in heart again, you must lay open his
roots, and cast upon them the lees of oil mingled with water, or else the
stale of oxen, or man's v^ine, or cast upon the roots the ashes of Vine branches
thoroughly boiled.

All Plums in general are cold and moist, more or less, the sweet ones less,
the sour and sharp ones more.

The sweet Plums have virtue to loosen the belly, Laxatiue Plums.
and yet they will purge more strongly, if at such time as when the Plum-tree
is young, there be taken from it some part of the pith of the stock, or else
one of his boughs, and the place filled up again with Scammonie. They will in
like manner procure sleep, Sleeping Plums*
if you put into the said emptied places the juice of Mandrakes, or Opium.
Sharp and tart Plums are given to stay the belly. Plums of Brignoles.
There is great account made in Prouence of the Plums of Brignoles, by reason
of their pleasant taste. In France throughout, and every where else, there is a
special account made of Damask Plums, which are of three sorts, the black,
red, and violet color, all of them proving very excellent in the Country of
Tourraine, for from thence are sent, throughout all France, of them dried,
which are used at all times. The Plums of Pardigoine are likewise greatly
esteemed, by reason of their plumpenesse and pleasant taste. Furthermore, Dates
are very rare and scarce in this Country, namely, those which come near to
the Dates of other strange Countries, which are more pleasant relished than
any other. Some likewise make account of Rhemish Plums dried, by reason of the
pleasant tartness and sharpness which they have.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Of the Pomegranate-tree.
COncerning the Pomegranate-tree, The Pomegranate-tree.
it requires little husbanding, (...) yields small delight to the sight, by
reason of his ill-fauored branches and boughs; save so long as it is bearing
his fruit, before it come to perfect ripeness, and yet put out, quartered, and
as it were laid open to the show, out of his coat and covering, this tree is
the most delightsome to behold of all others: the frame and fashion of whose
flower and fruit being well considered, i^ ^ work of Nature right admirable:
there is not that rain, that scorching heat of the Sun, nor yet almost that
fading and decaying old age, which can cause it to forgo his goodly show of
Rubies: and yet notwithstanding, how famous a thing soe^er it be, it grows
without any dainty or delicate handling and looking to, and that sometimes at
the foot of a wall, sometimes in the midst of a heap of stones, and sometimes
amongst the hedges by high ways sides. It is true, that it craves a hot
Country, and where it may not be debarred of the Sun: and if it happen to be
set at any time in a fat ground, it makes his best advantage of it, being in
this respect like unto the Oliue-tree, whereof we have spoken before. And if it
be in such a Country as i^ fit for it, you need not to think either of the
digging or vnder-digging of it: for it reckons not of seeing it self set in
a great heap of stones, as neither to break crosse-wise through a ruinous
wall, neither cease ^t for any such thing from bringing forth his good and
pleasant fruit: but in cold Countries, where it hardly grows, it would be
dug and husbanded about the foot twice a year, that is to say, in Autumn
and in the Spring. It will grow either upon roots, or of grafting in the cleft,
and that upon it self, about March or April: but and if you will plant it
upon some branch that has roots, you must choose such a one as is a handful
thick, and make it a delightsome and fine molded pit. Some would have it
thrust into the earth with a stake by it, as is usual in setting Willow
plants, but I cannot find that this way of thrusting it down thus into the
earth, does prove to any good. The Pomegranate-tree will not loose his flower,
if when as it is flowred you compass the flock about with a ring or hoope of
Lead, or with the old slough of an Adder.

The wine of Pomegranats Pomegranate wine.
is made of this sort: You must take the ripe kernels clean and free from
their skins, and put them in the press, where they must be pressed by and by.
Some strain them through bags made for the purpose: some (...) them to be
put into vessels until it be well fined; in the end they power oil upon them,
that they may not corrupt or grow sour.

The Pomegranate Apple put in a pot of new earth, well covered and (...) with
clay, set in an Oven, and in the end so well parched, as that it may be made
into powder, then such powder taken the weight of half a crown with red wine,
does help the party maruellously that has the bloody flux. The innermost
flowers of the Pomegranate made up in conserve with Sugar, have an incredible
force to stay (...) manner of fluxes of the Matrix, whether white or red, taken
in the quantity of (...) an ounce, with the juice of sour Pomegranates, or
red wine, or water wherein (...) has been quenched; as also to stay the
bloody flux, the shedding of nature, the flux of the guts, or of the stomach.
The kernels of sour Pomegranates d^ied, made into powder, and after mingled,
the weight of an ounce, with a (...) of fine powdered Frankincense, and two
drammes of this powder taken every morning, do stay the whites.

CHAP. XL.
Of the Ceruise-tree.
THe Ceruise-tree, The (...)-tree.
as well the male as the female, delights in a cold, moist, and mountainous
place, but in a hot and plain place it thruieth not. It must be sown of the
stones: and some plant it of shoots in February and in March. It is grafted in
the end of March and April upon it self, upon the Thorn or Quince-tree, and
upon the Peare-maine-tree, in the bark or stock. It must be often dug and
watered: and let him that can conveniently, lay dung unto the foot of it,
mingled with ashes, and that in very deep pits.

Ceruises are gathered in Autumn before they be ripe: they are gathered by
handfuls tied together: or else they are orderly laid upon straw to ripen them:
for otherwise they are not fit to be eaten, because of the harshnesse.

The wood of the Ceruise-tree is very solid, close, and hard, and therefore
in great request to make Tables of, and other house implements, as also to make
goads and whips for Neat-heards.

There is wine made of Ceruises, The flux of the belly.
as there is of Pears. Ceruises have force to restrain fluxes of the belly:
and for this cause they may be dried in the Sun before they be ripe, and
afterward used.

He who has sometimes been subject unto the biting of a mad dog, or
otherwise, must not sleep or rest under the shadow of the Ceruise-tree: for if
he do, it will hazard him to cast him into his former madness again: Such
is the force of the Ceruise-tree, to raise up, renew, and revive a qualified
and appeased madness.

CHAP. XLI.
Of the Corneile-tree.
AS for the Corneile-tree, Of the (...)-tree.
which the Latins call Cor^us, (so called, because his stock is of such
knottie and solid wood, as that it seems to be horn) as well the male as
the female, delights to be planted in a fat and sandy ground: and as for
other things, it would be planted or graf^ed after the manner of the
Ceruise-tree. In any case it must not be planted near unto where Bee-hiues
stand, neither suffered to grow there of it self: because that the Bees having
once tasted of the flowers thereof, fall into a flux of the belly, and die
thereupon presently: but the contrary falls out in men, who by having eaten
of the Corneile-tree berries, or of the conserve made of the flowers or fruit
thereof, do fall suddenly into a costi^enesse. The fruit of this tree is long
and ^ound, fashioned like an Olive, and is not ripe before Autumn, and then it
becom^eth of a red color, or the color of Wax. This fruit contains in the
pulpe of (...) a stony bone. Some make of the pulpe or flesh a confection like
unto (...) with Sugar, and it is very singular in bloody fluxes, and the
staying of women's terms.

CHAP. XLII.
Of the Iuiube-tree.
THe Iuiube-tree is a tree that is very rare, Of the Iuiube-tree.
and seldom seen in France, but much in the country of Prouence, especially
about Dupon^, S. E^prit, and in Languedoc. This is a tree of great reach and
compass bot^ for his height and breadth, and naturally it loves to be in hot
Co^^tries, not so much seeming to regard the soil wherein it is set: likewise
in many pl^ces of the said Country it is seen in turning ways and public
places. But and if you would have it to grow in cold Countries, you must not so
lightly regard it ^ (...) you must see that it be seated in a good fat ground,
and manured with Pigeon^ dung* and joining to the side of some wall, whereby it
may have the reflex of the South Sun, of which you must look to give it the
full fruition before all other things. Sometimes it grows of kernels, three
or four of them being put into the earth together, and their sharp ends
downward, the holes must be a foot deep, and heaped full of Cowes dung
mingled with ashes of Vine branches, and that in April i^ hot Countries, and
in May in such as are cold. And when it is once grown up, and become somewhat
strong, which will be about the term of eighteen months, or two years
after, then you shall remove it into some other place, with such obser^^tions
as have been delivered concerning others, and concerning the Country, (...)
it shall fall out, hot or cold. Some likewise plant it of the root, when it
rises up into shoots, which have small threddie and hairie roots, loosing and
pulling them up gently, together with some of the principal roots of the tree,
for fear of parting them and their threddie roots, planting them in pits
prepared some fifteen days before, in a light ground, and that in March. As
concerning their ^iences, to ma^^ them grow, it is not so certain a thing, as
that it deserves the troubling of ones head about it: but for grafting of it
in the cleft, either upon it self, or upon the Medlar-tree, or upon the
Quince-tree, you may if you will: but grafted upon it self, the Iuiubes will
be more gross and thick, and of a more pleasant taste, as generally all manner
of fruit is, being grafted upon a tree of his own kind. Some will say, that it
rejoices during the time of Winter to be compassed about with a heap of
stones, and when Summer comme^h, to have them taken away: and that it craves
likewise to have Ox dung laid unto the roots of it: but in those Co^^tries
where there are such great store of Plants, this piece of service is altogether
neglected, which notwithstanding is the means to cause great store of fair
(...) good fruit.

CHAP. XLIII.
Of the Bay Tree.
AS for the Bay Tree, The Boy-tree.
it is very common, seeing it grows in (...) ground, (...) overthwart the
Conie-burrowes and heaps of stones. It grows (...) times from under the
foundation of walls. It is likewise to be a Coun^^iman in every coast and
quarter, but yet his natural incli^ation and birthright is to be in hot
Countries, or at the least temperate: And therefore being enticed over into
cold Countries, it must be much made of and well welcomed when it comes
there: for indeed it must be planted in a fat, solid, and good soil of earth,
near unto some wall, where he may have the South Sun to comfort hi^ with a
double comfort* and at the approach of Winter, it must be ma^^red, ouer-cast,
and covered with long straw in the strength of the Winter, or else well cased
and wrapped about with Mats. It must also be under-digged for the first four
or five years after his coming and bearing, and that in March and April. And
yet, if notwithstanding all this pain and industry taken, it shall happen to
be extremely and rigorously entreated of the frost, and that the lea^es shall
begin to wither away, and the wood to wax black, then you must add more store
of earth unto it at the foot, and strengthen it there, in the month of March,
if that the cold put forth and begin to be dealing the same year: for the dung
will have kept the roots and clasping gripes in force and whole untouched, and
so it will not fail to put forth with speed new shoots and sprigges in
abundance, which will be fit to multiply and propagate the Winter following
in the said ^oneth of March, at which time the sap draws up unto the bark,
if so be that you desire to have great store. It takes also of a branch,
foreseen that it be set in a fat and black earth, which is moist. The time to
set it of root, plant, or branch, is either in Autumn or in the Spring. It is
sown in the same seasons a foot under ground, and four berries together: and
when one year is past, you must plant it where you will have it abide. In any
case you may not sow it or plant it near unto any of the Lattice-worke or
climbing and running frames made for the Vine, much less near unto the plant
it self, because that the Bay Tree is altogether enemy unto the Vine, as well
in respect of his shadow, as of his heat, which draws away all means of
growth from the Vine. Look in the second Book.

The leaves of the Bay Tree do preserve, keep vncorrupt, and make faster the
Fish that is fried, especially that which is fried in oil, laying them by beds
one upon another. They perform in like manner the same good unto dried Figs,
Damask or Frail Raisins, if you strew of them amongst the said Raisins in the
Frail.

You must observe, as well in the leaves of the Bay Tree, as in those of the
Juniper and Elme-tree, that they being cast into the fire, do presently
crackle, and that the cause of this is, for that they take fire before their
superfluous and raw moisture be consumed and spent.

The leaves of the Bay Tree dried and rubbed one against another, if there be
put betwixt them a little powder of Brimstone, do cast out sparkles of fire,
as does the steel and the stone: in like manner do Iuie lea^es. The boughs of
Bay Tree stuck down in arable ground, do keep the Corn from mildew and
blasting. Some ar^ of opinion, that tempests and lightning will turn away from
those houses and places where there are hanging any Bay Tree boughs, wherher
it be at the chamber floores, or else at the doors or windows.

The tender crops of the Bay Tree, boiled with flowers of Lauander in wine, do
heal hardness of hearing, and noyses in the ears, if the vapor be taken
thereat with a funnell. The Vuula being fallen, is again restored to his
place, if you lay the ^ayes of the Laurell-tree very hot unto the top of the
crown of the head, with equal weight of Cummin, Hyssope, Organie, and
Euforbium, mixed together with honey. The bays of Laurel powned with
Wheat-bran, Iuniper-berries, and Gar^icke, heated in a hot frying-panne,
sprinkled with wine, and laid to the flanks, do provoke the retained urine.
If women with child, and near their accounts, do eat every night going to
bed seven Laurel bays, or Bay Berries, they shall have a more easy tra^aile
and delivery.

CHAP. XLIIII.
What space must be left betwixt Fruit Trees when they are removed.
THat you may fitly appoint the standings of trees, The greatness of trees
(...) to be considered.
and their distances one from another, in respect of the trees themselves,
compared one with another: you must first consider the height, fullness of the
leaves and boughs, and spreading of the same, according as every sort of tree
does ordinarily grow and attain unto: and besides the ordinary, how by place
affoording abundance of nourishment, the tree may exceed and surpass it self
in height and breadth, for that fruit trees would not be encombred above head,
or over his top, but would have the breathing and blowing of certain winds at
liberty, and with sufficient space favorably to light upon them, and withal,
the fruition and benefit of the Sun: in all which points, the unequal
proportion of one tree unto another in height or breadth does offer let and
hinderance. And yet further, if they would have their waggings and plyings to
and fro to be free, that so they may play (...) liberty when the wind tosseth
them, how greatly should the exceeding greatness of the neighbor trees
disturb and trouble one another, if care and advise be not taken in the first
planting of them? And therefore you must have regard and cast an eye about you
for this cause, that so you may well and profitably appoint out your distances
and spaces betwixt one and another: for in good and fat grounds, where trees
may grow much, you must allow more space than elsewhere. And further you must
note, that one tree planted well at liberty, whatsoever the place be of it
self, does fructify and bear a great deal more.

If you mind to plant thick and gross trees all on a row, The space and
distance betwixt trees.
and upon high ways, and against the hedges of fields, then you must leave
them some five and thi^^e foot distant one from another: but and if you intend
to plant many rows in one and the same place, then you must be sure to leave
five and forty foot space betwixt every two, and as much betwixt one rank
and another, that so the boughs of each tree may the more freely spread
themselves every way upon their empty and vacant sides.

As for Peare-trees, Apple Trees, and others of that bigness, if you plant
only one row by the sides of your field-hedges, or elsewhere, it will be
enough to allow twenty feet betwixt one and another: but and if you set two
rows upon the hedge of your Garden allies, then you must allow them some five
and twenty feet betwixt one and another every way square, in such sort, as
that as well the alley as the spac^ betwixt every two trees on either side may
make a perfect square of five and twenty feet in every line: and if the
distance allowed them be of less quantity, then it must be somewhat answered
and helped, by not planting of them every one right over one against another,
but as if you should wrap and lay them up one within another, to let the full
and planted place of the one side stand ouer-against the void and empty of the
other. Some would, that there should some small trees b^ planted amongst those
great trees which you thus set about the alleyes for the times whiles they are
in growth: but this would not do well, if either they should be suffered to
continue there always (because it would break the rule and precept delivered
before couching such course) neither yet if they should be taken up afterward;
and the reason thereof is, because they draw away and eat up the juice and
nourishment of the earth, which should wholly be employed in growing and
furthering of those which are intended for the enclosing and defending of the
alleyes.

If you should go about to plant a whole Field, or quarter of your Garden,
with great fruit trees, such as before named, you must then set them
checkerwise, and allow them betwixt twenty and thirty foot of distance the
one from the other every way, that is to say, from tree to tree, and from row
to row.

Plum-trees, Plum-trees.
and other trees bearing stone-fruit, and being of the like size of bignes^e,
will not admit under fourteen or fi^teene feet distance one from another in
every row: but and if you will only plant two rows upon the sides of your
garden alleyes, then they need not above six foot distance square; but you must
look, that this proportion, or whatsoever other that you s^t down to your
self, do ^ustly answer the proportion of the length of the place intended to
be planted.

Sweet Cherri^-trees Sweet Cherrie-trees.
and bitter Cherrie-trees do look to have allowance of distance betwixt ten
and twelve foot: but and if they be to be planted upon the sides of the great
alley of your garden, then it will suffice to allow them betwixt nine and ten.

The lesser trees, Common, or the lesser sort of Cherrie-trees.
as Cherrie-trees, Quince-trees, Figge-trees, Hasel Nut-trees, and such like,
are sufficiently allowed, if they be set distant betwixt eight and nine foot in
your green Grasse-plot, or Orchard, and betwixt five and six in Alleyes and
Garden rows. When you would plant two rows, either of them of several kinds
of trees, then set the lesser on that side that the Sun falls first upon,
that so the shadow of the greater may not disadvantage them.

CHAP. XLV.
Other precepts about the planting of Fruit Trees.
IF you plant Peare-trees and Plum-trees one with another, it will be better to
set the Plum-trees toward the Sun, for Peare-trees do better endure the
want and with holding of the same.

When you shall take up a tree to plant it elsewhere, To (...).
take a great circle ^ound about the foot, and raise together with the root as
much of the earth cleaving ^hereunto as you can: for besides that thus the
roots do not loose their bed, they find themselves otherwise also infinitely
better contented, when they carry with them the earth alread^e reclaimed and
familiar unto them, than and if they should be constrai^ed in their new lodging
to stoop and conform themselves to the earth which they should there find. To
water.
For as for watering of the roots, in pulling of them up to the ray^ing up of
the more earth therewithal, it is as good as nothing, but rather does much
^urt, because that this wet earth being within the new hole, becomes stiff
and ^ard, which cannot but greatly offend the roots of the tree removed: for
the very ^emoue does astonish and blur them so, as that it makes the points
of their roots as (...) were blunt, and to have their mouths stopped, so as that
they can neither draw unto them, or else go forward themselves: so that if
they find not the earth of their new ^odging so light and crumly, as that they
may pierce it without straining of them^elues, and con^ey themselves any way,
either the tree continues long without ta^ing, or else it dies right out. For
the avoiding of which discommoditie, you must ^ot either wet the new hole,
neither yet the tree in removing of it, nor so much as re^oue it in a dris^ing
time: and it is enough that the hole has continued open before ^or the space
of fifteen or twenty days, and has drunk in of the dew and wet of ^he
night. Of one thing you must take good heed, that you give it his just quarters
^f North, South, East, and West, as it had before, and that if you take it up
from a ^laine ground, that then you bestow it in a plain ground again: and if
you remove (...) from a hilly place, into the like, or otherwise into a
plain: then you must look that ^he seat wherein you set it in* be desended in
like manner from the winds, both below and on high, as it was in his first.

You must not plant the tree^ that have been browsed by cattle, Trees browsed
wub (...)*
or have had their (...) broken off; for they grow not so well, except you
think it good to cut off the end of their tops and head, to see if that
thereupon they will take and grow again. You may plant trees also without
roots, To plant trees without roots.
if they have great piths, as the Fig Tree, ^ame Mulberrie-tree, Hasel-trees,
and other such like.

And as for the Pits wherein you mean to plane trees, Pits.
you must make them six foot deep in clayie places, but not so much in moist
places: you must likewise make them roomethie and wide enough; for though the
tree that you shall plant, should have but small roots, yet you must make it
wide, that so there may store of good e^rth be cast in round about the root. To
moist an earth.
And if the bottom of the earth where you make the pits be too so^t, then
help it by putting to it some dry earth, or else stay till it harde^ and
breath out his moisture. Too hard an earth.
On the contrary, if it be too dry, or hard and ho^^ie* dung it and moisten
it with water, letting it drink in of the same well and sufficie^^ly: not that
you should make it like a poole, but sprinkled or bedewed with water, therewith
to cool it. Again, it is meet, that if your tree be old gathered, that they
be watered and steeped at the foot two or three days. If any of the roots of
your trees prove too long, The roots pilled.
or to have their bark hurt, then you must cut them off byas, and (...) the
side that is most unfurnished be under when the tree shall be planted, for there
will small roots come forth round about the cut.

It is a general rule, Small trees.
that before the removing of any manner of tree whatsoever, and especially if
it be a tree grown up of kernels, if it be grown thick, for to (...) off the
branches of it first, and to leave nothing on it, except such sprigs as are not
above a fingers length, or somewhat more or less, according as the tree does
require: and this is it which some utter in a proverb, A Prouerb^.
That he that will plant his father, must cut off his head: but as for small
trees, which have but some one small wand or ro^ put out of them, there is no
need that such should be cut up on high, when they be removed. The stocks of
the Nurserie which you intend to graft, must be very well (...) forth into
branches before they be removed, as we have said before.

And when you shall set down your trees in their pits, To give trees their ^it
p^aces.
you must free their roots from being entangled one with another as much as you
can, and make them all (...) draw downward, not suffering any one of them to
turn their ends upward: and (...) is not needful that they should be set so
deep into the earth, for it is enough, that the roots be laid in so deep, as
that the earth may cover them half a foot, or thereaba^^, if the place be not
very scorching and stony: and you must not fill up your pit, (...) leave a
hollow round about the tree with some open passage or conduit, that so the
rain water staying there, may be conveyed unto the roots of the tree.

When your trees shall be spread in the pits, and the roots thereof orderly
laid (...) large, weigh down upon them easily with your foot, and after mingle
well (...) earth with a part of that about the pit, and strew this upon your
roots* causing the smallest of it to fall down amongst them; but lay not the
grassie side of the earth ^^wards them, for that might set them in too great a
heat: you shall mingle the (...) earth well with the other, and so fill up the
whole pit. And if there be any worms in the earth that you shall put in, then
you shall mingle some lee ashes therewith, to kill them, To kill worms.
because they might do hurt unto the roots. Afterward, when your pit shall be
filled within half a foot, or near thereabout, you must tread down the earth
(...) upon and in the places about the roots, and it is far better if it be
dry in that (...) than for to have it wet.

But and if you prick down or plant a tree of a prop, stake, The pricking
down of trees.
stake, or pole without (...), with a wooden beetle or mallet, make not way for
it into his hole with another (...) but let it make his own hole for it self,
not leaving it such a depth of earth to pass^ through, as that it cannot
possibly enter without spoiling his bark: but when yo^ drive in the stake, tie
it in such sort at the upper end, as that it may not (...) driving.

CHAP. XLVI.
Of pruning, lopping, uncovering, and making clean of Trees.
Slothful and negligent Hinds say, That a tree must never be touched after it
is planted: but a good Husbandman says, Be still doing one good turn or
another unto the earth and the tree, and they will do the like to you again.
It were true indeed, that to say that we may not touch the tree, would have
some color of reason, if it were to be understood of the not removing of it
from his first seat, it being good, and according to the nature of the tree:
but to say that we should not touch it at all after it is once planted, would
be either to prove negligent, or else to be willing not to receive any fruit
of his trees: for by how much you are the more diligent about it, and procure
it the more good and pleasure, by so much the more increase will it repay you
again: and he shall never have good or much fruit, that shall not be diligent
in cleansing of his trees in Winter, and in the end of Autumn. To take
branches from trees.
For as concerning the taking away of superfluous and bad branches, and picking
of them, it is most certain, that a tree that busieth it self much to grow
wood, must have his branches tamed about the beginning of December, by taking
away of them so many as are superfluous, with the unnecessary wood, over tall
and high boughs, and such as hinder it from making of many buds to blossom
and bear flower: in doing whereof, you may not touch the principal branches.
To make way for the Sun ^o come to the trees.
Again, you must free your trees of branches, and some part of the stock
also, when it stands behind others that take away his Sun, that so after
such disbranching, and loss of some part of his stock, it may set afresh upon
putting forth of new, and that so courageously, as that it may surmount and
ouergrow those which before did ouer-top it, and take away the Sun from it:
for the ^ame reason, if the Sun enter not in forcibly enough amidst the
branches of a tree, but that some are still shadowed, it comes to pass, that
those shadowed ones do ^ot bear any fruit; and therefore there is cause that
it should be observed and mar^ed ever as it grows, what branches there be
that do ouer-shew and drown the other, and to take them out of the way when
the leaf is fallen. You must likewise ^ut the boughs that look downward, or
which grow crooked in the midst of the ^ree, as those which hinder the growth
of it. This disbranching must be done in the decrease of the Moon, when there
is not either excessive cold wind, or rain, and that with a good cutting
tool: and not in any case when the tree is in his blos^omes, because that so
it might come to pass easily, that they should dry away. Young grafts may not
be too soon picked and pruned, least they should become too ^rolicke and
lusty, putting up still in height, having but a feeble body to bear so great
a head: and therefore they must be let grow strong about the foot before you
do any thing unto them.

It is like wise most certain, To take dead wood (...) the tree.
that the dead wood of a tree does cause other braun^hes for to die, and so by
little and little the whole tree throughout: or else it keeps ^he tree from
growing and rising, What is meant by bourgening.
which is the same that we call bourgening. Then (...) appears how necessary
it is to take away all dead wood, and it may be done either in Summer or
Winter. This mischief haunteth old trees most, or else such young ones as the
Sun has come too fiercely against, Exceeding heat of the sun hurtful to
trees.
in the place of their standing: or ^lse by some inconvenience of lightning,
thunder, or tempest: or else of some veni^^ous beast lurking at the foot of it,
having bitten and wounded some fibrous part of the root: or else by having had
some of the branches tainted and wronged by the ^pade or pick-axe in the laying
of it open at the foot, or multiplying of it by propagation. And if it be meet
that that should be remedied that is above the earth; ^hen do that also which
is under the earth, and with greater care and diligence: for the heat of the
earth and dung does engender vermin at the foot of the tree, which eat away
the roots: or else sometime dung cast about it, does minister such store of
nourishment unto it, as that thereupon it is forced to put forth so great store
of shoots and siences, as that these do make it to miscarrie, without hurting
or taking any nourishment from any other of the trees: So that then hereby it
appears, that there is need to dig trees at the foot in Winter unto the
very quick of the earth, and take away from thence whatsoever may threaten
any danger; and as for such number of siences, to see them planted other
where, whether they be of Plum-trees, Peare-trees, Apple Trees, or such other,
and at the end of three years to graft them. And here it shall not be amiss to
note, that the siences of Hasel-tree being removed, bring forth the better
small Nuts.

In like manner, To order a tree in Winter.
the tree must have some recreation given it in Winter, after hi^ great travel
in bringing forth of his fruit, and that in this sort: as by opening the earth,
and laying his roots bare, that so you may cleanse them, and that the rain and
the snow may fat them, which especially and principally happens in nanie
places that are hot, dry, and lying very open upon the Sun in his scorching
heat. Furthermore, if the bark of the tree begin to dry away, showing signs
of small store of nourishment within, that then you make fast unto the foot of
the same tree some dead dog, or other carrion, A dead dog o^ some other
carrion made fast to the foot of the tree.
for to rejoice it withal, and some one or other scuttle full of good and
small dung to lay about the foot of it: or on the contrary, lee ashes, if so
b^ that the ground be found too fat and full of worms.

The age of the tree will make it to grow full of moss: and if it be young,
The moss of trees.
then to^ much moisture will make it mossie, as also too much drines^e. This
disease feeds upon a tree, and makes it lean, as the scab does the beast:
and we must not think, th^^ this can happen by reason of the mos^e that is put
about and above the wreath of the grafts. The remedy for this, is to lay it
open at the roots, as has been said heretofore: as also to make it clean in
Winter with a knife of wood, or of bone, for fear that the moss continuing in
peace, win the country, and in fine devour the whole tree.

He that will have fair young trees, The time to dig and cu^ off vnprofitabl^
members from young trees.
must dig about them every month, and (...) off unprofitable and noisome
parts every of those times, after March and October, and so long, as until
they be grown great: but when they are become great, they must not be dug
ofter than thrice a year. In Winter, whether they be great or small, the earth
must be taken from their feet, that so it may be mingled with dung and put into
the pit again, to the continual retaining of necessary moistured and
comfortable influence of the heavens, as we have said before. And in Summer,
and when it is extreme hot, there must be kept and gathered a heap of cool
earth about the foot of the said tree, to help it to avoid the heat and
drought of the laid season.

It is best to disbranch and prune trees, The fit time to pick an^ prune trees.
when the sap begins to rise up into them, and when they thereupon begin
to but and blossom in sign of approaching Summer, and this time most commonly
falls out about March and April. And in this business you must see, that
you cut the superfluous boughs off dose by the stock, and the sap thereupon
will by and by run out at the same cut: which thing cannot so happily succeed
with them which cut trees in Winter. And to p^^uent that the thickness of the
weighty and great branches may not rend the (...) from the tree in falling,
cut it first half a foot from the earth, and after goef forward to saw off the
residue very close unto the tree, and lastly, cast the sawed dust upon the cut.

If you disbranch and prune your trees in Winter, To cut d^wne branches fr^^
old trees.
leave the stumpes sufficient long to cut them afterward again in March and
April: but and if you mean to lop and disbranch your great and old trees, to
the end they may grow young again, when you perceive them to loose their
lusty color, and to begin to look yellow, then yo^ must do it shortly after
the first of November, as after that their leaves are fallen and before their
sap put up again: and in cutting or sawing of these boughs, (...) their
stumps with the stock, that so you may grant upon them new siences, some
longer, some shorter, as the tree requires, being (...) in all your work to
take away the most offending branches, that ^o the remainder may receive the
more h^mour and substance.

It the tree through age or otherwise become barren contrary to his wonted
custom, An old Tree fallen barren.
you must not cut off all his boughs, but those only that are dead. Likewise
you must uncover his roots after the beginning of November is past, and cleave
the thickest of them, and put in the clefts some shiuers of hard stone, and
there leave them, to the end the juice of the earth may enter in that way:
afterward, at the end of Winter you shall cover their roots again with good
earth.

When the grafts of three or four year old are broken, Grafts broken:
broused or hurt of cattle; or when as you see that at such age they increase
not neither grow greater, then you must cut them again, and graft them more
low or more high than they were. And after you have thus cut it, you may take
the vnthriuing grafts, cut off and graft them again, or some part of them in
this new head, but somewhat deeper than it was before in the former; and let it
also be well and close made up, even from the first setting of it into the
stock: and when you have thus grafted the stock this second time, you must
still leave remaining and not pull away the siences which put forth of the
plants so grafted, until you see whether the graftes do put forth new wood or
no; for peradventure you might kill the plant, which yet being reserved and
kept alive, you may graft again the third time, if the second should die or
miscarrie.

After the graftes have put forth new wood, How to order graf^s after they ha^^
put forth new wood
of some two or three foot length, if they ag^ine put forth siences more than
need, and those about the parts which you desire to cherish, and to bring to
large growth, then cut away those superfluous siences, and that very close,
even in the year that the grafts were grafted, but let it be at such time as
the sap is in the wood: likewise it will not be amiss to cut off some of the
principal members of the shoots and grafts of the first year, if there be too
much put forth, and to ingraft them in some other place: and about four or
five years after that they have been grafted, and therewithal the grafts
well and close grown to the plants; yet once again go over your former
work, and take away after the same manner whatsoever you perceive of idle
remainder: for it is enough for one tree to have one good member for to make
his stock or body of, and especially those which have been grafted small upon
a graft, and thus it proves a f^^rer and better tree in the end. But and if
the tree were grafted after it had been grown great, and that with many
grafts, you may well afford it larger allowance, according as you shall find
requisite and needful, for the better covering again of the clefts and cuts
made in the plant.

When your trees shall begin to grow, To order and ^andle Trees ^ at are grow^
up.
you must govern and guide them well for three or four years or more, namely
until they be come to a good shape and fashion, cutting their top on high, and
their small branches of superfluous wood, so long as till they come to the
height of a man and more, if well it may be done, and dress them well, and set
them in good order in their principal parts and members, and that in such
manner as that one branch stand not too near unto another: neither yet that
they may take hold one of another when they shall grow great: and some also
must be cut away if that the tree should be too thick of boughs within, that
so the Sun may show his force by having passage and entrance thereunto.

If it come to pass that trees being yet young do cease to grow in
thickness, Trees giving over to grow.
you must cleave the bark of the stock in four all along, or else in five
places, according as the tree shall be in thickness, and after that, in a
short time you shall perceive it grow maruellously.

You must take from trees the dry leaves, To take away the Caterpillars nests.
which have shut up within them the nests and eggs of Caterpillars* and other
such like little beasts, which are given to consume, wast, eat, and spoil the
leaves, tender parts, and fruit it self from off the tree: and besides, do
oftentimes cause to dry away, as also to die the whole tree, especially
peare-trees, and apple trees, as being more subject unto this vermin, than the
other sorts of Fruit Trees. And it is needful furthermore to rid the stocks
of all galls and breaches which the Worms or Pismires have made there, because
that upon these occasions might follow their death and ruin.

Trees may be cut from the first of November unto the end of March: The time to
cut trees.
and yo^ are to give order, that there may no gashes be made of great depth:
and if you cut off the siences or shoots of the tree which brings forth no
fruit, and that it be in the decrease and last quarter of the Moon, it will
cause it to become fruitful. And when the tree which you have grafted, shall
have grown great, you may take away his siences, and leave remaining your
grafts alone.

For the matter of watering of trees, To water trees.
they must not be watered except in time of very great drought, and then not
upon their foot and stock, but in compass about them: and this again must be
moderately done, because trees desire to be moistened rather by amending of
them with fat and well manured earth, than with water: also we see, that the
fruits which grow in places that are not watered, are ordinarily more sauorie,
and keep longer, than those whose earth and soil is drencht with water,
howsoever that sometime the dryness thereof be such, as that it does hinder
and keep the fruit from coming unto his perfect growth and accustomed
greatness.

If that trees sor some years together do bear more fruit than ordinary,
Much fruit upon a tree.
insomuch, as that it is as much or more in number than the leaves, you must in
such case rid them of the third or half part, in as much as those behind will
not only grow fairer, but because also, that the year after it will bring
forth more than and if those should be let alone, it would do.

CHAP. XLVII.
Of the curing of Fruit Trees.
EVen as all things that draw their force and take their growth from the earth,
have some perseverance of that which is good for them, as those things by
means whereof they live: so they have certain special and particular
diseases growing upon them by reason of things that are contrary unto them, as
either old age, or want, or over great abundance of that which should nourish
them. Wherefore it is no marvel if Trees and every one of them do now and
then suffer inconveniences, and such as if they be not quickly helped and
relieved, they will not fail to die.

All trees which through force of wind or otherwise shall be cloven, Sliuen or
shiuered trees.
shiuered, or sliuen, must be cured with mire, sheep dung, and swines dung.

Weeds growing about trees, Weeds about trees.
do suck the nourishment of the earth, and they must carefully be weeded out,
and the rind of the tree must be smoothed with a hedging bill, but not in
overthwart manner.

When a tree grows not in thickness, The small and dwarfish tree.
and is long in putting forth of branches, and in rising on high, after that
you have uncovered it at the foot, at such time as has been said before, you
must cleave asunder many of his roots, but those not of the chief and
principal, and put unto them swines dung mixed with other earths, and sometime
power down in the place the lees of strong wine, round about the roots:
likewise if it be grown exceeding mossie, then you must cleanse it of the
moss, with a great wooden knife, taking heed that you hurt not the bark. And
in Summer time when the earth is too wet, it will be good to dig the earth
about the foot and roots of those trees, which were not uncovered at the roots
in Winter, and to mix therewith some thing to better the earth withal, whether
it be dung or some good mould from some other place.

You shall make the barren tree fruitful, The barren tree.
if you hang amongst the boughs a bag full of the seed of Roses,
Mustard Seed, and the foot of a Weasell.

The file is a diseases in trees that fretteth their barks: wherefore you must
cut away this infection very neat and clean at the end of Winter with a very
sharp tool, The f^le in trees
and after put upon the wound or cut the dung of Oxen or Swine, and bind it to
with old clothes, and keep them also very close and fast with Oziers, that it
being thus fastened, may continue a long time, even whiles the plasters can be
kept on, and made cleave thereto.

There are but a few trees but they are subject unto the worms, W^rme in trees.
and some more than others, as Apple Trees, Peare-trees, and all such as
contain within them a sweet juice: some others less, as the Bay Tree, and
others which bear sour and bitter fruits. Sometimes these worms grow of the
oldnesse of the tree, sometimes of having taken a blow. Therefore against such
worms as use to breed in the bark of the tree, in the place where you shall
see the bark swelled or houen, you must race it with a knife, and pierce it
even unto the wood, that so the infecting humor may issue out, and with some
hook or crook you shall pull out the worms and rottenness that is within,
and that with as much speed as you can: after this, put into and upon the cut
an emplaister of oxe-dung or swines-dung mingled and stamped with sage and some
quick lime, wrap it well and tie all fast, and there let it remain and abide
so long as it can endure.

The lees of Wine, The iaundise in trees.
or grounds of Oil, being cast upon the roots of the Trees that have the
jaundise, or else are otherwise any way sick, does them very great good.

There breed in Trees certain small beasts almost like to Weeuils, Weeuils.
and they are somewhat bluish or black, and certain of them have long and
sharp pointed peakes or bills, these do great harm to grafts and other young
Trees: for they cut off young siences which are yet but tender, and put forth
not past the length of a finger: you must at the height of the day, when you
shall see them there, lay your hand upon them very softly without stirring the
Tree: for they let themselves fall down when one goes about to take them,
because they cannot quickly betake themselves to flight, and if they let not
themselves fall into your hand, then reach up and take them upon the siences
with your other hand.

For Snailes and Ants, Against snailes and ants.
lay ashes or saw-dust of wood, or the meal of lupines at the foot of the
trees, and when the rain has fallen upon it, stir it up again, and put also
new upon it: otherwise, set certain small vessels full of water at the foot
of your trees: or else power lees of wine round about them.

When a tree lets fall his fruit, The tree that loses his fruit
you must compass his stock about with Iuorie, as it were with a crown, or
else with a plate of lead, or, which is best, you must uncover the roots of the
tree, and pie^ce them, and put into the hole the wedge made of the wood of a
ceruise tree.

To hinder the rust from hur^ing of your trees, Against ^^sting of trees.
you must smoke them with straw in the Spring time, and that round about.

When a tree loses his flower, The tree that loses his flowers.
or that the leaves do fall from it, you must uncover the roots, and lay bean
straw wet in water round about them.

The best is to look to Caterpillars in the time of Winter before that the
trees be leaued, Against caterpillars.
and if you find any remnant or remainder of them behind, or their palaces or
round gathered bunches, take them away with your Caterpiller crookes made for
the purpose before they be hatched. Cut not the wood when you cannot come by
them with your hand, or, as little as can be, and cleanse you trees well and
thoroughly in every place, that so there remain not any eggs, then look
underneath at the feet of your trees, and see that there be no young ones,
which can spin, and have betaken themselves thither, and settled themselves
betwixt the siences and the roots. If there remain any clewes or round
bottomes of them in the spring, or that some blasting or small rain has bred
some young ones, then mark at the height of the day, their repa^^e, in which
place you shall see them together upon heaps, whether it be upon the arms of
the tree, or upon the branches, from which you must either with old clothes, or
else with some large and great leaves held in your hand, beat them and kill
them every one, weighing hard upon them with both your hands, and oftentimes
have recourse thither, and spy if you have not let some of them ^all unto the
ground; but beware there sp^rt nothing from them in your face: and to the end
they may not breed any more, you shall tie and make fast the branches of the
Sallow about the foot: These branches will serve likewise to make this vermin
fall down stark dead. There breeds likewise a little worm, which the
inhabitants of Bou^deaux call Quayre, betwixt the wood and the bark, which
eats trees in such sort, as that it cau^eth them die. These you must kill
with an iron wyre, probing for them on every side of the tree.

When a tree bears too much, The over fruitfu^n^s of a tree.
it must, after that it has been uncovered at the roots, have diverse of them
(so they be not of the principal) cloven, and the water that is within them
let out, if there be any at all in them: and this will be as good for them, or
better, than letting of blood is for a man, for by this medicine the life of
the tree is renewed.

The sickness of the bark of the tree comes of the moisture of the place
where the branch is planted: and likewise on the contrary, The d^fease of the
ba^^e of ^he tree.
trees become ^ame when they be planted in too dry a place. To keep tame
young trees in the kernel Nurserie, and to cause them to thrive the better,
(...) trees.
they (...) be covered a man's height with stubble, or with straw, but the
covering must be borne up with poles laid long and crosse-wise.

To hasten and help forward a tree in his bringing forth of fruit, To hasten a
tree his bringin^ forth of fruit.
which is long before it bear any thing, you must make a hole with a wimble
in the thickest branch of his root, without boring of it through, and in the
hole which you have made, put a staff, and stop it up with wax, afterward
cover the foot over again, and the tree will bear the year following.

As concerning trees that have been lately planted, The drines of a tree.
and begin to wither away, if you cause them to be dug and watered, you
shall much help them: and withal, they must be kept from heat, in providing
something which may make them shadow; and against the cold, they must be
covered with straw.

Swines dung will kill worms: To kill worms that trouble trees.
as also men's urine put in the hole where the worms are; and quicke-lime in
like sort: but and if the bark be hurt, then let it be cloven in many places,
and likewise in the foot of the tree a little, in such sort, as that the humor
may run out.

The moisture often times will cause worms to breed in fruits that have kernels:
and therefore at such time you must pierce the tree with a wimble, The breeding
of worms.
and that throughout if you do well, and as near the root as is possible, to
the end that the humors breeding the worms may pas^e away.

It Apples or any other such fruit fall from the tree, The falling of apple^
from the tree.
cleave the root, and put in the cleft a great stone or a wedge of vvood.

It fruits grow upward, wash the foot of the Tree with Purcelaine water or
vinegar; or power about it less of wine: or take two parts of Oyle-oliue,
Fruits rising vpwa^d.
and one part of black pitch, mingle them together, afterward anoint them, or
put ashes to the foot of the tree, or ^lse some vessel full of water about it,
or some hoope cut and anointed with Petroleum: or a little cord dressed over
with swines blood, wherewith quicksilver has been mixed.

To kill Ants from about a tree, To kill Ants.
you must uncover the earth about the tree, and put in place some chimney soot,
and that a reasonable quantity. Take also of the saw-dust of the Oak, and lay
good store of it at the foot of the Tree, and the rain when it falls will
either cause them to depart, or else they will die: as for other accidents
which may annoy and hurt trees, as hail, fogges, or mists, flies, frogs, and
such other inconveniences, see in the second Book, and the sixtieth Chapter.

CHAP. XLVIII.
To keep and preserve the fruit of Trees, to be taken and eaten in their due
time and season: and out of it.
ALl such skill as man is to have, rests not alone in the well ordering of
the Fruit-tree, and careful maintaining of it; but the must know withal, the
keeping and preserving of the fruit, either to sell it when the time is good
and fit, or else for use of his household and family, especially in places
where the most delicate and dainty fruits do grow, as in the country of
Touraine, Tourraine the garden of France.
which for this and such other considerations, is called the garden of France:
wherefore we will entreat briefly of the manner of keeping of fruits, and we
will begin with the Almond.

Almonps are ripe when they begin to cast the husks. Ripe Almonds.
If you vvash them in salt brine, you shall make them white, and to endure
long, but yet the more if you dry them also: if you see that it cannot cast
his husk, lay it upon some straw a certain time, and shortly after it will
cast it: to keep it long, lay it in a dry place where the South vvind blows
not.

Chestnuts Chestnuts.
will be good to keep unto the Spring time, if you first dry them in the
shadow, and after lay them in dry places upon heaps, or in vessels covered
with sand: or and if you mingle them amongst common nuts, for by this medley
they will be robbed of their excrementous humor. But chiefly to keep them
long, you most gather them when they are reason^ble ripe, in the old of the
Moon, and lay them in sand in some cool place, or in some vessel well
stopped. Some do spread them upon hurdles, or bury them so in sand, as that one
of them touch not another. Othersome set them in ranks in baskets or panniars
full of straw. Sound Chestnuts
You may try if they be ^ound, by casting them into cold water: for if they
go to the bottom, then they are sound, but and if they swim above the water,
they are corrupted and naught.

Cherries Cherries.
will keep long, if you gather them from off the Tree before the Sun rise,
and afterward lay them orderly in a vessel, having in the bottom of it a bed
of Sauorie: and that by laying a bed of Sauorie, and a bed of Cherries, and a
bed of Sauorie, and a bed of Cherries, and lastly, a bed of Sauorie, watering
them with sweet vinegar. In like manner they will last long if you order them
alter the said manner, covering them with Rose leaves in a barrel: they are
likewise either dried in the Sun, or stewed in their own juice, and
preserved with sugar to keep a long time.

If you anoint your Citrons, To keep C^trons.
gathered with the leaves upon their boughs, with well tempered plaster, you
may keep them sound a whole year: and if you hide them and cover them with
barley, they will not rot: or if you do but close them up close in any vessel
whatsoever: or else if you do but cover them with small straw.

The Corneile-berrie (commonly so called) must be put in a bottle of glass
which has a wide throat, To keep the Corneile-berrie.
and when they are in, the bottle must be filled up with very good and liquid
honey, or else with sugar in stead of honey: after this, the juice rising of
this sugar wherein they are preserved, is a s^ngular thing for the staying of
the flux of the belly, and the procuring of appetite.

To keep Quinces, For the staying of the flux of the ballie.
dippe them in the lees of wine, or which is better, make them up in new
earthen pots close shut, and put the same into vessels full of wine, or else
dippe them in the wine, and by this means the Quinces will remain fresh, and
the wine a great deal more pleasant. Some keep them in Straw or Barley, or the
sawdust of Wood, or Fig Tree leaves. Othersome cover them with leaves and
loame made of potters clay, and afterward dry them in the Sun: and when they
would use them they break the clay, and taking out the quinces, find them such
as they put them in. The mal^gnant (...) of Quinces.
Some put them all whole in honey. But note by the way, that you must not keep
quinces in a house where there is other fruit, for what by their sowernes^e,
and what through their smell, they spoil and corrupt the other fruits which are
their neighbors, or near unto them, yea the very grapes which one would
keep.

Figs will be always green and new, To keep green f^^ges.
if you put them in a pot full of honey well covered, in such sort as that they
do not touch one another, nor yet the pot it self: or else if you put them in
gourds, every one by it self, and hang the gourd in a shadowed place, where
the fire or smoke cannot come: or if you put them in a glass pot well stopped
with Wax. Dry figs will not corrupt if you lay them upon hurdles in an oven,
after the bread is drawn out, and after put them in a new earthen pot, that is
not glased.

Walnuts will continue a long time sound, To keep walnuts sound.
if they be covered with straw, or with their dry leaves, or shut up in a
coffer made of the wood of Walnut-tree: or if they be mingled amongst Omons,
whereunto they do this pleasure, as that they take from them the greatest part
of their acri^onie, or sharpness. Some s^y likewise that they will be kept
gre^ne a whole year, if when they are gathered green, they have their coat
taken from them and be dipped in honey: and thereupon also such honey becomes
singular for them which have ulcers in their mouth or throat to make
gargarismes of for the same.

Pomegranats will keep, To keep Pomegranats.
if at such time as when they are ripe, or almost ripe, you writh the little
stalk by which they hang upon the tree: or ^f presently as soon as they be
gathered, they be covered all over with pot^ers clay, tempered in water, and
afterward set out to the Sun in sweet oil, in a broad mouthed pot covered
and hung at the floor of some chamber in a close place where the frost cannot
come: or else set in some cave under the earth: but see that they grow not
mouldie there. In the mean time for the gathering of them, you must touch them
softly with your hand, that so you may not crush them: they keep very well
also in saw-dust of ^ake woad, in alt water, or salt brine. Or else you must
dip them all over in boiling water, pulling them out again presently,
afterward drying them upon sand or small gravel, or in the Sun for the space
of eight days. Some hide them over head and ears in a heap of corn in the
shadow, until that their rind be hardened.

Apples after they have been gathered in weather not rainie or cloudie, To
keep apples.
but fair, must be kept spread upon their eyes, not upon their tails, upon a
table covered with corn straw, in a cold place, but not in a cave (for in such
a place they would look their savor) and where the windows are turned toward
the North, which likewise must in fair weather be set open: or upon straw, or
in barlie, or in a pot done over with Wax within, and close covered: or in an
^arthen pot not pitched, but having a hole in the bottom, and yet close
covered aloft, and ^o hung up in a tree all Winter, in which case the apples
will continue such as they were put in. Some warp them eu^rie one by themselves
in figge-leaues, and after cover them with lome of white potters clay, and
with dry lome, and set them in the Sun. Some after they have gathered and
made choice of the soundest, heauiest, and fairest apples, not being yet
altogether ripe, do set a hogshead in the ground, round about which they set
these fruits, and cover them afterward with a bed of straw, laying again
another bed of apples thereupon, and covering the same as before, they continue
th^^ until the ves^ell be full, which then they take out of the earth again,
and s^op it ^uerie where close, that so there may no air get in thereat. The
Normans lay them vp^n heaps, minding to make their Cider thereof: In the
country of Orleans and Touraine they use to dry them in ouens, for Winter and
Spring time banquets. But the ordinary and safest manner of keeping of apples
is, after they are got and pick^, and the bruised ones put from the rest, to
spread straw very thin, or lay ma^s upon ^ boarded floor (for the earth
floor is too moist, and the plaster floor too cold) and then spread your
apples upon the same, so as they may lie close one by another, but not one upon
another, and when extreme frost or very hard weather shall come, you shall
lay the like layre of straw, or the like quantity of mats above them, as you
laid beneath them, and as soon as the frost breaks up, you shall with a dry
cloth rub all moisture from them, and where you find any one tainted, presently
cast it out, for else they will soon corrupt one another. Now as soon as
February is past, you shall take away your straw or mats both from above and
underneath them, and lay your apples upon the plain boards, but yet in such
sort that they may not touch one another, and thus you shall keep apples all
the year safe, both from rotting, vvithering, or vvrinkling of their skins.

Medlars To keep m^dlars.
are kept in small pitched vessels, or put in pots amongst grapes.

Olives To keep olives
are preserved in salt brine, or in a composition of honey, vinegar, and salt:
some add thereunto penniroyall, mints, anise, and masticke-tree-leaues:
othersome, the leaves of the bay tree; and others, the berries of the bay tree.

Pears To keep pears.
will keep a long time, if their tails be pitched over, and so hanged up.
Others put pears into a new earthen pot, and power into them cuted Wine, or
wine from the press, or common wine as it is meet to be drunk, until the
vessel be full. Others keep pears covered with file-dust, or with the
saw-dust of wood: some put them amongst the dry leaves of the Walnut-tree, or
else in an earthen vessel which is scarce baked, and power in thereinto wine
able to be drunk, and the new pressed liquor of grapes, and stopping up the
vessel well and close, do so keep it. Some lay them in pits, in a place
near whereunto there passes a running water. And some divide into quarters
the Eusebian, rhodine, and bell-fashioned pears, and taking their kernels out
of them, dry them in the Sun, that so they may have them good in the Spring
time.

Mulberries To keep mulberries.
that are close stopped up in a glass vessel, do keep very long, so that
therewithal they have powered upon them some of their own juice.

Citrons and Oranges To keep citrons and oranges.
are kept in some cave under the earth, separate one from another, or in salt
brine made of verjuice, or verjuice without salt, or in manner of a preserve
with salt, as the olives are kept.

Peaches To keep peaches.
are kept in salt brine, or in sweet vinegar: or else their stones being taken
away, they are dried in the Sun, after the manner of figs. Some do
preserve them with honey.

Ceruises To keep ceruises.
are preserved in sweet Wine: or else when they be gathered, the hardest are
taken and set to soften in vessels of earth full or almost full, covered over
afterward with plaster, and set in a pit a foot depth, in a dry place, and in
the face of the Sun, and after covered with earth. You may likewise cut them in
pieces in the midst, and afterward lay them in the Sun to dry.

Damaske-plums To keep damaske-plums.
shall be put in vessels, and cast upon them new or sweet Wine, stopping the
vessels very diligently and close. Or if you lay them between
mulberrie-leaues, or vine-leaues, one leare above another in a close box made
for the purpose, they will not only keep a long time, but also you may in
that sort carry them without bruising more than an hundred miles: in this sort
also you may keep or carry Nertarines, Abricots, Peaches, Figs, Mulberries,
or any fruit of the like nature; as for your grapes, there is no readier or
better way to keep them long, than to hang them upon strings over the
mantell-tree of a chimney, or where they may receive a moderate warmth from the
fire, for nothing so soon as cold does make them rot or putrify, and
therefore you must by no means, so far as you can choose, suffer your grapes
to take any frosts, nay hardly the cold dewes.

CHAP. XLIX.
A brief discourse of making of drinks of the juices of Fruits.
IN such Countries as the vine cannot bear fruit in, because of the cold
distemperature and churlish roughness of the air, and whereas notwithstanding
there grow singular good fruits, and in great abundance in recompense of the
same (as in Britain, Normandy, the country of Man's, Chartraine, and
Touraine) although there be the means to make Wine of a certain kind of
corn, called Bier: yet by reason of the less cost and charges, as also by
reason of the greater profit, they use to make diverse sorts of drinks of
fruits: and to give them their several and particular names from the several
and particular fruits whereof they are made. As for example, that which is made
of apples, cider or citer, and so the Normans and other countries bordering
thereupon do call it, as having a smell or other excellent quality resembling
the citron. Perrie which is pressed out of the Pears, and ceruise Wine, quince
Wine, pomegranat Wine, mulberrie Wine, gooseberrie Wine, and slo^ Wine, which
are made of the juices of these fruits pressed out. And hereof we are to
observe that all fruits are not fit to make Wine of; but only those which
will not putrify easily, and have great quantity of Wine juice within them,
of which kind these are whereof I have now spoken. For of cherries there is
not any Wine to be pressed, because their juice does easily corrupt and
putrify very quickly: neither yet of Almonds, Common nuts, Filberds, Pine,
nuts, or other such fruits, for they yield an oily and not a Wine-like humor.
But for as much as we are not determined to speak in this place of all these
sorts of fruit drinks, but only of them which are called cider, perrie, and
carasie, which next unto the juice of the vine, are the most profitable and
necessary liquor for the life and health of man: we will set down before
hand a certain summarie, and as it were a transition and plain declaration
of and unto as well the making, as also of and unto the qualities and virtues
of the said cider, perrie, and carasie, and will refer the Reader unto the
Latin Book now long ago looked for from Mounsier Paulmie Doctor of Physic
at Paris, therein to read and learn the entire and perfect knowledge of this
so pleasant and delightsome a drink. And to begin with our purposed matter, I
intend not here to stand about the finding out of the first inuentour and
deuisour of this drink; only I will say, that as Noe carried away with the
pleasant taste of the juice, which he pressed out of the grape of the wild
vine planted by him, was the first inuentor of making and drinking of wine: so
a certain Norman having his taste wonderfully pleased with a delicate and
dainty taste and relish of the juice of Apples and Pears, invented the
making of Cider and Perrie* I say, a certain Norman, for this is in base
Normandy called the Country of Ne^z, where this drink had first his
beginning.

The way then to make these kinds of drinks generally, The way in general to
make such Wine.
is to gather the fruit not all out ripe, and after to let them ripen some
certain time in the open air or to dry them in the Sun, for the spending
and wasting of their waterie humor; then to break and crush them with
Mil-stones, or such other heavy instruments; and lastly, to press them out:
but withal you must observe this special quality in certain Apples, which
the longer they are kept, and the riper they be, the better and greater store
of juice they yield, though then indeed it be not so durable.

On the contrary, wild Pears do yield more liquor, and of a better taste, and
withal of longer continuance, than do the tame and garden ones. When the
juice is pressed out from the fruit, it must be put into caske, for to boil
therein a certain time, and to be ordered after the manner of the ordering of
the juice of Grapes, as we intend to declare more particularly.

How Cider is made.
THe drinks made of fruits that are most commonly used, are Cider and Perrie,
which as they are pressed out of diverse sorts of Apples and Pears, so are
they differing as well in taste as in goodness. For to make your Cider, you
must see that your Apples be not wild ones, but garden and tame ones, grown
and bred in orchards carefully and diligently dressed, kept, husbanded, and
ordered all the year long, according to that care and diligence which we
have said to be needful before in speaking of the Orchard, and yet without
having any great regard unto the place where the Orchards are planted, and do
grow, as whether they be gardens, greene-plots, arable ground, or other such
like places; always provided and foreseen, that the ground be good, and well
seasoned. And above all things such Apples What apples are fittest to make wine
of.
must have a firm, solid, and fast flesh, accompanied with great store of
juice, of a pleasant smell, and delightsome taste, and of a beautiful color:
such are these that follow, the Heroet, Ruddocke, Maligar, Rambur, Fairewife,
Gastlet* Clanget, great Eye, Greening, Curtain, Grosegraft, Rucke, long,
sower, and sweet Kennet, Barbarian, Rangelet, and Ado^ill. The Shortstart,
Honie-meale, and Garden-globe, notwithstanding that they be rare and singular
apples, and of a more pleasant smell, and delightsome taste, then any other
sorts of Apples, yet are they not fit to make any Cider of, as well in respect
of the tenderness and delicacie of their flesh, as for the little and
insufficient store of juice which they yield, not worthy the putting into the
pres^e to make any quantity of Cider of. And hereto you may put another
reason; namely, that these Apples are not so plentiful, neither grow they in
such store as others do, and therefore it is better to keep them to eat, or
to employ them in broths or sirope of king Sabor, and de succis pomorum, than
about the making of any common drink.

The most common time to gather Apples is about mid-September, The time to
gather apples.
after they have been partakers of Summers heat, and received some small rain
and gentle winds from September: some being very ripe; others yet not
altogether ripe; principally those which have a faster and less delicate
flesh: the greatest part whereof (being kept some time) yields greater store
of juice, and better concocted and digested by the work and operation of
their own natural heat. In the gathering of them there is necessarily to be
used cudgels and poles, except it be that we lay our hands to them, which
we have a purpose to keep: there must in this business also be chosen such
a day as is fair, dry, clear, beautiful, and full of Sunshine, for if
they should be moist with any rain or dew* they would rot in their garners.

Being gathered, they must not all of the sudden be taken in hand to be made
into Cider, but they must be suffered to take a heat in heaps, (as the Normans
call it) and be kept some three weeks or a month, more or less, according
to their consistence and kind, seeing unto it in the mean time (at their own
peril) that they rot not; as also, they may be laid on great heaps in
Gardens, or under some roof open to the air when it freezeth not, or when
it freezeth, to court them with straw newly threshed, or else with some
Mattresses or Featherbeds to keep them from the frost. Some during the time of
the frost, cover them with linen Clothes steeped in water, and vvrung out,
and these being frozen once themselves, do keep that the air cannot pass
unto the Apples to freeze them: the best of all it to provide them warm
garners, the ^loores being laid neither with plaster nor tiles, but with
straw, having the windows very close, the doors firm and fast shut, and all
the creuises or chinkes perfectly stop to resist the entrance of the cold air.
And notwithstanding all this, yet you must not tarry and wait until they be
thoroughly ripe, and almost upon the rotting especially: but you must take your
time somewhat before that they be come to this exact maturity and height of
ripeness, for else your cider will not prove durable, but withal will gather
great quantity of lee^, and grow covered with much white mother swimming
aloft: if they be frozen, then trouble not your self with going about to make
Cider, for having lost their natural and accustomed smell and color, they
have also lost all their force and virtue, and so it is not possible to make
any thing of them but a raw, weak, unpleasant, vvaterish, vndurable, and soon
sowring licour. When as therefore the apples shallbe well prepared, and come
to a good scantling of ripeness, not such a o^e as is exact, but rather of the
first or second degree of ripeness, and that they shall yield and breath out a
very pleasant and sweet smell: then it shall be high time for you to go in
hand with making of your Cider. Which opportunity if you foreslow and still
stay longer for their further and exact ripening* they will wither and fall
away, and the Cider that you shall press out of them, will become waterish,
weak, and sour out of hand.

There are diverse ways used in pressing out this drink made of Apples in the
country of Neuz: The manner of pressing out the drink made of Apples.
Some do stamp them, putting them in fats, and afterward fill them up with
great quantity of water, letting them ferment, boil, and purge, so long as
until the water have got the force and strength of the Cider. Others stamp
them in a mortar, and after power them together with a great quantity of water
into some fat, not giving them any time of concoction and purging: but these
two ways are not so much worth; this third is better than them both. First,
you must break your Apples in pieces, and after press them out: the way to
break them in pieces, is to put them in a presser made ^ound, and containing
in compass some seven or eight ^adome, the said compass and round being
contrived after the manner of a trough of two foot broad and deep at the
least, in these troughes shall be put and contained the said apples for the
better staying and keeping of them in close together. Within these troughes
there shall turn about one or two great milstones of stone, or of some hard,
massy, and weighty wood, fashioned like a wheel, carried about with one Ox
or Horse, or two, so as shall be sufficient for power and strength, as we have
said in the making of Oils. When the Apples shall be sufficiently broken, you
must gather into heaps the same, and cast them into ^ubs for the purpose, and
there let them work for a time as Wine does, and when it has wrought, then
you must draw out the juice or liquor (call it as you will) which shall have
run out of the substance without being pressed, and turn it up into vessels,
whether they be pipes or hogsheads, old, or altogether new; provided that they
have not taken any ill taste of any unsavory liquor: the best vessels or
caske of all other, is that wherein there has been Wine, and especially white
Wine, for the savor of the Wine does make this juice more acceptable, and more
affected. The Cider that comes voluntarily without being pressed, is the best
and sweetest, though not always stronger than that which has abode the
press: that likewise is better and more excellent which is made without any
mixture of water: It is true indeed, that when apples have a very fast and
solid pulpe, and have not so much moisture, but withal some sharp relish,
that then it will not be amiss to mingle some small quantity of water with
them to make them break the better, as also, after that they be broken by
force of the turning stone, even whiles they are working in their fats, or
before they be put into their fats a working, even at their going to the
press, there may water be mixed with them, to prevent that the Cider may not
be too rank, neither yet too sour or greenish. The grounds of the vvorking
fat shall be laid upon the press interlaced with long straw, to keep the
said stamped Apples steedie and stayed, that they slip not to and fro when they
are pressed, (the Apples by reason of their roundnesse, not being able to stay
and abide under the door and other boards of the presser, except they be kept
in upon the sides with something) and that which shall run out upon the
pressing of them, shall be tun^ed up into caske, and put to the former: or else,
which is better, tun it up by it self, as is done by wine, without mingling
of it with that which did run out vnpressed, the pressed being the stronger,
though the vnpressed be the more pleasant and sweet. The dross or gross
substance remaining after the pressing, shall be put again into the fat, and
stamped, and sufficient quantity of water powered in amongst, and it shall be
let so rest, steep, and boil together for the space of four and twenty
hours: after which, there shall be made thereof spending Cider, or small
drink for the household. For the making of this household drink, it shall be
after the rate of gathering of one vessel thereof from so much dross as made
four vessels of the best.

When the Cider is tunned up into caske, you must let it boil within the caske
by the bung-hole of the caske lest open, and thereby to purge it self of all
his froth, scumme, and other impurities, after the manner of wine: and when it
is thus well purged, you must bung it up very close, and so leave it to boil
again within his vessel: but you must see that at this time the vessel be
not top full, least in the boiling it break the vessel. And indeed this kind
of Cider is a great deal more strong than that which boileth all his boiling
with the bung of the vessel open, but somewhat more fuming, and not so
pleasant as the other: and it must lie in some cellar for the Winter time, but
in some cave in the Summer.

Cide^, as concerning the taste, does resemble and become like unto Wine: for at
the first it is sweet; afterward, being fined, it is somewhat sharp; and when
it is altogether fined, it has then a sharper relish, but yet altered from
his former verdure: even after the manner of Wine, as being more pleasant when
it is in fining, than when it is fined.

The Cider is better to keep than Perrie: and there are Ciders found of two or
three years old, as good, in their place, as any Wine that is made. It is true
indeed, that it is subject unto the same accidents that Wine is, and it must be
as heedily regarded in the piercing of it, as if it were Wine, not giving it
any air in the drawing of it, if it be possible, or if you give it any at all,
to give it when the fossest is half out, causing the air to recoyle before
the fountain be stopped up and shut. So soon as the Cider vessel is empty,
you must look that the less be not let stand in it any long time, because that
it would breed an infinite number of worms, which would make it to have an ill
smell and stink, in such sort, as that it would never be good afterward to
keep any Cider. And thus much for the making and keeping of Cider. Now we will
speak of the making of our choice of the Apples.

To have excellent Cider, you must make it of sweet Apples, and that but of one
or two sorts, and both of them in his kind very good, of a pleasant taste, and
sweet smell: and you must break and stamp them every sort by it self, but
put them together under the presser. That which is made of sweet Apples mixed
amongst some sour ones, is not altogether so excellent good, and yet in the
heat of Summer to be preferred before the most excellent Ciders, in that it is
more clear, heateth less, and quenches thirst better. And of a certainetie
experience has taught it, that the Cider made of sweet Apples, having a soft
and tender flesh, is more apt to sour, if that there be not some sour ones
mingled amongst them, because that such sweet Apples have but a weak heat, and
easily overcome and wasted. But such sweet Apples as have a fast flesh and
thick juice, stand not in need of having any sour Apples mixed with them, to
the helping of them to make good Cider. It is true, that sweet Apples yield
less Cider than sour ones: but yet, in as much as the sweet have the less
juice and the thicker, therefore their Cider is the better, lasts longer,
nourishes the body more, and is a longer time in fining: But on the contrary,
those sweet Apples which have much juice, do make much Cider: but this Cider
is not so good, nor making so good nourishment, notwithstanding it be sooner
fined and ready for drinking. Sowrish Apples do yield much juice, that is
waterie, thin, and soon fined, but nourishing very little.

The Cider that is all neat, and of it self, without any mixture of water,
does fine and become clear more slowly than that which is made with water: In
like sort it retains his smell and taste a longer time, and all other the
virtues and qualities of the Apples whereof it was made: for water added but in
small quantity, after six months once past, or if somewhat longer, yet after
one year it causes the Cider to sour, and then so much the sooner, as there
shall be the greater quantity in the mixture, as in the household or ordinary
drink. Wherefore such Ciders as you would have to last long, must be made
without water, and use rather to mix your water with them when they are
drawn out of the vessel to drink, if then you find them too strong for you:
and this also is the same course taken with Wine, especially when such a
sickness has seized upon the party, as craves a thin, weak, and vvaterish
drink.

Ciders differ one from another, especially in color, and ^auour, or relish:
for as for their color, some represent the scarlet as it were like unto
Claret Wine, and such is that which is made of Apples that are red within and
without: such also will last long, and fine, not under the color of high
Clarets, and have a taste resembling the same somewhat a far off, but
afterward coming near to the resembling of Hyppocras. Others are of the
color of Muscadells, and resembling the same also in relish. The greatest part
of the rest draw near to a yellow color, and some of them clear as the rock
water.

As concerning their relish and taste, all Ciders, if they be good, should be
sweet, or a little bitter or sour, whether they be new or old: and it is as
true, that some of them have no more relish than water. Some are of an evil
taste, and that either of themselves, or of the ground, or of the vessel, or
of the straw, or of some other such strange cause. The sweet, as well the new
as the old, and fined, are the best of all, and nourish most. But it is true
withal, that the new do swell up a man, and cause obstructions: The fined
Ciders, are good for such as have weak lungs, or those which are subject to
the stone, or have ulcers in the reins or bladder. Such as are bitter, and
hold out bitter, are naught: But such bitter Cider as after becomes sweet, is
the best of all, and lasts long. Such as are greenish, if they continue the
same color always, are not of any value: but if in time they change this
greenenesse into a manner of sweetness, then they prove good, and last long.

You may also make Cider of vvild Apples, but such Cider although that it last
longer than that which is made of tame and garden apples: yet it is not so
pleasant nor profitable for the stomach.

Good householders do not loose the dross of their pressings, but (as we have
said) cast them into vessels, and with a sufficient quantity of fountain
water, make Cider for the household: many make no account of it, but cast it
out to the dunghill, assuring themselves that it dries and makes barren the
place where it comes. In such places as where they have not the benefit of
millstones, pressers, and other implements for to make Cider, they stamp
apples, but not of all sorts, but only wild ones with a stamper, and afterward
put them thus stamped into vessels with a sufficient quantity of water, and
this is called Cider-pinet. Pinet.


As concerning the faculties and virtues of Cider, The virtues of Cider.
they must be measured and judged according to their taste, age, continuance,
and ability to last, and the manner of making of them. The taste is not to be
tried only by the savor and relish of the apples whereof they were made,
which were either sweet or sour, or harsh, or of more tastes than one, or
without any taste at all: but likewise of the age thereof, in as much as Cider
if it be kept, changes his taste, Sweet Perrie.
together with the time, and gets another relish, after that is fined
diverse from that which it had, vvhiles it was in fining, or that it had when
it began to fine, after the manner of new wine, which when it comes to be
old, purchases and gets diverse qualities together with the time. Such Cider
therefore as is sweet, because of the sweetness which comes of temperate
heat, heateth in a mean and indifferent manner, but cools least of all; and
again, it is the most nourishing of all Ciders, and the most profitable to be
used, especially of such as have cold and dry stomachs, and on the contrary,
but s^^ally, profiting them which have a hot stomach, whether it be more or
less, or stomachs that are full of humiditie, very tender and queasie, and
subject unto choleric vomits: so that in such complexions as are hot and
choleric, it is needful as with Wine, so with Cider to mix water in a
sufficient quantity; with sweet Cider when they take it to drink,
especially when such persons have any ague vvithall, or and if it be the hot
time of Summer: foreseen, that he that shall then drink it thus, be not
subject to the pains of the belly, or collicke; because that sweet Cider,
pressed new from sweet Apples, is windy by nature, as are also the sweet
Apples themselves. This is the cause why Physicians counsel and advise, that
sweet Apples should be roasted in the ashes for them which shall eat them, that
so their great moistness and waterishnesse, which are the original fountain
of their windiness, may be concocted by the means of the heat of the fire.
Upon the same occasion it falls out, that neither sweet Apples nor sweet
Cider can be good for them that are subject to distillations and rhewmes,
because of their windiness, and for that likewise, that as the Arabian
Physicians do judge, they breed great store of windiness in the muscles and
sinews, which cannot be discussed but with great pain and continuance of
time. Amongst the sweet Ciders, the best and most wholesome are those which are
made of these Apples, the Hero^t, sweet Kennet, Curtain, and Rangelet, because
these Appl^s are very sweet, of a golden color, good smell, and long lasting.

Sour Cider, Sour Cider.
whether it were made such by reason of the sowrenesse of the Apples, or become
such by reason of the space of time, in as much as it is very wa^rie, and
somewhat earthie, as also very subtle and piercing, and yet therewithal
somewhat astringent and corroboratiue; becomes singular good to cool a hot
liver and stomach, and to temper the heat of boiling and choleric blood, to
stay choler and adust vomiting, to assuage thirst, to cut and make thin
gross and slimie humors, whether hot or cold, but chiefly the hot. Such
drink falls out to be very good and convenient, and to serve well in place
of wine, for such as have any Ague, for such as are subject to a hot liver and
hot blood, for such as are scabbed, or itchie, for such as are rheumaticke,
upon occasion of hot humors, and it needs not that it should be tempered with
water. Of sour Ciders, those are the most wholesome which are made of sharp
sour Apples, as of Rundockes, Ramburs, and sour Kennets.

The Cider that is harsh and rough, Cider that is harsh and rough.
in as much as it is very cold and dry, is not good, but after a long time,
as namely, not before that it have lost his harshnesse, changing this his great
coldness and dryness into a mean and middle coldness, accompanied with some
moisture, drawing thereby near unto some kind of sweetness or tart and
pleasant sharpness: as we see it come to pass in fruits, which yet, whiles
they are not ripe, have a certain kind of harshnesse in them, but coming to
be ripe, change by little and little their harshnesse into an eager tartness,
and after into a pleasant sweetness. Wherefore such Ciders would not be drunk
till of a long while after they be made: or if that great necessity should
compel, then to allay them with a sufficient quantity of water; for
otherwise, they would but cause costi^enesse, the strangurie, shortness of
breath, and an infinite number of obstructions: yea, they would procure
manifold crudities in the stomach, guts, and principal veins: yea, they
would overthrow a weak stomach, beget a gross, cold, and flegmaticke blood
in the liver, send up many thick vapors unto the brain, which would offend
the head, and hurt the sinews and ioints: but it is as true, that they (...)
this commodity with them, as to comfort the languishing stomach, the qu^asie
stomach, and that which has altogether lost his appetite, such as commonly
be^ideth women having newly conceived, and strange appetites, for which this
Cider is very fit and convenient: as also to stay excessive vomiting, all
sorts of fluxes of the belly, all distillations also, falling down upon the
ioints: it quieteth the beating of the heart, and cutteth off faintings: it
helps digestion, drunk at the end of meat, so that (as we have said) it be
allayed with a little water, to diminish and reform the heaviness and
slownesse to pierce and pass away which is in it; following the counsel of
Galen, who teaches three manner of ways to use sour and binding Apples and
Pears, without ani^ preiudicing of the health: the first way being to boil
them in (...), that so they may get more moistness and softness: the second,
to set them in the breath and vapor of boiling water, to moisten and ripen
them: and the third being to cut them in the midst, and to take away their
core, and in place thereof to put honey or sugar, and then afterward to roast
them amongst the hot ashes. These kinds of Ciders are made principally of the
Apples called small Ruddocke, of wild Apples, not grafted nor husbanded, of
Apple Bequet, Rellet, and such other, having their coats diversely spotted.

Ciders without all taste Ciders without any taste.
become such by reason of their great waterishnesse, and are easily corrupted,
and that not only in their vessels, but also being drunken and used for
drink; and therefore there is no reckoning to be made of such.

As concer^ing Ciders having several tastes, Ciders of mixed taste.
as ^ager and sweet, harsh and sweet, or any such other medley; the eager
sweet are much better and more wholesome than the harsh sweet, because they are
not only more pleasant, but also more speedily passing, piercing, and cutting,
than the other; which by reason of their harshnesse, joined with some
sweetness, and causing a thickness and heaviness in them, abide and stay
long about the principal parts, where they may cause crudities and many
obstructions.

As for the age and lasting of Ciders; such as are new made, and continue as
yet troubled, not being fined, are not wholesome, and cannot be drunk without
(...) unto the stomach, without headache, and an infinite company of
obstructions and other accidents, tedious to the health. For such as are very
sour, and begin apace to turn tart and eager, they are not less hurtful
than the former, and therefore they must not be used but when they are well
fined, and in their middleage, as we see it observed in wine.

As concerning the compounding of them; those are the best, most wholesome, and
easiest to be digested, which are made of very ripe Apples, gathered in due
time, and not ouer-long kept, which are likewise made of one only kind of
Apples, or else of many kinds, but either agreeing in taste; or else being of a
a diverse taste, yet are such as may be tempered together, and make a more
pleasant taste, than if they were alone and several: as for example, if one
should mingle amongst sweet Apples such as were eager and sharp, such a medley
would make a far more pleasant Cider, and more profitable, than if either of
the said sorts were alone. The Cider likewise that is made of Apples only, is
better than that which is made of Apples and Pears stamped and pressed
together: better in like manner, and more wholesome, are those which are made
without water, than that which is made with water, seeing water makes it to
lose his natural taste, makes it sour and corrupt, and that it will not last
or endure long: wherefore it is better not to mix any water at all with it when
you make any, but rather at the time of drinking of it to dilay it, and power
in (...) water, if necessity require it, and according as there shall be any
of the occasions (...) mentioned.

The worst of the Ciders is that which is made of wild Apples, stamped and cast
into a vessel with fountain water in sufficient quantity: and yet worse than
this, is that which is made of the dros^e remaining of the first pressing: as
that also which is only cast into a vessel with sufficient quantity of water:
Wherefore, seeing that Ciders, how pleasant and excellent soever they be,
afford no such nourishment unto the body as is very profitable for them, as
we will handle more at large hereafter; he tha^ will be careful of his
health, shall use none but the best Ciders. We will speake^^ gain of the
faculties of Cider in the sixth Book, in the same place where we (...) speak
of the faculties of Wine.

How Perrie is made.
PErrie is made of diverse sorts of Pears: sometimes of rough, harsh, sour,
and wild ones, never husbanded, planted, grafted, or otherwise having had any
labor or pains taken with them: such Perrie will keep long, even three or
fo^re years, and be better at the end than at the beginning: Sometimes of
Garden, ^ender, and delicate Pears, such as are the Eusebian and the Marie
Pear, the (...), Hasting, Rimolt, Mollart, Greening, butter Pear, the laques
du four Pear, the little the Conie Pear, the perplexed Pear, the Alablaster
Pear, the two-headed Pear, the dew Pear, and the wood of Jerusalem: and
such Perrie is pleasant for a certain time, but after it is once come to be
five months old, it becomes void of all taste, and dead. The best and most
excellent Perrie is made of little yellow wax Pears, and such as have been
thoroughly dres^ed and husbanded, as the little musk Pear, the two-headed
Pear, the Pear, Robart, the fine gold Pear, Bargamo^, Taho^, Sq^^e, and such
other Pears, which have a ^ast and solid ^lesh, and hard coat.

The A^iot Pear is commended above all the rest, whereof likewise is made the
Perrie, called waxen Perrie, because it resembles the color of wax, but
which otherwise is called Car^sie, very pleasant and delightsome, but
notwithstanding indifferent hard, and not so easy to be corrupted as the
later. some do also sometime^ mingle diverse sorts of Pears together to make
Perrie of. But of what sort of Pears soever the Perrie is made, the
Peare-trees must be carefully and diligently husbanded and ordered, according
to our former delivered precepts, in what ground soever that the Peare-trees
grow, as whether it be in Orchard, Garden, arable ground, or other such like,
so that the said ground be such and so well seasoned as is requisite to bring
^orth Pears in abundance: and such as be good Pears, must be gathered to
make Perrie of, some before Apples, and some after, with ^udgels or poles: some
when they are ripe, as the Amiot, the Tahou, and the Squire, and to break and
grind the same with a turning Millstone so ^oone as they be gathered, in such
manner as has been said of Apples. Othersome must be gathered before they be
ripe, as the Pears of Grosmeuill, and others, which have a hard flesh, rough
cote, and are heavy, as those which by reason of their hardness and
heaviness cannot ripen well upon the tree. Such as these are not to be
employed to make Perrie of, till they have layne to ripen and mellow, that so
they may become the tendrer and softer, to get the greater quantity of juice
out of them.

Whether they be Pears to be gathered early or late, pressed they must be, and
the like implements and means used about them in making the Perrie, that were
used in the making of Cider: for after the same manner must you proceed, in
sometimes mingling water with it, when there is need, as also in the manner of
the using of it in the working, boiling, and purging of it, in the tunning of
it up into vessels, in appointing it a place to be kept in, in the governing of
it, and such other necessary care for the defending of it from all things that
might hurt it, and that it is subject unto, even in as great measure, or rather
greater, than you used about Cider, especially in respect of the cold and
frost, which Perrie cannot in any sort endure: insomuch, as that all Winter
long you must keep the windows of the cellar or cave under ground where it
lies, close shut, and well stopped with straw, or some such other thing, to
drive away the cold: besides that, Perrie is not so good for keeping as Cider
is, except it be the Carisie, or that which is made of the Pear Grosmeuill, or
such other Pears as have a hard flesh and skin, the Perrie whereof may be
kept two years vndrawne, and after they be pierced or drawn of, six weeks,
foreseen they be will ordered and governed. Perrie makes as great, yea
greater settling then Cider, whereof you must ^ree the vessel presently after
the Perrie is drawn forth, for otherwise there will breed an infinite number
of worms in the vessel, which will infect it. The good house-holders do make
a sort of Perrie for the household, of the dross of the Pears coming from
pressing, and that by casting of them into some vessel with su^^icient
quantity of fountain water. Some others cast away the said dross, as a thing
altogether unprofitable. In all other things Perrie is to be ordered after the
^anner of Cider.

The faculties and qualities of Perrie The virtues a^ Perrie.
must be considered of and weighed in such manner as we have said of Cider,
that is, by his taste, age, and making. The taste of the Perrie depends for the
most part of the relish of the Pears out of which it is pressed, and those
are either sweet, or sour, or harsh, or of mixed tastes, or else altogether
without taste, according to which rellishes you are to find out the virtues and
qualities of Perrie, following such form and manner as we have largely laid
down in the handling of Cider. It is true, that to speak particularly of the
good qualities of Perries, the most wholesome, profitable, and of best juice,
are those which are made of the Pears called the waxen Pears, the same being
pressed out in the Summer time, and foreseen also that it be drunken so soon
as it is fined, because it is not to be kept, being a very delicate and tender
juice, and therefore apt to corrupt easily and very soon. Next unto this in
goodness is the Perrie made of Pear Robart, and Muscadel Pears, provided
that they be drunken also so soon as they be well fined, and their lees
settled, but then also they must be drunk with water, and but in a reasonable
and mean quantity, for otherwise by the piercing smell and subtilnesse
thereof it causes great pain of the head oftentimes. The Perrie called
Carisie, or made of the Kersey Pear, though it be one of the best and most
excellent, and of those which are last pressed, is yet to be drunk after it is
well fined in a mediocritie, and allayed with water, to repress the fuming
smell of the same, which easily would take hold of the brain. There is no
cause why you should greatly esteem, in respect of your health, of the Perries
which are pressed out of wild Pears, and all such as are unhusbanded, untamed,
of a sharp taste, fat, reddish, or of those which are pressed (...) of diverse
sorts of Pears, not agreeing together either in taste, or otherwise, neither
yet of such as are made of Apples and Pears mingled and pressed together; as
neither of that Perrie which is newly put up into the vessels, and not fined*
or that which had water mixed with it when it was made; or that which is made of
the Pear called the Wood-Peare, being stamped and put into vessels with a
sufficient quantity of water. To be short, whatsoever we have said of Cider,
it may be applied unto Perrie for the most part: and yet notwithstanding all
this, we are not to confess the Perrie to be any whit inferior unto Cider:
for although in some Countries, as in Britain and Normandy, they make
special account of Cider, and do more esteem of it both for the taste,
lasting, abundance, and profit thereof, than they do of Perrie;
notwithstanding, if necessity should drive a man to confer the one juice
with the other, comparing the sweet Ciders with the sweet Perries, the sour
with the sour, the sharp with the sharp, and the mixed tastes with the mixed
tastes, it would be ^asie to judge, that the Perrie is more wholesome and
profitable for the stomach and whole body, than the Cider: for besides the
astringent, binding, strengthening, and corroboratiue virtue that it has to
benefit the stomach withal, and that coming from his terrestrious and
earthie temperature, which all sorts of Pears do most consist of, whether
they be sweet or sour, rough, or otherwise rellished; there is yet further in
the Perrie a certain secret and unspeakable virtue for the ouer-comming of
poison, and principally the venime engendered in the stomach by eating of
Mushrome^, which indeed is the Perries natural quality, as left it of the
Pears from which it is pressed, Again, we see by experience, that the use of
the Pears is every where more commended than the use of the Apples, and that
for this cause there is more careful heed and charge enjoined for the keeping
of the Pears than of the Apples, as those which for that cause are wont to be
preserved in sugar or honey. They are also dried in the Sun, dried in the
Oven, and made up in composition to serve in time and place. It is true that
Cider moisteneth more than Perrie: but in recompense of tha^, the Perrie does
relieve and refresh a man more, and in cooling of him, (...) withal, save that
it stirs up more o^t the pain of the belly and the collicke (...) Cider
does, especially the sour or harsh Perrie, in such as are subject unto the
collicke; and the cause is, for that it passes not away so speedily by urine
through the belly, but stays longer time in the stomach, and about the
principal parts, than Cider does, as we have declared in the Treatise of the
Pear: For which cause, it is better to drink of it at the end of meat, than
at the beginning, so that the party have not any vomiting, or flux of the
belly; following the coussaile of Dioscorides, who says, That Pears eaten
fasting bring harm and iconuenience.

Lo here, in my opinion, what we are to judge of the qualities of Cider and
Perrie, as well in particular, as in comparing of the one with the other.

It remains, that we examine what kind of drink the Perrie and Cider are,
and whether there be any such excellent quality in them as may match them and
make them equal with Wine, that so famous and highly esteemed drink^, seeing
that a Physician of our time could not content himself with matching of them
together, but went further, and preferred them before Wine in every thing: but
this might happen (possibly) by his being more affected toward his Country, or
by being carried away with a paradoxicall judgment, than upon any sinc^re mind
to find out the truth of things. But for the deciding of this controversy, we
have thought good to set down our judgment thereof in our Book, written in
Latin, and entitled De Salubri Di^^a, that so we may not in this place pass
the limits of our Far^^ and Country house.

The making of Ceruise drink.
CEruises must be gathered when they are half ripe, even so soon as you espi^
any of them to fall from the tree: Suffer them not to mellow and ripen, except
it be a very little, for when they be thoroughly ripe, they are not worth a
farthing to press out to make drink of. You must break them lightly in the
trough of the Presser, let the juice work together in the fat, after it is
pressed, and when it has wrought, tun it up, and lay it in some cellar, or
cave, and keep it long; for the Ceruise drink the longer it is kept, the
better it is. You shall know his goodness, by his having lost his sharpness
and unpleasantness, and turned the same into the taste of Wine which is of a
white color: Or if you will not stay the full ripeness thereof, then dilay it
with sufficient quantity of Fountain water, when you will drink it.

This drink, though it be the first of that kind that was put in practice, as
the pattern after which all other sorts of Fruit-drinkes have been made, and
of which, and not of any more, Virgil makes mention in his Georgickes*
notwithstanding, (...) is so cold a friend unto the health, as that it is not
to be much set by. It is veri^ ^rue that for want of other remedies, in case of
necessity, the Countryman may ^erue himself with this Wine, when he
finds himself heavily oppressed with ^he flux of the belly, whether it be
that which is called the bloody flux, or ani^ other kind thereof.

Drink made of Sloes.
THe good Householders of the low Countries of Normandy, being such a^ will
not loose any thing, and thereupon being more careful to g^t goods, ^han to
keep their health* so soon as Autumn is come, cause to be gathered by their
people great quantity of Sloes, whether they be ripe, or not: which done, ^hey
power them into certain Vessels with sufficient quantity of water, and stop
^p the Vessels, without touching of them. Before a month be at an end, this
wa^er thus infused does represent the color and taste of a sharp, unpleasant,
and ^ild Wine, which notwithstanding serves the thirsty Laborers and Hindes
of that Country to quench their thirst withal in the great heat of burning
Agues. This drink is called Piquette.

CHAP. L.
Of pr^seruing of Fruits.
FOr to make Marmalade, Marmalade.
provide your Quinces very ripe and yellow, make them clean, and the seeds
taken out, boil them in fresh water in some Skillet, so long, as till they
begin to open and burst (if you think it not better to cut them in quarters:)
afterward force them through some S^arce or Strainer that is very close and
clean, and so long, as till nothing remain but the gross parts: to eight
pound of pulpe thus passed and forced through, put three pound of fine powdered
Sugar, boiling them together at a little coal fire, mix them well by stirring
them diligently with a broad spatule of wood, and let that your boiling
continue till they be sufficiently boiled; which is, when you see that it
leaves altogether to cleave unto or hang upon the sides of the vessel, as
being the very mark of the perfect and sufficient boiling. If you be disposed
to put any spice into it, as Cinnamon, Cloves, Nutmegs, and Ginger, you must
do it in the end of the boiling of them, and then also stir it well about
with the spatule. After the same manner you may preserve or make Marmalade of
Peaches, Pears, and other fruits.

Yet there is another Marmalade which is made of Oranges, Marmalede of Oranges,
Lim^^^s, or Citrons.
which desires a great deal of more curiosity in the working, and is
exceeding pleasant to taste, and indeed more wholesome than any other Marmalade
whatsoever, especially for those which are sick and weak: for it fortifieth
the stomach, and increases appetite, it expels wind, and comfort the
vital spirits. This Marmalade of Oranges is made in this manner: Take of the
fairest and best Oranges you can get, not those which are called Civil, and
have a sweet taste, but those which are of a clear, high, and bright color,
and are sour in taste: then with a very sharp knife pare away the upper yellow
rind, I do not mean to the white, but so exceeding thin as is possible,
taking away (as it were) but only the smooth thin skin, and leaving the
Orange as yellow as before, only looking a little more blanke and rough: this
done, you shall by them in fair running water, pressing them so down, that
they may be all couerted over with the water: then at the end of every five
hours shift them into fresh water, till (having layne full five or six hours
in each of them) you cannot taste any bi^^ernesse in the water, but that it is
sweet and pleasant as when it came out of the Fo^^taine, then you may be
assured that they are steept enough; so that then you shall take them forth of
the water, and dry them with a fine clean cloth: then to every pound of
Oranges you shall take a pound of refined Sugar well beaten and ^earced, and
six or eight spoonefuls of Damaske-Rose-water, and in the same you shall boil^
the Oranges till they burst, and become like unto pappe, or pulpe, which you
shall the more occasion, by continually stirring them with a spoone or spatule:
then when they are fully broken enough, you shall take them from the fire, and
presently strain^ them through a clean Strainer into your boxes, and so let
them cool and stiffen. I^ this sort you may make Marmalade of Limons, Citrons,
or any other whole (...), whose rind is bitter, or unpleasant. You may also,
after this manner, preserve other Oranges, Limons, Citrons, or any other such
like fruit, observing not to let them boil until they break, but keeping
them in a very moderate and gentle temper.

If you would make a laxatiue Marmalade, such as they use at Lions, look into
the 26. Chapter of this Book.

To make good and excellent Gellie of Quinces, To make gellie of Quinces.
cleanse your Quinces that (...) very ripe and yellow, taking out of them
their kernels, them cut them in small quarters, without paring of them, for the
skin does increase the smell: whiles you are thus making of them clean, and
cutting them in quarters, cast them presently into a basin full of water: for
if they be not cast into water so soon as they be thus chopped in pieces, they
will become black: boil them in a great quantity of water, until such time
as they be almost become like pap meat: when they are sufficiently boiled
strain this water through a new linen cloth that is good and thick, and that
even all the decoction, and so strongly as possibly you can. To this decoction
thus strained, add the fourth part of fine sugar: cause all to boil upon a
reasonable coal fire, so long as till in the end you perceive it very near
perfectly boiled, then make a small fire, that so it may not burn to the
sides, for that would make the gelly to be of an evil color: and you shall
know when it is perfectly boiled, if you find it cleaving like glue unto the
oil, and therefore you must then put it in boxes.

To preserve Walnuts: To preserve Wa^nuts.
Gather vvalnuts whiles they are small, tender and green with their rind and
all, and make many small holes therein, and after lay them to sleep in water
eleven or twelve days, more or less, cleanse then from the skin that lies
upon the shell, without shaling of them, and boil them in clarified Sugar a
long time, still putting unto them more and more clarified Sugar, because the
long boiling will make great waste: in the end put them into vessels with
cloves, ginger, and cinnamome, but less of cloves than of any of the rest,
because they would make them over bitter. Another way to preserve them, is to
take green Walnuts about the month of May, or of June, before that their
pilling become hard, pill them, and let them steep nine days (more or less
according as you shall perceive them to become tender) in pure water, which
must be changed every day three or four times: boil them yet afterward to
make them more tender: being boiled, dry them in the shadow of the Sun, or
wipe them dry with a linen cloth, afterward prick them with cinnamome and
cloves: In the end, set them a boiling in clarified sugar, so long till the
sugar be boiled up to the consistence of a sirope, afterward put them in tin
or earthen vessels made for the purpose, together with the sirope wherein
they were boiled. Others do them otherwise: They gather the Walnut whiles it
is green, they prick it upon a spindle or some such like instrument of wood,
not of iron (for iron would make it more black) and let it steep in water
often changed, and then boil it till it be tender: being tender, they cast it
by and by into very clean cold water: being cooled, they cleanse it from a
little skin which shows it self above the shell, and dry it with a linen
cloth, and finally, prick it about with cloves and cinnamome: they put it thus
in vessels, and cover it with sirope to keep it in: if it happen that after
some small time the sirope become too thin, then they boil it again, and put
it again into the vessel: this is the way to keep walnuts always green,
according to their natural color. Cute wine to b^ used in steed of honey or
sugar.
In steed of sugar or honey to make liquid preserues, you may for need use
cute, such as we will entreat of in the fi^t Book: which cute or boiled wine
is of no less sweetness and goodness than honey or sugar.

To preserve pills of Cytrons or Oranges: Preserues of Orange pills.
choose great pills of Cytrons or of Oranges, or of Assyrian Cytrons cut in
four or six pieces, cleanse them from their inward skin and pippins, steep
them in clear water for the space of nine days, changing the water the fifth
day: when the nine days are past, put them again in clear water to steep
until they become sweet, and have lost their bitterness, and withal appear
clear and transparent, which is a sign of their sufficient watering:
afterward, boil them in a vessel of brass that is clean, or in a leaden
ves^el so long as til they be tender; when they have cast out all their
waterishnesse, put them to steep in a Iu^lep made of one part of sugar, and
three of water, for the space of four and twenty hours, afterward make them
to boil at a little fire so much as is sufficient: take them out of the Iulep,
and put them in a glass vessel, and putting upon them the Iulep of
Rose-vvater thick enough of consistence, that so it may afford them as it
were a crust, you may if you will aromatize them with a little Amber and
Musk.

To preserve whole Peaches, The preseru^ o^ Peaches.
you must pill them and cleanse them as carefully as may be, and after boil
them whole or cut in quarters, in a sufficient thin Iulep, not to boil them to
the full, but only to boil out their waterishnesse, wherewith they abound:
and then after this, in a better boiled Iulep to boil them up to the full,
till they be become through tender and soft: and finally, to put them up into
some ea^then vessel, and to cover them with the sirrup wherein they have
boiled. For their longer keeping, Preserved Abricots.
you may aromatize them with Cinnamon or Musk. This manner of preserving of
whole Peaches, is general for the preserving of all other gross fruits, Small
Peaches.
as Pears, Pears.
Quinces, Apples, Apples.
Abricots, small Peaches, and timely Peaches. Timely Peaches.


To preserve Cherries, To preserve Cherries, Ceruiser, Gooseberries, etc.
you must choose the fairest sour Cherries that you can, full ripe (for if they
be not full ripe, in boiling them toward the end, you shall find nothing but
skin and bone) cutting off their starts at the half, and afterward boil
them in their own juice with sugar, in such proportion, as that for every
pound of Cherries you have half a pound of sugar, taking away the s^umme still
as it shall rise in boiling of them: when they shall be sufficiently boiled,
you must put them in glass vessels, and power upon them the sirrup wherein
they have boiled: notwithstanding, if the sirrup should still seem waterish,
boil it more perfectly. Otherwise, and better: put apart some quantity of
your said sour Cherries which you shall press to have a sufficient quantity
of juice: in this juice so soon as you have pressed it out, melt your sugar,
and (not in any other liquor) boil them together presently, and in boiling,
scumme them: when the juice is well scummed, clarified, and become red, without
taking it from the fire, or making it loose his boiling, put the Cherries
thereinto to boil, as long as needs, without any stirring of them, but
looking well to the scumming of them with a spatule: stir them not from off
the fire until they be perfectly boiled, and that you shall discern, if you
see the sirrup dropped upon a trencher to fall into drops that do not spread
abroad, for then it is exactly boiled: and you must put up your Cherries into
their glass vessels good and hot for to be kept. In this manner you shall
preserve Plums, Ceruises, Gooseberries, and such other small fruits.

For the preserving of Barberries, To preserve Barberries.
you shall take the fairest and goodliest bunches of Barberries that you can
find, being gotten very dry from the tops of the trees, and as near as you
can from the Sun side thereof, being fully ripe, and of one entire color:
then with a pin or needle you shall open the side, and pick out all the
stones or kernels from the same: then to every bare pound of these Barberries
thus stoned, you shall take a pound down weight of fine sugar well beaten and
searced, and so boil them on a gentle charcoale fire, till the sirrup be
thick: then let them cool, and afterward pot them up, being sure to cover
them all over with the sirrup. But if you intend to make Conserve of them, Of
Conserve.
then you shall not need to stone them, but only pick them clean from their
branches, taking all the sound berries, and casting away all that are unsound
or spotted, and so boil them in their sugar over a hot fire until they burst,
stirring them continually with a spatule of wood or steel made for the
purpose: and then strain them through a strainer, not exceeding fine, and
squeese them so soon as is possible: then being cooled, pot it up, and use it
as you shall have necessary occasion. This Conserve is most excellent against
burning feauers, or other pestilent diseases, growing from inflammation or
corruption of the blood: it comfort the stomach, and begets an appetite: it
cheareth all the spirits: and being drunk in Iuleps, brings the blood to his
true quality, and takes away all thirst, inflammation, or roughness in the
throat or mouth: it is also good for any heat in the liver.

For to have paste of Plums: first boil the Plums with a little water, Past of
Plums and other fruits
stirring them oftentimes, that they may not burn too: afterward strain and
force them through a s^arce, and weigh them, that so you may put thereto for
every pound four ounces of sugar: set all upon the fire to boil again, and
stir them well, not giving over until all the scumme be consumed and spent:
which done, make them ready as they are where you will: afterward lay them in
the Sun to dry three days, and then shut them up: and in case that they
grow moist, or that there spring forth any water out of them, you must lay
them in the Sun again. This pattern of making this paste, may serve
generally for the making of paste of any other fruits, as Pears, Apples,
Cherries, and Peaches, save that you must have respect unto the quantity of
Sugar, which shall be more or less, according to the more or less moistness
of the fruits which you are determined to make up in paste.

To keep Peaches, or other fruits: take Peaches, To keep Peaches and other
fruits.
or other fruits which you would keep, when it is fair weather and dry, and
opening them in the midst, take out the stone: then lay them all one day to
dry in the Sun, or in an Oven after that the bread is drawn out: afterward
take sugar well boiled and purified, and anoint them over, and lay them again
the day following in the Sun, and so anoint them over again, and so often as
they shall dry, and until they have gotten a sufficient crust, and after
keep them at your pleasure.

To make Olives ready against a day: Take green Olives, To keep Olives.
and cut off a little from the one side, after lay them in water with lime and
good sifted ashes (but take withal, that you must have twice so many ashes as
lime, and let them steep in that sort the space of 24. hours:) after you
shall take them out, and wash them four or five times in warm water:
afterward you shall put them in a stone or glass vessel with salt water, and
this you shall change every three months, and mingle amongst them common
Thyme, wild Thyme, Anniseed, or the ribs and boughs of Fennel: and thus you
may keep them a long time.

To preserve Olives: lay white Olives to steep six days in a vessel of
Seawater, The preserve of Olive.
and upon them power the juice of Grapes as it comes from the press, but
fill not the vessel too full, to the end that the sweet wine, when it shall
boil, do not shed over, and when it has boiled, you must stop the vessel:
Some do put a handful of salt in first, and after it the Must of new wine,
and last the Olives, and when the new ^ine has boiled, they stop up the
vessel: Otherwise, dry them in the shadow, in a place that is open for the
wind to enter, then put them up in an earthen vessel filled with honey, mixing
therewithal some Spices.

Filberds or small Hasel-Nuts may be preserved two several ways, To preseru^
Fi^berds, or small Nuts.
that is to say, either in the shell, or without, by the kernel only. To
preserve them in the shell, and to have them very full, large, and pleasant in
taste, you shall take a large earthen pot, as wide in the bottom as at the
mouth, and then first lay therein a pretty thick layre of Nuts, and then strew
upon them a handful of Bay salt, then lay another layre of Nuts and an
handful of Bay salt, and thus do layre upon layre, till you have filled the
pot up to the top: then cover it with leather and parchment exceeding close:
which done, lay a smooth stone on the top of it, and then dig a hole in the
earth in some dry vault or cellar, and set the pot therein, and cover it all
over with the earth, and this will keep them all the year, or diverse years,
in as good strength, fullness, and sweetness, as if they were but newly gotten
from the trees. Some use only to bury these pots thus filled in red or yellow
sand: and some use not to bury them at all, but to keep them in a low, cool,
and moist vault: and surely any will do will, but the first is the best, and
makes them most full, and to have the pleasantest relish. But if you would
preserve them without the shells in the kernels only, then you shall open them,
and pick off the upper red hull or skin, and in all points do to them as was
taught you before for the Walnut.

To make Quince-cakes thin, and as it were almost transparent, Quince-cakes*
you shall take your Quinces and pare them, and cut them in slices from the
chore, then take weight for weight of refined sugar beaten and well searced,
and only moistened with Damask Rosewater, and in it boil your Quinces till
it be thick, and then take it forth, and dry it upon a flat place-dish
ouerasoft fire, not leaving to stir it with a spoone or slice till it be
hard: then put it into a stone-mortar, and beat it very well, and if you find
that it wants sugar, then as you beat it, strew in more sugar, till it have
the taste you desire: then being come to a paste, take it out of the mortar, and
roll it forth into very thin ^akes, and so print it: and in this manner you
may make thin cakes of any manner of fruit you please whatsoever.

If you will make your Pastes, Cakes, Marmalades, Preserues, or Conserues of
diverse colors, Diversity of colors.
as red, white, or between both; you shall do as follows a first, if you
will have your paste or marmalade red, you shall take your Quinces, Apples,
Pears, Oranges, or what other fruit you please, and after you have pa^ed or
ri^ed them, you shall cut them in halfes, and chore such as are to be chored,
then take weight for weight of refined sugar, and to every pound of sugar a
quart of fair running water, and boil them in the same over a very soft
fire, and turn them over many times, and cover them very close with a
pewter-dish observing ever, that the longer they are in boiling, the better and
more ruddie will the color be* then when they be soft, take your knife and cut
them cross over the tops, that the sirrop may pas^e through them, and make the
color entire, then take up some of the sirrop and cool it upon a sawcer, and
when you see it begin to be thick, then break your Quinces with a slice, or a
spoone, as small as is possible, then strain it, and box it after you have
strewed sugar in the boxes: or if you will have it in paste or cakes, then use
it as is before said of the Quince cakes, and so mould it, and roll it forth:
Now if you will have it of a pure white color, you must in all points use your
Quinces, Apples, Pears, Oranges, or other fruit, as is beforesaid, only you
must take but to every pound of Sugar a pint of water, and you must boil them
as fast as is possible, and not cover them at all, but suffer the air to pass
away as freely as may be. Now if you will have it of a carnation, or more pale
color, then you shall take a pint and a half of water to a pound of Sugar,
and a pound of Fruit, and you shall so cover it with a Pewter dish, that at one
corner of the same a little of the air or smoke may pas^e away, and no more:
and thus observe, that the more air you suffer to go away, the paler the
color will be: and in this case you shall neither suffer it to boil exceeding
fast, nor very slow, but of a temperate and indifferent manner.

If you will make artificial Cinnamon sticks. Cinnamon sticks.
so like unto the true Cinnamon it self, that the one can hardly be judged
from the other, and yet the counterfeit to be a most delicate and pleasant
sweet meat, and wholesome and sovereign to be eaten: you shall take an ounce
of the best Cinnamon, from which no water has by any means been extracted,
and beat it into very fine powder, well fearced: then take half a pound of
refined Sugar also well beaten and searced, and mix them very well together:
then take gum Dragon the quantity of a Hasel Nut, and s^eepe it in
Rose Water, so as it may be thick and very glewie: then with it temper the
Cinnamon and Rose Water, till you bring it to a fine paste: then work it out
with your hand, after that roll it forth with your Rowling-Pinne, then print
it, and lastly, fold it up in the same manner that you see a Cinnamon stick is
folded up. Now, if where you dissolve your gum Dragon, you also dissolve with
the same a grain or two of fat Musk, and also twice as much Ambergreece, it
will be a great deal the better, and add more pleasantness and delicacie of
smell unto the sticks.

To make Conserve generally of any fruit whatsoever you please, Conserve of
fruits.
either sweet or sour, you shall take the fruit you intend to make Conserve
of, and if it be stone fruit, you shall take out the stones; if other fruit,
take away the chore, parings* and seeds, and then boil them in fair running
water, to an indifferent good height: which done, you shall draine them away
from the same, and put them into another clean Vessel, either with white
Wine, or claret Wine, according unto the color of the fruit which you
conserve: and then boil them to a thick pappe, breaking them with a Slice, or
Spatule, as they boil, until all be brought into one substance: then unto
every bare pound of pulpe, if the fruit thereof be sweet, you shall take a
bare pound of refined Sugar, beaten to fine powder: but if it be sowr^ fruit,
as Cherries, Gooseberries, Barberries, Bulleys, Sloes, and such like, then unto
every bare pound of pulpe, you shall take a pound down weight of refined
Sugar in powder, and so stir the Sugar and the pulpe very well together upon
the fire: then taking it from the same, you must immediately, hot as it is,
strain it through a middle strainer clean washed, and so letting it cool,
then you may pot it up.

But if you will make Conserve of Flowers, Conserve of flowers.
Herbs, Leaves, or such like; as are Roset, Violets, Gilloflowers, Mints,
Basil, and such like: then you shall take the flowers or leaves from their
stalks, and with a pair of sheeres cut away the tippes of the upper ends of
them, and the white ends at the roots thereof, leaving nothing but the heart
and middle part thereof: which done, you shall put them into a stone Mortar, or
into a rolling Mill, or wooden Brake, and there crush, grind, or bruise them,
till they come to a ^oft substance, and be so like unto a soft pulpe, that no
part of the leaves or flowers may be discerned: then to every pound of that
pulpe, as was before said, take a pound of refined sugar, beaten and searced
into fine powder, giving the sweeter the less, and the sour the more, and so
beat them exceedingly well together, till the sugar be generally dispersed, and
then pot it up, and keep it for your occasions.

If you will make an excellent Leach of Dates, Leath of Date^.
you shall take your Dates, and opening of them, take forth their stone, and
the innermost white rind, and beat them in a stone Mortar with Sugar, Cinnamon,
and Ginger, till they be well incorporated together: then take it forth of the
Mortar, and work it like a piece of paste, and then roll them forth, and
print them: and either serve them moist, or dry them in a stoou^, for either
kind is excellent.

CHAP. LI.
The manner of making of Oils: that there are three sorts of preparing of
Oils, and how you must make Oil Olive.
Entreating in the second Book of the Oliue-tree, we promised a brief
discourse of the making of Oils, a thing certainly very profitable for our
Country House, in as much as Oil is no less profitable for man's life, nor of
less fruit and increase unto a good husband, than Wine: then it shall not be
from the matter, if (after we have spoken largely of Gardens and Orchards, and
especially of the ordering of Oliue-trees, and other herbs and trees whereof
Oils are prepared) we briefly do specify the ways of making of Oils.

And to say something of Oil in general, Oil may be made three ways: The
first, by expression, which is most common, and the chiefest amongst the rest:
The second, by impression: and the third, by distillation or resolution, after
the manner of distilled waters: We will only speak of the two first in this
place, reserving the third for the Discourse which we intend to make
concerning Distillations in this Book; although, in very deed, we have not
purposely resolved to speak exactly of the making of Oils, because it is a
thing that properly belongs not to the Husbandman, or his Hind, but only
unto a good Apothecarie.

To speak then first of Oil which is most useful and serviceable for the
Husbandman, because it not only benefiteth himself and his family, Oil of
Oats.
but also cures his cattle of all manner of dangerous and corrupt diseases:
you shall understand, that it is the Oil of Oats, which may be made either by
expression, impression, or distillation: yet for your greater ease and
readiness, to have it upon any sudden occasion, you shall make it in this
manner: First, you shall take half a pecke, or a quarter of a pecke, of the
goodliest, best, and fullest Oats you can procure, of which, the whitest are
the best, and these you shall hull and break from their husks as clean as is
possible: then take a pottle or three quarts of new milk, and setting it upon
the fire, as soon as it is ready to sees, you shall put into it half a
pound of Allome beaten to powder, and stir it about, and so let it stand an
hour or two, in which time it will gather unto a curd: then with your hands
you shall press down the curd into the bottom of the Vessel, and then
strain the Whay from it into another clean Vessel, and press the curd very
much, not leaving any Whay in it that you can wring forth: then take that
Whay, and put your Oats therein, and set it over a very quick fire, and
boil it until you see the Oats break, or be as soft as pappe: then take it
from the fire, and power it gently into a small Cullender, so as the Whay may
softly draine from the same, without any force or pressing at all: then when
it has almost left dropping, take a clean Frying-panne, and put the Oats
therein, and hold it over a gentle fire so long, as you shall see the smoke of
the Oats ascend upward: but so soon as you perceive the smoke to stymmer or
run about the edges of the pan, you shall forthwith put the Oats into a
fine clean bag of soft old Linen, or Boulter, and so lay it into the
Oyle-presse, and press it with all the strength you can, and that which
runs from the same, is the Oil thereof, which you shall receive into a
Glasse-vessell, and keep it close and well stopped up. In this manner, and
with this Whay, you may also extract Oil from any hard substance either of
Trees, Seeds, Leaves, Flowers, Grains, or what else soever, which has any
concealed moisture remaining within it.

This Oil of Oats is most excellent for the smoothing of the skin, and
taking away of itch, scabbe, or little pustules about the bodies of men or
children: It also purges most gently and sweetly, and expels out of the
body all manner of venomous and infectiue humors: it is also very sovereign
against the stone or difficulty of urine, being drunk with white Wine and a
corroded Nu^meg: Also it feeds much, and makes a man strong and Iustie. It
is most sovereign for any inward disease in Cattle, or any surfeit taken by
too violent labor: but especially it cures all inward diseases in Horses,
being given either with Beer, Ale, or Wine: but above the rest, it cures the
Glaunders, mourning of the Chyne, consumption of the Liver, or rottenness in
the Lungs: and as it cures these inward diseases, so also being inwardly taken
(as aforesaid) it cures all outward grieuances which come of inward
corruption, as the Farcie, Maungie, Scabbe, Leprosy, Hidebound, the evil
habit of the body, and such like. And as for this manner of ^aking of Oils,
although it be precisely none of the three ways before rehearsed, but somewhat
more gross, yet seeing at ^auoureth of the two first, which is expression and
impression, and being so ready, perfect, and easy a thing for any man
practice, it is no less to be embraced than any of the other: for there is no
place nor no necessity void of those helps and furtherances which are
needful in this Work.

The manner of making of Oils by expression, Oy^e by expression
belongs not only to Olives, but also to many other fruits and seeds, as
common Nuts, Almonds, Nutmegs, Line-seed Hempe-seed, and such other, whereof we
will speak hereafter. Notwithstanding, in as much as the Olive does yield more
Oil than any other fruit or seed, it has deserved the name of excellency
above all the rest* for the fat and unctuous liquors of other fruits and seeds
are not like to have any other name bestowed upon them, Oil the proper name
of the liquor of Ol^^es.
than that which of right appertains unto the liquor which is pressed out of
the Olive: for which reason, when we speak of the Oil of the Olive, we only
say, Oil* but when we make mention of other Oils, we add the name of the
fruit or seed whereout it was pressed* as Oil of Nutmegs, Oil of sweet
Almonds, and so of the rest: Wherefore we will begin to describe the manner and
fashion of making the Oil of Olives.

When therefore you have first gathered your Olives, What is necessary before
the making of the Oil.
and disposed of them in such manner as we have spoken of in our second Book,
entreating of the Oliue-tree, consider diligently, if the place where the Oil
is to be pressed and made, be furnished of all necessary things, that is to
say, of fats or vessels to put your diverse sorts of oils in: of scoopes of
iron, to draw and empty out the oils: couers to cover the vessels; great and
small spunges: pots to carry out the oil in bands and cords of hemp and
broom barks, and of many other things which must be prepared and made ready
before you come to the making of the oil, in like manner as is used before the
gathering of grapes. The milstones, Milstones. Oil mills. Pressers.
oil mills, and pressers must be clean, as all the rest of the instruments
serving to make oil: you must likewise have made sufficient provision of vvood
to make good fires, thereby to cha^e and heat the room a good while before
hand, where the oil shall be pressed, if so be it be not warmes enough by his
natural situation: for all oily liquors do dissolve and run the more freely
by the help of heat, as they do keep in and cease to depart through cold. And
for this cause it were requisite that your presser stood upon the light and
clearenesse of the South Sun, The South Sun necessary for the oil presser.
that so you may stand the less in need of fire and candle, when you go about
the pressing out of your oil.

All these things thus prepared, cause your servants and workmen to cull out
and cleanse your olives: when they are clean, let them be carried forthwith to
the pres^e, under which they shall put them whole in new Willow basket (for
the Willow gives great beauty unto the oil) to the end they may be pressed
with as much leisure, The Willon graceth the co^our of the oil.
and as softly as may be. It is true that it would be good before they were put
under the press to have them trodden with feet* in as much as the oil t^oden
with the feet is always better, sweeter, clearer, and more delightsome to eat
in salades, than that which is pressed out: but seeing the treading of them is
harder to do than to press them, the common making of oil is in the press:
wherefore before you put your olives under the press, it will not be amiss
to break their skin and flesh with turning milstones, and that but gently,
to the end that the kernel which spoyleth and corrupts the taste of the oil
be not stirred: and afterward to soften and grind them most strongly in the
press, putting in thereto of salt four pound to every bushel of olives, and
after to press the bones or stones of the olives by themselves. He that shall
empty the oil out of the vessel whereinto it runs from the press, shall
make three sorts of oil, Three forts of oils of ol^e.
seperating so many one from another: for it would be great loss to mingle the
first pressing with the second, but yet more to mingle it with the third,
because that that which runs from the press being yet scarce strayned or
moved, is of a far better taste than the second, and is called Virgins oil,
Virgins oil.
being very beautiful and goodly, and sit for to use with meat: the second
being fitter for ointments, and such other like uses: and the third for to
burn in lamps. And yet further it will be very good when the oil shall be a
little settled in his tups, to power it out of them into others: for the more
that oil is ayred and stirred, so much the more clear it is, and without lees.

The tons and vess^lls wherein the oil is to be put, must be well dressed
with pitch and gum, Vessels for oyl^
made very clean (if they be old) with warm lee, and dried with a sponge,
receiving the oil not till thirty days after that it is made, that is to
say, (...) the time when the lees are fallen to the bottom: in like manner the
vessels and sackes of Goats hair must be well mended for the receiving of the
oil into them, according to the manner which we have set down in the first
Book, in the Chapter of the Goat-keeper.

The cellar where the vessels for oil are to be set, Oyle-cellars.
shall be in some cold place; for as all liquors do dissolve and become more
fluent by heat; so they keep fast and close in, and s^ay their courses by the
working of cold: and so oil of it self is kept very well in a cold and dry
place, because heat and moisture are his utter enemies. This is the cause why
the oyle-makers give in charge above all things that there be ^o fire nor
smo^ke made near unto the presses and cellars of oil; because the taste of
the oil is spoiled by smoke and soote: The North is fittest for oil cellars
to stand upon.
so then it is meet if possibly it may be that the oil cellars be situate
toward the North, quite on the other side from the hot winds, as also that the
oil be put into glass vessels or earthen pots, such as are the pots of
Beauu^is, especially the oil that is made of green olives that are not ripe,
Oil Omphacine Frosen oil.
and is called oil Omphacine.

If in the time of Winter oil does freeze together with his lees, and clears
it from all manner of mischief that can happen unto it: neither need you fear
that it should be salt: for though you should put much salt into it, yet the
oil would take no taste of it.

To keep oil from becoming rank, To keep oil from becoming rank.
melt wax with oil in equal quantity, and therein mingle fried salt, then
put it all in a vessel of oil; and this same composition serves also to mend
it if it be already rank. Anise cast into the vessel performs the same.

If the oil be troubled, Troubled oil.
purify it at the Sun or fire, or else cast into the vessel boiling water;
provided the vessel be not weak and in hazard of bursting.

If the oil be full of filthiness, Filthy oil.
fry salt and cast it hot into the vessel* the pine not burned, or the lees
of oil dried and parched and cast into the vessel of oil does the like.

If oil have got any stench or other evil smell: Stinking oil.
poune green olives, and cast them into the oil without their stones: or else
cast in the crumbs of barley bread mingled with grained salt: or else in^use in
the oil the flowers of melilot.

If the oil be corrupt and putrified, Putrified oil.
hang in the vessel a handful of the herb coriander, and cast in besides of
the same diverse times, if you perceive that the putrefaction is not taken away:
or which is better, change the oil his vessel: you shall likewise amend this
fault, if you take grapes, and after you have taken out the kernels, stamp
them, and make them into lumpes to put into the vessel, and ten days after
change the oil his vessel.

Oil will be very clear, Clear oil.
if you stamp the bark and leaves of an oliue-tree with salt, put in all in a
little knot or nodule, and hang the same in the vessel.

To make sweet smelling oil: take Virgins oil, Sweet smelling oil.
which is that which first runs down from the press without the weight of
the press forcing it: into it cast of the fine powder of bay-tree-leaues, the
roots of aller and cypres, the roots of co^n^lag, or some other sweet smelling
things, such as you are disposed, all being dried and made into fine powder,
stirring the vessel well: afterward, put in salt finely powdered, and set out
the vessel in the Sun for the space of fifteen days: or else set a vessel
well covered (for fear that the oil should spend it self) in a caldro^ of
boiling water, let it stay therein the space of three hours to boil at a
little sire: after take it out, and let it rest some time, until you perceive
all to be incorporated together, then strain the oil, and reserve it in some
vessel well stopped for your use.

Furthermore, Good oil in the upper part of the vessel.
you must know that as the bottom in honey, and the midst of Wine, so the
uppermost part of the oil is always the best: the reason shall be delivered
in the treatise of Wine in the sixth Book.

As concerning the properties of oil, The virtues of oil.
it has a singular virtue applied outwardly as is to be known by the answer
of Democritus, who being asked of the means to live long, and to preserve
ones body in good estate and plight, said, If you arm your self without your
body with oil, and within with home. And this is the cause why Hanniball
gave in charge unto his soldiers passing the mountains, that they should arm
their bodies with oil, to keep them from the injuries of the cold: in like
manner the men of ancient time to make their bodies the more nimble and ready
to all actions and motions, caused all their body over to be anointed with
oil before they were to go into the bathe: in like sort also, their
vvrastlers and champions, before they entered the combat, did anoint all their
body over with oil, not only that they might not be so easily taken hold of
in wrestling: but also to have their whole body the more nimble and obedient,
and their members the more lusti^ and strong.

As concerning within the body, To loosen the belly.
oil has no less virtue than without; for that if it be taken inwardly, it
softeneth the belly, subdueth the malignitie of venimes, and causes vomiting
speedily: furthermore, if any venime or burning have pitched and settled it self
upon the skin, and begin there to exulcerate or work his further mischief;
for the staying of the fierceness and malignitie thereof, there is nothing
better than to lay a little liniment of new oil thereupon.

Oil powered upon wine or any other liquor, Aspent Wine.
keeps it from spending it self: In like manner the Vinteners, wise enough
to keep white Wine from waxing red, are wont to cast upon it a pint of
Oyle-oliue.

Oil is altogether enemy to plants, Oil an enemy to plants.
especially gourds and cucumbers, which dye presently if a man place near unto
them any vessel of oil; or if that he which dresseth them be oily, as we
have said in the second Book.

The lees or grounds of oil are good to make a mortar with to lay the floores
of corn garners, The virtues of the lees of oil.
because such a mortar chaseth away Mise: lees also are good to keep
instruments and iron tools from rusting: oxen are helped to a good appetite,
by having their fodder besprinkled with oil lees: oil lees are good to
anoint the bottomes of chests wherein clothes are to be laid, for they drive
away mothes: they are good also to give light unto the family with some wood:
to keep sheep from being scabbed, if they be anointed with the lees of oil,
as also to heal such as are already scabbed: to cause vvood to burn and
slame without smoke.

CHAP. LII.
How the Oils of other Fruits and Seeds are made by expression.
THere are many other seeds and fruits which do yield an oily liquor by
expression, Oils made by expression of many things.
and that after the manner of the Olive, that is to say, royal Walnuts,
Filberds, Nutmegs, Almonds, both sweet and bitter, the Indian nut, Anacardies,
Peach kernells, the kernells of pine Apples, Abricots, Cherries, Plums,
Pistaces, Linseed, Rapeseed, Mustard Seed, Hempe-seed, the seed of Poppie,
He^bane, Burnet, Citrons, Oranges, Apples, Pears, Cucumbers, Gourds, Melons,
Citrulls, and other such like, whereof we will speak particularly, to the end
that we may give to know what course is to be taken, and what manner and order
is to be kept in every particular.

The oil of sweet Almonds is thus prepared: The making of the oil of sweet
almonds.
Pill the Almonds after that they have sleept some time in warm water: pound
them in a mortar of stone or marble with a wooden pestle, and make them up in
lumpes or little loaves, which you shall knead and work with your hands at
the vapor of vvarme water a long time, if you like it not better to warm
them upon hot ashes, or hot sand for the space of an hour, or in the Sun the
space of five hours: or else put them in a glass vessel which shall be
vvarmed at the vapor of boiling water in a caldron: after put them in a hair
cloth or hempen bag, for to press in a press that has his planke hollow
and bending downward: or betwixt presses whose plankes you have heated: but
here in this you must note, that the Almonds are not always blanched before
their oil be drawn, because many times a man's leisure will not serve him to
do it: though indeed it be the best way to pill or blanch them, that so the
oil may come the more neat and pure: and to pill them rather with a knife
than by the means of water, either warm or cold, for fear that through the
mixture of water, there be caused to come forth great store of vvaterish and
unpleasant oil. The dross of sweet almonds
After that the Almonds have been thus pressed, you may bake the dross under
ashes, and use them in steed of bread: you must observe, that such manner of
preparing of oil of sweet almonds is only to be used when such oil is to be
taken at the mouth, to stay and take away the throws and gripes of women newly
delivered of child^or else to mitigate the pain of the collicke, Women's throws
Pain of the colicke and kidneyes.
or of the reins, taking it in a drink of two ounces of white Wine, or with
Aqua-vitae: And this oil is drawn oftentimes without fire or any other heat
whatsoever: sometimes the almonds are fried to give them a light drying, and
after the oil is pressed out.

The oil of bitter Almonds is made of almonds fried in a drying pan, Oil for
to make (...).
and sti^ed oftentimes that so they may not burn to, after which they are to
be pressed out so strongly and long, as till they will yield no more: After
this manner a man may pressed out two other sorts of oil out of sweet almonds:
one appropriated unto ^^^ments to be applied unto the outward parts of the
body that are pained: the other serving for perfumers: which two are made of
old sweet almonds sound and whole, Oil of Sweet almonds for perfumers.
and very oily by reason of their age: they must be fried in a drying pan,
and alter pressed with weight or presses being close wrapped in a bagg, or
hair cloth. The oils of Pistaces, common vvalnuts, filberds, Indian nuts, the
kernels of pine apples, cherries, seeds of gourds, cucumbers, melons, Palma
Christi, the seed of hemp, line, pionie, henbane, wild saffron, stauesacre,
and other fruits and oily seeds, are pressed out after the same manner that
the oils of sweet almonds be: evermore looking to it that the expression be
not without the heating of the thing pressed, either by cha^^ng and warming it
self at the fire, or else by heating the plankes betwixt, or the weigh^ under
which they are to be pressed.

Oil of Bays it thus prepared: Oyle-de-Bay.
Take ripe bay berries and new, pound them, and make them into masses or small
lumps: boil them a sufficient long time in water in a caldron, strain the
decoction, and let it cool, gather the fat that swimmeth above, and keep it
for oil; or else let all the water run out at some hole which shall be in the
bottom of it, and the fat which stays behind is the oil. Some do not boil
the masses of bay berries, but press them from under a press, and let the
oil fall down into a vessel standing underneath with water: Otherwise, mix
an equal portion of bay berries and olives, pound them together, and press
out the oil. The oil of bays is sovereign to put in clysters for the pains
of the cholick, Collicke. Cold swellings.
and to make ointments of for cold tumors, the palsy, shaking of quartaine
agues, and cold affects of the sinews. After the same manner you may make the
simple oil of my^^tes, I^niper-berries, Oil of myrtles, juniper, mastick
tree, turpentine tree, and iuie berries.
of the fruit of the masticke-tree, turpentine-tree, and Iuie: which is also
very singular for cold distillations, and benumbed members. Sometime men take
an equal portion of Juniper and bay berries, and steep them in Wine, pressing
out the oil thereof afterward. You may likewise boil bay berries in oil, and
press them out after: or else without any other mixture or preparation, you
may put (...) and green bay berries in a bag, and by weight or pressing draw
out their oil.

Oil of nutmegs is thus made: lay nutmegs on heaps, Oil of nutmegs
bray them with a wooden stamper, afterward press them out from betwixt the
plankes heated: or else divide them into little heaps, and steep them three
days in very good Wine, after dry them in the shadow of the Sun two whole
days, then heat them reasonably in a drying pan upon the fire, sprinkling them
with rosewater, and presently press them out. You must note, that in this
manner of drawing of oil, which is done by expression, men are forced many
times to sprinkle the matter with water or wine, to draw out the oil both more
easily, and in greater quantity: so we see it practiced sometimes in the
expression of sweet almonds, that when they are too dry, there is some small
(...) of water put unto them: but unto other things some Wine, as in
oyle-de-baies, ^^^megs, Iuniper-berries, and such like.

CHAP. LIII.
How to make Oils by impression.
THe Oils made by impression are commonly compounded of Oil olive, Oil made
by imp^^ssion.
because it is more temperate than others, easilier to be gotten, and retayning
more exactly the quantity of ingredients whether hot or cold. It is true,
that very often in place of Oil olive some take the oil of sweet Almonds,
F^^berds, Cammo^ile, or such other, according as the occasion of things
require, as you may know and understand by particular description of such
oils. Whatsoever it is, Three things to be considerd in making oils by
impression.
there are three things to be considered in the making of oils by impression:
the heat, which is the efficient cause of the making of the oil: the quality
of the ingredients; and the quantity of them. As concerning the heat, whether
it be of the fire, or of the Sun, or of other things which yield heat, it
must be measured according to the qualities of tenderness or hardness which
shall be in the substances and matter: for flowers do not crave so great a
heat is fruits or roots; Oils of flowers
whereupon it comes to pas^e, that for the composition of such oils, men are
oftentimes contented with the heat of the Sun, or with the heat of boiling
water: otherwise called Maries-bath, To make oils by impression in Maries-bath.
or the double vessel. And I for mine own part jam of this mind, that for the
making of these oils there ought not any coal fire to be used, nor yet any
other kind of fire, but rather the help of Ma^^^^-bath: For as by the gentle
and mild heat of Maries-bath, all the parts of the ingredients are kept, and
the oil well prepared and digested: so by the heat of a violent and forcible
fire, there follows rather the exhalation or combustion of oily things, than
any digestion. The preparing therefore of such oils as have need of a greater
heat than that of the Sun, will be a greater deal the better, if you put the
matter, out of which you draw the oil, in a glass or tin vessel for to be
infused in oil mingled with Wine or water, or other convenient liquor, or
without liquor, according as the nature of the ingredients, and the present
thing requires. After that this vessel borne up with the small slips of
broom or straw, has infused three whole days in Maries-bath, that is to say,
in caldron full of water somewhat boiling; or (which is better) the vessel not
infused or standing in the water, but rather receiving only the vapor of the
boiling vvate^ that is in the caldron, those three days being spent, you may
press out the things, which you shall have infused, strayning and forcing them
through some strong strainer and thick linen: and afterward to put in other
new ingredients if it be needful (that is to say) until the liquors which you
have mingled with the oil, or the humiditie and moisture which may rise of the
ingred^ents be consumed, and that the oil may seem to have gotten out all the
strength and virtue of the ingredients, and then to strain and force them as
before. This is the way that is to be taken for to prepare oils well by
impression. It is true that with less cost and a great deal sooner they may
be prepared, in putting the ^atter into some great brass pan upon a coal
fire, causing it to boil with a small fire until the liquor put unto the oil
or the moisture of the ingredients be consumed: and after strayning of them
after the manner that has been said before.

Furthermore it will be discerned that the oil has exactly drawn out the
virtues of the ingredients, To know if the oil be made*
and that the liquor mingled with the oil or moisture of the ingredients is
consumed, if with a spatule or stick of vvood you cast some few drops of the
said oil into the fire: for if they be all on a flame by and by, it is a sign
that it is pure and near, but and if it spatter, there is yet some waterish
moisture remaining in it: furthermore as it is boiling in the caldron, it will
be spatering and casting up bubbles, so long as there remains any of the
liquor or moisture: but after that it is spent and boiled away, it will be
quiet and peaceable: likewise a drop of oil dropped upon your hand, if there
be any moisture in it of waterishnesse, it will show it sufficiently, for it
will swim and ride aloft upon the same.

As concerning the quality of the ingredients, The quality of the
ing^edients. Cold oils. Hot. Tender. Hard.
it consists principally in this, that the ingredients are either hot or
cold, or tender, or tough, and hard. I^ they be cold, there is need that they
should be often shifted and changed in the oil, for the better imprinting of
their cold quality in the oil, for although that oil olive be temperate,
notwithstanding it inclines more unto heat and a fiery nature, than otherwise:
so that it is requisite to change the ingredients often, and to put new in
their places for that cause; yea, and in regard thereof to wash the oil in
some common water, as we will further declare in speaking of oil of roses: if
the ingredients be hot, Hot oils.
it is sufficient once only to change them for the composition of hot oils,
and that by reason of the affinity and agreement betwixt the Oil and the hot
things.

If the ingredients be hard, Of the tenderness or hardness of the ingredients.
and not easily digested, and imparting their properties unto the oil, they
must be infused before they be boiled, and also there must be put unto their
decoction some liquor, as Wine, or some convenient juice or other liquor, as
well to help their digestion, as to keep them from burning, or getting some
loathsome smell: but and if they be tender, they crave sometimes a simple
infusion in the heat of the Sun, or upon a slow fire without any boiling: and
this way fitteth flowers: sometime a light boiling without any infusion, as
many aromaticall things.

And as concerning the quality of the ingredients, Oils made of living things
or their parts.
you must observe that oils by impression are made, not only of the parts of
plants, but of living things, their parts and excrement, wherein there must
not be any shifting, changing, or renewing: and besides these, there is no
other thing to be observed; except that if the beasts be small, that then they
be killed in the oil, as it used in oil of scorpions, serpents, frogs, and
pismires: but and if they be great, they must be first killed, them bowelled,
and lastly, boiled in the oil, as is done in the oil of Foxes.

Touching the quantity of the ingredients, The quantity of the ingredients.
by which the oils made by impression are called simple or compound, you must
have regard to see that when the oil is compound, that this order be followed,
that is, to take the ingredients of greatest and hardest substance, and to
infuse them three days: afterward those of less substance two days: and
those which are the most tender, subtle, and aromaticall one day, and one
night: and then afterward to boil them in order, strayning them but once, and
reserving your Gums to mix and dissolve with the said strayned oil, according
as it shall be requisite, if so be that any gums do go into any such oils.

CHAP. LIIII.
A description of the Oils made by impression.
AS for Oil of Roses, Oil of Roses.
it is thus prepared: Take of oil of new olives so much as you shall think
needful, that is to say, sufficiently to infuse your roses in: vvash it
diligently, as well to cool it, and make it more temperate, as also for to
make it the more pure, if in case it should be any whit salt or feculent, and
thick of the Lees. Such washing it made with an equal portion of water and
oil, stirring them together in a vessel, until such time as they be mingled
and incorporated, and then so leaving them till they separate themselves one
from another again: which being come to pass, there shall be a hole made in
the bottom of the vessel where they are to let the water run out: after,
there must other water be put in to beat with the oil as before, and this
shall thus be gone over three or four times: but and if there be any have to
be made in this washing of the oil, then the vessel shall be kept in some
warm place, to the end that the oil and water may be the sooner severed: and
you must note that the oil is not to be washed on this fashion, except it be
for cooling oils, as oil of Roses, Violets, and such like: it is very true,
that there will be no need to wash any oil at all, if you have the oil of
green olives called Omphac^^e. This washing of oil being finished, have in
readiness a sufficient quantity of blown Roses, put them to infuse in this
washed oil, in a vessel having a narrow mouth, like a pitcher or a glass
bottle, or some one of Tin, and filled up within a quarter of the top, and
afterward well closed and stopped: set them in this sort in the Sun, or some
warm place, for the space of seven days, boil them afterward in a double
vessel in boiling water, as we have said, or else boil them in a brass
kettle upon a small fire without any flame for the space of two or three
hours: when the oil has boiled and wasted one part of the moisture that was
in it, it will be convenient to strain it through a strong strayner, and
thick linen cloth, and after to put into it new Roses again, doing as you
did before, and that for three several times: in the end, after it has been
strayned, some put into it as much water of the infusion or other Roses,
infused in water, as there is Oil; then you shall set it in the Sun for the
space of forty days, which infusion may be severed from the oil afterward as
the water wherewith the oil was vvashed. Notwithstanding it may be sufficient
to take the infusion of the Roses in oil only, without the putting of other
water in the infusion. Some mingle now and then in the decoction of Roses a
little wine, or juice of fresh Roses to keep the oil from burning, Two sort^
of oil of Roses.
or that in boiling it should not get any loathsome smell. You must further
note, that some prepare and make two sorts of oil of Roses: one oil of ripe
olives, and roses all opened and spread, which are the better if they be red:
the other oil it made of roses being yet in the b^d, with the oil of green
and unripe olives: or if you have not any of this oil Omphacine, you shall
make it with common oil and verjuice boiled together, to the consumption of
the juice. This is more cooling, astringent, and repercussiue: the other more
digestive, dicussiue, and anodine or assuaging of pains.

Some there are which sometimes make this oil or Roses without oil of olives,
A new kind of making of oil of Roses.
putting red, carnation, or musk roses to putrify in a vessel set in dung
for one whole month being close covered. And this kind of oil is very
fragrant and sweet.

This manner of making of oils may be followed in the compounding of oils,
Oil of Cammomile, Melilote. Yellow Violets. Corneflag. Elder-tree flowers.
White mulleine flowers. Iasmin. Poppie, Lettuses Water Lilly flowers. Oil of
Quinces.
either cold or temperate and simple, such as are the oil of violets,
cammomile, meli^^te, yellow or red violets, of the leaves and flowers of dill,
lillies, the yellow taken away, of corneflag flowers, of elder tree flowers,
white mulleine flowers, jesamine flowers, poppie flowers, or of the leaves and
heads of poppie, of lettuse leaves; and white water lilly flowers, to the
compounding of which oils, you must note that for want of oil of green
olives, you may take the oil of sweet almonds newly drawn, or of ^^^berds, if
it have been first washed.

Oil of Quinces: Take whole Quinces with the rindes when they are very ripe,
but cast away their kernells, then stamp them, and infuse them in oil
Omphatine in the Sun five days, or else in oil washed as we have said
before: afterward, boil them with equal portion of the juice of Quinces in
double vessel the space of four hours: renew the flesh and juice of Quinces
three or four times, the old being made away, set them in the Sun again,
and boil them: afterward strain all, and keep it in a vessel for your use:
you shall draw greater store of the juice of your Quinces, if you crush them
well, and bruise them, rather than if you cut them in peec^s.

Oil of Masticke: Oil of (...) stick.
you must take oil of Roses, or oil Omphacine, or of Quinces, three pound, of
good wine eight ounces, of masticke powdered and put unto the rest toward the
end (for it will not endure much boiling) three ounces: boil them altogether
to the consumption of the wine in stirring it often, to the end that the
masticke may be melted and mixed with the oil.

Oil of the flowers of the Elder-tree: Oil of Elder-tree.
Fill a glass bottle full of vvashed oil, or oil Omphacine, put therein a
sufficient quantity of Elder-tree flowers, set the bottle in the hot Sun
six days, after that press them out, and put in others new; continue this
all the time of Summer vvhiles the flowers of Elder-tree are in force: this
oil is singular to comfort the sinews, assuage the pain of the joints, and to
cleanse the skin.

Oil of S. Iohns-wort: Oil of S. John's woort.
Infuse for three days the crops of S. Iohns-wort in very fragrant Wine:
after that, boil all in a soft and gentle sort in Maries-bath, and after this
some small space, strain them out lightly: infuse again in the same Wine as
many days as nights the like quantity of the tops of S. Iohns-wort, boil
them, and strain them as before: afterward, put unto the liquor of
Venice-Turpentin^ three ounces, of old oil six ounces, of saffron a scruple,
mix them, and in the said Maries-bath boil them unto the consumption of the
Wine: you shall keep that which remains in a glass or lead vessel, for to
use, as hot as you can apply it in malign ulcers, especially those of the
sinews, and in the lean and cold parts, in the pricks of the sinews, pain
of the teeth, con^ulsions, tumors, and distillations. Some do make this oil
after the simplest and singlest sort, making only the flowers of Hypericum,
which they infuse all the Summer in washed oil in a glass vessel, and
setting it in the hot Sun, keep it.

Oil of Rhue: Oil of Rhu^.
Take the leaves of Rhue somewhat dried, (because they are subject to a
super^lous kind of moisture) set them to infuse in oil a whole Summer: Or
better, change and renew them every eight days, strayning and pressing them
out at every change: Summer being gone, boil them not, but strain, press
out, and keep them in a vessel: after this manner are made the oils of the
Myrtle-tree, Oil of Myrtle-tree, W^rme^wood, Marierom, Southernwood, Thyme,
and Aller.
Wormwood, Marierom, Southernwood, Thyme, Cammomile, and such like: unto which
there is sometimes added the like quantity of juice, or flowers, or leaves
mingled with oil: and so they are set in the Sun.

Oil of Spike: Oil of Spike:
Take true Spike, or for want of it, lauander, to the quantity of three
ounces, of marierom, and baye-tree leaves two ounces: of the roo^s of Cypres,
Elicampaine, and Zyloalo^^ of each an ounce and a half: of nu^megs, three
ounces: infuse every thing by it self in an equal quantity of Wine and
water: the infusion accomplished, boil the whole together in a sufficient
quantity of oil in a double vessel, the space of four or five hours: this
done, strain it all and keep the oil for your use: that is to say, for the
cold ach of the stomach, reins, belly, matrix, Pain o^ the stomach, reins,
belly, matrix.
and other parts.

Oil of Foxes: Oil of Foxes.
Take a live Fox of a middle age, of a full body, well fed and f^^, such as
Foxes be after vintage: kill him, bowell him, and skin him: some take not out
his bowels, but only the excrements in his guts, because his guts have much
grease about them: break his bones small, that so you may have all their
^^rrow: this done, set him a boiling in salt brine, salt water, and sea water,
of each a pine and a half, of oil three pints, of salt three ounces: in the
end of the decoction, put thereto the leaves of sage, rosemarie, dill, organie,
marierom, and Iuniper-berries after that he shall be ro^ten sodden, Rheumes.
that is to say, so as that his bones and flesh do part clea^^ asunder:
Weakness of s^^^ws.
strain all through a strayner, and keep it in a vessel to make (...), for
ache in the joints, Pains of the reins and back.
the sciatica, diseases of the sinews, and pains of the reins and back.

Take Earth-wormes half a pound, Oil of Worms.
vvash them throghly in with Wine, then boil them in two pound of Oil olive,
and a little red Wine to the consumption of the Wine, strain and press it out
all, and keep the oil: yet further, it would be good to put into this oil
some other worms, and leave them there as long as the oil lasts. This oil
is singular good to comfort the stiff sinews, Sti^^e (...), Pains of the
joints.
and for the (...) of the joints.

Oil of Serpents: Oil of serpents
Take whole Serpents, put them in an earthen vessel well leaded, fill the same
with May-butter, and cover the same with a covering, the joyn^ being well
lu^ed, but notwithstanding having a small hole above: set the po^ neer^ unto
the ^ire, that it may boil half a day, to the end that all may be thoroughly
boiled: the strain it through a linen cloth, afterward pound it well in
mortar, and make an end of strayning that which shall be in the bottom of the
linen cloth: mix together both these expressions, letting them cool, and
reserving them in a glass vessel to serve your use for distillations or
rheumes, and for pal^ies. Some take Vipers, and cutting off their heads and
tails (as is done in the making of Treacle) they boil them in oil, and use
the oil for rebellious Ringwormes, and first buds of the leprosy.

CHAP. LV.
A reuiew or suruay of Oils made by distillation.
But the third manner of making of Oils has been said to be by distillation
or resolution, of which we will speak, after we have spoken of the
distilling of waters: but besides that, there is an other manner of drawing of
oil (though in certain things it be done by expression) which comes very
near unto this third kind of making oils by distillation: and it is practiced
in eggs, wheat, m^stardseed, hay, barlie, ^arrar, brimstone, and others.

Oil of Eggs: Oil of eggs*
Take the yolks of eggs roasted hard in water, or which is better, under the
hot ashes, about thirty, rub and chafe them a long time betwixt your hands,
after fry them in a leaden pan, or in an earthen one well leaded at a soft
fire, (...) them (...) turn them often with a ladle of vvood, until such time
as they begin to be of a sad red, after press them with the back of the said
ladle: or, which is better, put them betwixt two presses, to force out their
oil, as is done with oil of Almonds: you shall have great store of oil to
run out; which is very good to take away the spots of the skin, to heal
ringwormes, to cause hair to grow again, to cure ^istulaes, and malign
ulcers, assuage pains, take away the roughness of the skin, to cure the chaps
of the lips, hands, feet, and fundament: to take away the scarres left after
burnings, and principally for the ulcers of the membranes of the brain. Some
in the making of this Oil do not boil the eggs hard, but fry them raw, and
after by pre^^ing them together in a bag betwixt two presses, or under a
presser, they press out the Oil.

Oil of Wheat: The ^yle (...) Wheat.
Press Wheat together betwixt two plates of Iron reasonably glowing and fire
red, or very hot, or betwixt a Marble-stone, and a thick hot pla^e of Iron:
receive the Oil into something which distilleth from it: or else take away
from Wheat his pill or rind, and distill it after the manner of the
Philosophers Oil: this Oil applied hot, takes away the spots of the skin,
heals ringwormes, fistulaes, and chops in the skin, Ringw^rme^, Fistulaes.
Chops in the skin.
and the scall or skurfe in little children: the oils of barlie, mustard seed,
and other oily seeds are thus prepared and made.

Oil of Hay: Oil of Hay.
Set on fire a quantity of Hay, after quench it again by and by, then lay it
upon coals, and vvhiles it is smothering and smoking, spread it upon a plate
of iron, and there will gather upon it an oil liquor, which is called oil of
Hay: and this is singular good for ringwormes, and. Anthonies fire,
Ringwo^mes. S. Anthonies fire.
scabbes, and r^ughnesse of the skin.

Oil of Tartar: Oil of Tart^^.
Take Tartar, that is to say, the dried lees of Wine which slicketh unto the
seames or hollow places that are within the Wine vessel, not that which is in
the bottom, because it is very dreggish and filthy, neither yet that which
is aloft on the upper part of the vessel, for that is too frothie and scummie,
but that which cleaves round about unto the staves of the vessel wherein
there has been very good white wine, rather than red: make it into fine
powder, and make it fast in a linen cloth, infuse it in very good white
Vinegar: or not infusing it, calcine it, and put it in a Hypocras bag, or in
an oxes or swines bladder: afterward, roast it under hot embers, until it
become white: you shall know if it be sufficiently burned, by the growing of
it clear, and a little burning of your tongue, if you touch it therewith.
Notwithstanding you may blanch or whiten it, if (as some hold it for a great
secret) you boil it a long time in water, scumming it often: powder it yet
once again, or (which is better) calcine it: then put it in the bottom of an
hypocras bag, that is to say, of a bag which has a sharp and narrow
bottom, and this you shall hang up on high at some staff in a cave or other
cold place for the space of eight days, until it be resolved into Oil: and
if the Oil do not drop of it self, then graspe it hard, and press it out,
putting underneath some glass viol^, to receive the liquor that shall distill,
which is not indeed properly on Oil, but a very sharp water, or a reddish
kind of humor. This humor is good for all sorts of itchings, Ring-wormes,
Scurfes, Scalles, and other such diseases of the skin: It makes the face
white, clean, and seeming young: it takes away vvrinkles and spots, coming
of a melancholicke humor: It makes the hair of a straw color: hinders the
falling of the hair, and causes it being fallen to grow again: it whiteneth
copper and silver: and takes away the spots of linnens, if they be rubd with
this oil hot.

Oil of Brimstone: Oil of Brimstone.
hang in some high place with a vvire, or doues-tayle of iron, a glass
vessel in fashion like a Bell or Basin, covered above with Potters earth of a
cubice vvidenesse, underneath which near the length of a cubite you shall
place another vessel of glass, being broad and very large, able to hold
much, such like as is the dish or basin usually served with Ewers: in the
midst whereof there shall be a little vessel of earth in f^rme of a little
pot, which shall contain the Brimstone, which must be of that which is
called quick and Virgins Brimstone, and not artificial Brimstone: when you
intend to make your. Oil of Bri^stone to d^still, you shall take a shee^e of
iron of four fingers thickness, and fire red: this you shall cast into the
small pot with Brimstone, to make the said Brimstone burn and flame: the
smoke coming forth of the Gode^ will ascend up to the vessel hanging above,
wherein after a short time it will be turned into Oil, which Oil will
thence distill into the ves^ell below. Gather this Oil, and reserve it in a
vessel well stopped, for to use for the curing of Gangrenes, Fistula^s, v^cers
of the mouth, and Ring-wormes, (...)
if you do but touch them with this Oil upon the end of a feather. It is
singular good against rebellious ulcers coming of the pockes* some give it to
drink with balm water in the morning unto such as are but scarce cured and
recovered of the pockes, to the end it may drive out the dis^ase. The oil of
Brimstone may be made otherwise: boil Brimstone in Aqua-vitae, until there
begin an oily substance to swim aloft: gather this liquor with a woollen or
linen cloth, or with a little espoone: you must sometime renew your
Aqua-(...), until you have gathered oil enough: if presently after bathing
your self you annoin^ with this oil your body infected with Quick-siluer^,
you shall expel and draw forth the said Quicksilver.

But concerning all these Oils, see more in our Book of secret remedies and
medicines.

CHAP. LVII.
A description of certain artificial balmes.
But it is well and sufficiently known, how that now the true and natural
balm is no where to be found, and that in place thereof the industry and
skill of man has invented Oils which approach and draw near in virtues and
faculties unto the true balm: now therefore be it in like manner known that
these Oils are made either by distillation or impression: and that we will
speak only of some certain ones which are made by impression, ceasing to
speak of those which are distilled for them which meddle in drawing out the
quintessences of things, as you shall further perceive by our Book of secret
remedies.

Balm of the marvelous apples: Balm of the marvelous apples.
Take the marvelous apples either with or without kernells, but very ripe,
put them in a vessel full of common oil, either old or new, or of the oil of
sweet Almonds or Linseed, and infuse them a long time in the Sun, or in
Maries-bath, or in horse-dung that is very hot, or in the earth in a vessel
that is well covered over with sand, and let it remain there one whole year,
or else two, which is the better; you may likewise make this oil of the
leaves and little cods without the fruit: some with the apples put together
with the oil of sweet almonds or linseed oil, do join of liquid varnish one
ounce for every pound of oil: such an oil is a singular balm for all
wounds, inflammations of the breasts, and for the appeasing of outward pains
and ache; for the bursting of young children; the ulcers of the matrix; and to
procure conception, if after that the woman is come out of the bath made for
the same purpose, the anoint her secret parts therewith, and drink of the
powder of the leaves with white Wine: it is also singular good for the pain
of the hemorrhoides, being mingled with linseed oil, or the oil of sweet
almonds. We have spoken of the marvelous apples in the second Book, where we
have declared how that the herb whereupon they grow is called Balsa^ina,
Balsamin^.
because it has the virtue of balm. The oils of the flowers of Rosemarie,
Oil of the flowers of Rosemari^.
white mullein, White mullein^ Nicotian.
Paul's betonie, Paul's (...) and gr^und luie.
Nicotian, and ground Iuie, being thus prepared as we have spoken of before,
have like virtues with balm.

Another balm: Take the fruit of the elm, the flowers of Hypericum, and the
buds of Roses, put all together in a glass bottle with oil of Olives, stop up
the bottle close, and leave it in the Sun, until you see the same all of it
in such manner consumed as though it were rotten: afterward, strain it and
keep the oil for your use.

Another: Take Gum elemie four ounces, A balm.
oil of worms, oil of Roses, and Hypericon, of each two ounces, of Venice
Turpentine two ounces; mix altogether and incorporate them upon a coal fire,
afterward keep it in little bottles.

Another balm: A balm.
Take the flowers and seeds of Hypericon four handfulls, bruise them
thoroughly, and set them in the Sun the space of ten days in a glass bottle,
with four pound of old Oil of Olives, afterward press them out carefully,
and put again as many more flowers and seeds of Hypericon into the bottle, set
it in the Sun again ten whole days: after press it out all again, and
put thereunto as follows; of oil of dill, and of Venice Turpentine, of each
a pound and a half, of Aqua-vitae half a pound, of Mummia, vvood of Alo^s,
masticke, myrrh, and Iuiegu^, of each an ounce and a half, of the rosen of
the pine tree three ounces, saffron half an ounce, cloves, nu^megs, cinnamom,
of each three drams: mix all together, and boil them three hours in
Maries-bath in a glass bottle close stopped, that nothing may breath out: Then
set the bottle in the Sun the space of ten days, reserving the oil
afterward for pains of the ears, Pai^^s of the ears.
wounds, fistulaes, cankers, Cankers,
Noli me tangere, etc to anoint the back bone a little before the fit of the
ague come, which begins of cold.

Another balm: A balm of (...) flowers.
take the fruit of the elm, within which you shall find a liquor like unto
oil, put it whole into a strong viole, which viole you shall stop very close,
and bury for the space of fi^teene days in horse dung that is very hot by
reason of his being ver^e rotten, then set it in the Sun for a certain time,
and after gather the clear part that shall swim above, and this will be
unto you a singular balm. Otherwise: gather all the liquor that you find in
the fruit of elmes, put it in a strong viole, adding of the flowers of
Hypericon and common oil: stop up the viole very close, and bury it in horse
dung that is well rotted, leave it therein a sufficient time, and afterward
taking it out, you shall have a singular balm. See further in our Book of
secret medicines concerning balmes.

A brief discourse of the distilling of Waters.
CHAP. LVIII.
Of the profit and commodity of distillation.
NOtwithstanding that distillation be the work rather of a Philosopher or
Alchymist (otherwise called an extracter of quintessences) than of a farmer or
master of a Country Farm: notwithstanding the profit thereof is so great,
and the use so laudible and necessary, as that we take not the chief Lord of
our country house to be furnished with all such singular commodities as we
desire, if he lack the knowledge and practice of distillation; not that I
would have him to make it a matter to trouble himself much withal, and to be
at much cost and charges therewith, as many (not well advised) men be now
adays: In leisure to take the opp^rtunitie of ^easure to go about distilling.
but only that he would take his time thereto at his best leisure, and without
any great expense; or else to leave the same to his wife or his farmers wife;
for indeed such occupation is far better beseeming either of them than him;
for as much as the maistres^e or dairie-woman has the petty affairs and
businesses belonging to this our country Farm, and lying within the doors,
resigned and put over to (...). Therefore let it not seem strange in this
point, if after our brief entreaty of Oils, we discourse somewhat briefly,
and according as a country thing requires of the manner of distilling of
waters, and extracting of oily quintessences, out of such matter as our
Country Farm shall afford; which we would should serve for the use of the
Farmers wife, as well to relieve her folk withal, as to succor her needy
neighbors in the time of sickness; as we see it to be the ordinary custom
of great Ladies, Gentlewomen, and Farmers vviues well and charitably disposed,
who distill waters and prepare ointments, and such other remedies, to succor
and relie^^ the poor.

CHAP. LIX.
What Distillation is, and how many sorts there be of Distillation.
I Will not trouble my self here with setting down the party which was the
first inuentor of Distillation: The inuentor or first finde^ out of
distillation.
as namely, whether it were some Physician of late time, who having a desire to
eat stewed Pears, set them a stewing betwixt two dishes upon the fire, and
having afterward taken off the upper dish, and finding the bottom thereof all
set with pear^^e sweat, retaining the smell and favor of the stewed Pear it
self, invented thereupon certain instruments to draw out from all sorts of
herbs clear and bright airie waters: it is better that we see our selves to
work about the declaring of what Distillation is, and what things they be
which may be distilled.

Distillation, Distillation.
or the manner of distilling, is an art and means whereby is extracted the
liquor or moisture of certain things by the virtue and force of fire or such
like heat (as the things themselves do require:) no otherwise than, as we see
here below, that by the force and power of the Sun many vapors are lifted
into the middle region of the air, and there being turned into water, fall
down in rain. True it is, that the word, Distill, sometimes reaches further,
and is taken not only for things that are distilled by the means of heat, but
without heat also: as we see it done in such things as are distilled after a
strayning manner, Distil^^ng without heat.
that is to say, when the purer and thinner part of certain waters or liquid
juices is separated and extracted from the more muddie and earthie part by the
means of a Felt, D^stilling by a Fi^^re, Sand, ^^baked Earth-po^s, vessels of
Iuie, glass of Fern^.
or by the means of a piece of Cloth, fashioned like a little tongue, or
border: or out of Sand and small Gravel: or out of earthen Pots not yet baked:
or out of Vessels made of the wood of Iuie: or out of Glass made of Fearne.
Sometimes likewise things are not only distilled without heat, but with cold:
as nemely, when the things which you would have distilled are set in cold and
moist places: as Oil of Tar^ar is wont to be made, To dist^ll by cold.
as also Oil of Myrrh, Dragons blood, Otters, and other things. But
howsoever, yet I would not have the Mistress of our Country House to busy
her brain with all the sorts of Distillation, but that she should content her
self only with that which is performed by heat. True it is, Diverse (...) of
^eat.
that it is meet and requisite that she should know the diversities of heat,
to the end she may procure such a heat as will best fit such matter and thing
as she is in hand withal, or to go about: for some things crave the heat of
a clear fire, or of coal, or of the Sun, or of hot ^^^bers, or of small
sand, or of the filings of iron, or of the dros^e of Olives: others crave the
heat of Horse dung, or boiling water, or the vapor of boiling water, or of
Wine boiling in the fat, or of vnquencht Lime, or of some Bark, or other
putrified thing. And for this cause she shall mark and observe four degrees
of heat: the first whereof shall be called warm, like water when it is half
hot, or the vapor of boiling water, and in this there is no fear of any hurt
it can do: the second is a little hoter, but yet so, as that it may be well
endured without any annoyance or hurt, such as the heat of ashes or embers:
the third is yet hoter than the second, and so, as that it may annoy and hurt
one grievously, if he should hold any part or member therein any long time,
such is the heat of small sand. The fourth is so vehement, as that it cannot
without great pain very hardly be endured, and such is the heat of the scales
of filings of iron. The first degree is fit to distill fine, subtle, and moist
things, as flowers and cold simples, as Endive, Lettuce, and such other: The
second, for distilling of fine, subtle, and dry things: of that sort are all
fragrant or smelling things, as Pepper, Cinnamome, Ginger, Cloves, and many
simples, as Wormwood, Sage, etc. The third, for to distill matter that is of
thick substance, and full of juice, of which sort are many roots. The fourth
is proper for the distilling of metals and mineral things, as Allome,
Arsenicke, etc. By this means it will come to pass, that the Mistress of our
Country House shall not have any thing brought unto her, out of which she
will not be able to draw the waterie humor, and to distill clear and bright
waters.

CHAP. LX.
Of the fit and convenient time to distill in: and of the faculties, virtues,
and durablenesse of distilled waters.
Every thing is to be distilled in the time wherein it is best disposed,
Dis^^lling time.
and best fit, that is to say, roots, herbs, flowers, and seeds when they
are ripe; The knowledge of the rip^nesse of the matter to be distilled.
but living things, and the parts of them, when they are of middle age, as we
shall have occasion to declare in his place. Now as concerning the ripeness of
roots, herbs, flowers, seeds, and fruits, we refer you to our second
Book, where we have sufficiently at large laid open at what time every one
of these things is to be gathered. But it is to be noted, that necessity
sometimes compels us to distill dry plants, and then it will be good to
macerate and s^eepe them in some convenient liquor or decoction, answerable
unto the virtue of the things, by that means in part to renew and bring again
their youthfulness, and to endow them with such moisture as they brought with
them when they were first gathered from off the earth, as we will further
declare by and by.

As concerning the virtues of distilled Waters: The v^rtues of distilled waters.
it is most certain, that such as are distilled in Mary's bath, retaining the
cast, smell, and other qualities of the matter whereof they are distilled, have
not only equal virtues with the Plan^^ and matter whereof they are distilled,
but become much more pleasant unto the ^ast, and also more delightsome unto the
eye, than the juices or decoctions of the said matter would be. It is true,
that the waters distilled through Leaden, Tin, Bra^en, Copper, or such other
like met^all, like a Limbecke (as we shall by and by speak of) do loose the
best and most subtle parts of the substance of their matter, by suffering the
same to vanish away in and into the air, and for that cause they do not prou^
of so great virtue as their Plants. But howsoever it is, distilled waters are a
g^^at deal more pleasant unto sick persons, more ready for use, better for
medicines for the eyes, to make epithemes of for the heart and liver, to make
painting colors of, to put into perfumes, or other sweet things, as well for
the use of Physic, as also for the delight and decking of the body, than the
decoctions and juices of Plants: and therefore there is great reason they
should be distilled with greater heed and care.

It is most certain also, The la^^ing of disti^^ed waters.
that Waters distilled in Mary's bath, especially those which are distilled in
the vapor of boiling water, are not of long continuance, and hardly will last
above a year: likewise you must renew them every year by distillation,
circulation, or by distilling of them again, putting them also into the Still
again with some new matter upon the cake or drossie part, left upon some
former distillation: or else to distill them by a Filtre, whereof we shall
have occasion to speak hereafter.

CHAP. LXI.
What manner of vessels and instruments they must be wherein waters are to be
distilled.
TWo vessels are needful in distilling, which may be called by the common and
general word, a Limbeck: the one of them is properly called the containing
vessel, because it receives and contains the matter that you would distill*
some call it the body, or corpulent vessel* or the gourd: The other is
ordinarily called the cappe, head, or bell, being that whereinto the vapors
are gathered and turned into water. This vessel has sometimes a pipe, in
shape like the bill of a bird, through which the water passes drop by drop
into a violl, or other like vessel: and sometimes it has no beak or spour,
and those are v^ed in circulation. But these instruments do differ much, as
well in form and shape, as in matter. It is true, What distilling vessels were
first invented.
that the first that were invented were of Lead, like unto a Bell, and did
cover another vessel of Brass that was full of matter to be distilled: this
fashioned one is well enough known and used eueriewhere, because it draws
out more store of water than any other. Afterward there was another fashion
inuen^ed, by which many vessels (every one having his Leaden head or cover
several) are ^ated together with one only fire, set in a furnace made after
the fashion of a vault, to the end, that with less cost and labor there might
be drawn and dist^lled a great quantity of water; the figure and form
whereof you may here see and behold.



But in as much as waters distilled in Lead do not retain their smell or taste
at all, neither yet any of the rest of their qualities of the things whereof
they are distilled; but do rather smell of the smoke, or of a stink of
burning: as also, for that waters distilled of sharp, biting, and bitter
plants, do no whit resemble the same in the ^ast of their bitterness and
sharpness, but rather become unsavory sweet, Further, in as much (as Galen
witnesses) as the water which runs through pipes of Lead does stir up
oftentimes the bloody flux in those that drink it, because of his nature,
which is of the substance of Mercury: add unto these, that in as much as we
ordinarliy see the waters distilled through Lead to become oftentimes (with the
sharp and vehement vapor which it makes by the reason of a certain sale
dissoluing it self from the head) spoiled and made white and thick as milk:
I say, for and in respect of all these reasons, there is invented another
instrument, called the Bladder, whose under vessel and cap covering the same,
are both of Brass, and both of them standing over one ^urnace: which
instrument is not only good to distill Aqua vitae in, made of Wine, or of the
lees of Wine, or Bee^e, but also of all other sorts of Plants powered in
thereto, with a good quantity of common water. Moreover, it is requisite that
the head should have a great beak or spout, which must pass through the inner
side of a great caske full of water, to the end that the vapors breath not
out, but grow thick, and turn into water: The fashion of it is as you may see
here.



The later and better advised Physicians have devised a fashion much better
than the former, which is, to distill waters in Mary's bath, Waters distilled
in M^ries bath.
that is to say, in the bath of some boiling water, or over the vapor of the
same: for it is very certain, that such waters are without all comparison
better, in as much as they do exactly retain, not only the smell, but also
the ^ast, and other qualities of their plants: which happens, because the
bath of the boiling water, by his moisture, retains, keeps in, and
preserves the more subtle parts of the plants, and by this means hinder and
stay them from resolving and breathing out: as it comes to pass in those
which are distilled by a violent fire of wood or coal: which is the only
cause that there is so great difference betwixt the waters distilled in a
Limbecke of Lead, and those that are distilled in Mary's bath, as is betwixt
Gold and Lead: because they do not only retain the proper qualities of their
plants, that is to say, their smell and taste; but likewise they become clear,
pure, and bright, without smelling any thing of smoke, or burning: on the
contrary, the other always h^^h a taste of some s^inke of the smoke, which
does not only provoke a lust to vomit, as well in such as be healthful, as in
them that be sick, but also procures great hurt unto the parts of the breast,
stomach, liver, and other inward parts, by reason of some ill quality
wherewith they are infected by the vessels in which they are distilled, Which
is easily perceived by the water of Wormwood distilled in a Leaden Limbe^ke,
for it becom^^th sweet and not bitter, like unto the plant: and in like sort in
all other manner of waters that are distilled of plants, and are of a hot
temperature, and sharp or bitter of taste: For the Leaden Limbecke receiving
upon his superficial part the vapors of hea^bes which are hot in effect and
operation, is easily corrupted in that his superficial part, and turned into a
very subtle Ce^use, which afterward mingleth it self with the water, and
bestows upon them an vn^auourie* sweetnes^e: which is easy to be gathered
and known by the white residence that setleth in such waters, especially if
the Limbecke wherein they are distilled, be new: An old Leaden Limbecke is
better than a new.
for the vessel which has served a long time, having gotten by long space,
and being much distilled in, as it were a plasterie crust or hardness over all
the parts of it, is not so easily altered by the vapors, nor turned into
Ceruse. And indeed it is no marvel, if the upper face of the Lead be changed
into Ceruse by the sharp vapor of the plants, The making of Ceruse.
seeing that Ceruse it self (as Dioscorides testifies) is made of plates of
Lead hanged over the vapors of vinegar, and spread upon hurdles made of
reeds: but there befalls no such accident to waters distilled in Mary's
bath: The cause that makes waters dist^lled in Mary's bath to retain their
virtues.
for the bitterness of their ^ast is manifestly perceived, as also their
sharpness, sowrenesse, tartness, harshnesse, eagerness, sweetness, and
tastlesnesse, if they be distilled of bitter or biting plants, or yet of any
other tastes and qualities: and this falls out so, because the head of the
Mary's bath is of Glass, which cannot infect them with any strange or
unnatural quality. Moreover, the waters that are distilled in the vessel
called a Bladder, Waters distilled in the ins^rument called the Bladder.
which is made (as we have said) of Brass, as well the head as the body, but
yet ouer-laid within with Tin, are much better, and of greater virtue, than
those which are distilled in a Limbecke of Lead, because the fire of the
furnace cannot burn nor infect with any smoke the matter that is within,
seeing they are covered over and boil in water: but notwithstanding they do
not thoroughly retain the virtues thereof, because of the mixture of the water,
which smothereth and dulleth their force and virtues. The waters distilled over
the vapor of boiling water,
Wherefore we must needs commend as best the waters which are distilled in
the double vessel, or over the vapor of boiling water, especially when as
therewithal they are of a hot faculty. It is true, that amongst them, that
sort is better which is distilled over the vapor of boiling water, than that
which is distilled by putting the body containing the matter, into the boiling
water, because it extracteth and draws out the subtle parts therein a great
deal better: albeit that both the sorts thereof are excellent good, neither is
there any hurt at all in them, The (...) of waters distilled in M^ries bath*
save only that they are not of so long lasting and continuance as others: but
to help this in such things as need shall require, it will be good to distill
one and the same thing often, that so you may always have them good.

But to come to our third kind of Instrument, which we have called the double
vessel, or Mary's bath, it consists of two parts: the one is a great vessel
of Brass, made in manner of a Beefe-pot, very great, and raised high,
furnished with a covering, and it is set in a furnace, and contains in it
boiling water: The other is the Limbecke, whose body is likewise of Brass, so
set within the cover of the Cauldron, as that the one rests upon the other,
and that the one cannot be put in or taken away without the other: The head
thereof is of Glass or Tin, or of baked earth: in the covering of which,
there must be a hole made in that sort, as that it may be always close: it
would be at one of the corners thereof; and the use of it is, to power boiling
water into the Cauldron, when the water within the same is diminished after
long time of boiling: The fashion of it is as you may see here over the leaf.



There is another sort of double vessel, which contains four Limbeckes,
whose bodies set within the bath, may be either of glass or tin, and their
heads of glas^e* besides these four, there is another standing higher than the
rest, and is heated only of the vapor of boiling water, which ^iseth up on
high unto it through a pipe, and this Limbeck makes a better water than the
other four. All these vessel^ being well coupled and incorporated together,
do rest upon the Caldron, or great Bras^e pot, being sufficient large and
wide, and tinned over within, and so closely set one with another, as that
there may not any vapor breath out: in like manner, all these instrument^ and
vessels be so well ordered and contrived, as that they may seem to be but one
body, save only that the heads of every one must be so, as that it may be
separated from the body, and put to again, when you have any need to distill
water: the fashion of it is such as is here to be se^ne.



There are some that have yet seen another sort of double vessel, and that a
very excellent one, whose body is Tin, like unto a great Vrinall, of the
length of three good ^eet, very wide and large below, and somewhat narrower
above: The bottom or belly thereof is set two good foot in boiling water, and
the top stands out of the water a foot good, and that in a round hole made in
the midst of the cover of the Cauldron. Upon the top of this body is placed
a head of Tin, covered and compassed also with another vessel of Tin
likewise, and much more large: this is to contain cold water, running into it
through a Brass pipe or cock: it is to stand upon the top of a shanke, and
that for to cool the Limbeck continually, that so ^he vapors rising up
thither, may thicken the better, and be the sooner turned into water. And
because it is not possible, but that the water which is contained in the
vessel that compasses the Limbecke, should become hot in succession of time
through the heat of the Limbecke: this vessel has a small pipe or spout, at
which the water so heated is used to be lee run out, turning the little pin
of the cock; and it is filled again presently with cold water, which is made
to run down into it from a vessel on high. But to the end the labor of
emptying it so often of his hot water, and putting in again^ of cold, may be
remedied, things may be so carried, as that from the vessel which stands
upon the top of the pillar there may be cold water continually running into the
vessel compassing the Limbecke: and then it being once become hot, may be let
out, as is said before. And to the end that the cauldron which contains the
bath may always keep full at one measure and quantity of water, which
otherwise is sure to diminish by the continual and vehement heat of the fire
of the furnace; there is at the ^oot of the pillar another vessel full of
very hot water, which is to be conveyed into ^he bath by a cock, or pipe: and
this water is heated in his vessel by the same fire that the bath is heated,
in as much as the wall of the pillar is hollow and empty even as low as the
bottom of this vessel. This sort of double vessel is fit to distill waters
withal in great store and abundance, by reason of the cold water which
thickeneth and tur^^th by and by the vapors into water. The shape and fashion
is as you see.



The Venetians distill their water in such an Instrument: The furnace is round,
and contains on every side, round about it, many earthen vessels, glased
within, and fashioned like Vrinals, well luted with mortar of Potters clay, and
every one covered with a head of Glass, or baked earth: to their snouts there
is fastened a violl with a good thick thread, to receive the water that
distilleth. This furnace is heated, as we see, after the manner that the
Germans do heat their Hot-houses, and we ou^ Stoues. And if it happen, that
the fire should be too hot, you must not put any thing into the vessels, until
such time as the heat be somewhat abated, for fear that the plants, flowers,
and such other things should be burnt. The mouth of the (...) must be always
stopped and fast shut, to the end that the heat may beat inward for the heating
of so many vessels. For the attending and ordering of this furnace, there are
required many servants: some of them to look unto the ^ire; others to cast
the herbs into the bodies; and others, to put the heads upon the bodies. By
this likewise there may great store of waters be distilled, as some hundred
pints in a night and a day: and these waters are a great deal better than
those which are distilled in leaden Limbeckes or Stillitories, or yet of other
metals, because they are not infected with any fault or infection, which is a
common companion of those which are made of metal. This is the shape and
form of it.



There are other Instruments, the bodies whereof are of Brass, Iron, or other
metal, having a long, thick, and strait neck, on the top whereof rests
also a head of Brass, made after the fashion of a broch steeple, and is
compassed round about as (...) were with a bucket of cool water, to the end
that the vapor may be converted the sooner, and in greater quantity, into
water, and that the water may not taste or sm^ll of the fire. Some in stead of
this long neck and head, have a pipe of Plate, or other metal, very long,
and wrythen or wound about in form of a Serpent (and for this reason is called
a Serpentine) or made of many parts, consisting of direct angle^, and these
passing through a bucket, or some such vessel full of water.

There are many other sorts and fashions of Instruments to distill withal,
whereof I mean not to speak at this time, contenting my self with those
which I have mentioned, as being of more common use, and fit only to distill
waters: of which, it is our purpose only to speak at this present.

Furthermore, seeing the water does take his essence and consistence, and other
like qualities, from the head of the Stillitorie, it is good to make choice of
the best heads that one can: Choosing of the ^ead.
the best, are of Glass: next, those of earth, glased within and without:
thirdly, those of Tin: fourthly, those of Copper, laid over with Brass*
fifthly, those of Brass laid over with Tin: (but the vessels of Copper and
Brass have these two discommodities, the one, that they make their waters
reddish and half burnt, and the second, that in Copper and Brass Heads of
Bra^^^ and Copper.
there is a venomous quality more than in any other metal) ^ixtly, those of
iron, especially when a man would distill any thing that is hard to be
distilled, and which must be applied outwardly* and not taken inwardly. Such as
are not afraid of the cost, do use vessels of Gold or of Silver: but seeing
all are not of one and equal efficacy, it is best to rest contented with
Glasse-vessels, or earthen ones well leaded, either with Glass, or the fat,
which is called earth of Beauuais, rather than with Lead, or any other
metal: notwithstanding, those of earth are the best: the second, those that
are leaded or glazed, or of thick fat earth: How to order Glasse-stills.
next, those of Tin. Those of Glass must not be of brake metal, but of
Crystal earth well armed: which, seeing they cease not to be brittle, how well
soever they be armed, must be heated by little and little, whether it be in
Mary's bath, or in hot ashes, or in a furnace fire: And in like sort, when your
distillation is ended, to let them cool by little and little. And for as much
as the head is loose from the body, it will be good to set them together with
a hempen cloth which has been dipped in the mortar of Wisdom, which for the
most part is made of the whites of Eggs, Bean flower, and a little Masticke.
The vessel whereinto the water is received, and thereupon called the Receiver,
shall be a Glasse-violl, having a long neck, and the beak or spout of the
head must go into it; and these two, in like manner, may thus be fastened and
closed together with the said mortar of Wisdom, least the water which shall
distill, should euaporate very much: notwithstanding, that we see sometimes
some Receivers of the fashion of Vrinals, which are not made fast unto the
beak of the head at all.

CHAP. LXII.
What manner of Furnaces must be prepared for the distilling of Waters.
THe fashion of the furnaces for the distilling of waters is diverse, For the
(...) of water^^
as well in respect of the matter to be distilled, as in respect of the vessels
which are used in the distilling thereof. As concerning their matter, some are
made of unburned bricks, only dried well in the Sun, because they are better
to be handled than those that are thoroughly burnt, and besides, they may be cut
with a tool, and brought into what fashion one will; and fitted with fa^
earth; othersome are made of plaster only; some of fat earth only; but the
best are made with cement, vvhites of eggs, fat earth, and flocks of wool;
others of beaten bricks, hards, horse-dung, sinews of oxen, and fat earth. But
as for their fashion, it must be answerable unto the vessels that are set
therein; and so some be wholly round, and those are the best and most
profitable; others are four square; others are raised high like steeples;
others after the fashion of vaults; some after the manner of stones: all which
you may find out by the sight of the eye in the patterns set down before, and
from which you may gather more instruction and more certain direction, than by
all the descriptions that we can possibly make. Such furnaces as you may see
with your eyes, must have two bottomes; the one lower, to receive the ashes of
the coals, or whatsoever other matter that the fire is made of; the other
higher, which must contain the burning coals, and must be made after the
fashion of a Gridyron, having bars or rods of iron passing throughout from
the one side to the other, quite overthwart the furnace; or else divided into
many small holes, that so the ashes and small coals of fire may fall through
to the bottom below the more easily, and not stay behind to choke up the fire
that should heat the Still. The vnderfloore may have one or many mouths, for
the more convenient taking away of the ashes which shall be gathered there on a
heap: but as for that above, it must have but one only of a reasonable
bigness to put the coals or wood in at; but in the roof of it, it must have
two or three small holes, to give air and breath unto the fire at such time as
you mind to amend it. Every one of the mouths shall have his stopple. For
want of a furnace or matter for to make one, you may fit and set your Ves^ell,
Cauldron, or Bowl, upon a brand^ith, and kindle your fire underneath.

CHAP. LXIII.
How the matter must be prepared before the waters be distilled.
IT is not enough, that the furnace and instruments for distillation be made
ready in such sort as we have said; for the matter to be distilled must in
like manner be prepared before that it be put into the Still. This preparation
is of three sorts: that is to say, Infusion, Putri^action, and Fermentation.
Infusion is nothing else but a mac^rating or s^eeping of the thing intended to
be distilled i^ some liquor, not only that it may be the more apt and easy to
be distilled, but also to cause and procure greater store of juice to be in it:
(...) else to help them to keep their smell: or else to bestow upon them some
new quality: or to increase their force and virtues; or else for some other
ends, as we will handle them in particular, and only one. It is true, that
this preparation is not necessary for every matter: for some there are that
need not any infusion or steeping, but rather to be dried before they be
distilled, by reason of their too great and excessive moisture: othersome
content themselves with being watered or sprinkled over lightly with some
liquor, as is done in the distilling of dry Roses and Ca^^^^^ll, which are
wont to be sprinkled only with common water. Some spread them all a Summers
night in fair weather upon a Linen cloth to take the dew, and after they be
moist, to distill them. Such as are steeped and infused, lie in the Sun, or
are held over the fire, the space of some half hour, or many hours, a whole
night, a whole day, two days, three days, one or more ^oneths, according to
the nature of the medicine, the diverse intention and purpose of the Physician,
and the present necessity. Sometimes we press and wring out things, which we
infused before the distillation; and making our distillation afterward of the
juice only that we pressed for^h; sometimes again we distill the whole
infusion, that is to say, both the infused ma^ter and the liquor wherein it was
infused. Two things to be considered in (...). The (...).
Wherefore in this preparation, which is made by infusion, you must diligently
observe two things: the time of the infusion, and the liquor in which the
infusion is made. The time of the infusion must be measured according to the
diversity of the matter: for those things which are hard or solid, (...), or
entire and whole, deserve a longer time of infusion than those which ar^
tender, new, or bruised: whereupon it comes to pass, that roots and seeds
r^quire double time to infuse: the leaves and flowers a single and lesser time,
and so consequently of such other matter or things. The liquors wherein
infusions are to be prepared, must not only answer the qualities of such
matter as is to be distilled, in such sort, as that hot matter and things be
infused in hot liquors, and the cold in cold; but likewise the scope and dri^t
intended in the thing distilled, which is the only cause of the using of
variety of liquors in the making of infusions; and these are for the most part
Rain water, Fountain, or Rose Water, and they either raw or distilled, crude
or distilled juices, distilled waters, Aqua vitae, raw or distilled Vinegar,
Wine, What kind of things are infused in wine.
raw or distilled Urine, Whey raw or distilled, man's blood, Swines blood, and
Goats blood distilled or vndistilled. For this respect, things that have small
store of juice, as Sage, Betonie, Balm, and Wormwood, or which are very
fragrant, as all sorts of Spices, all sorts of odoriferous Herbs, all
aromaticall Rindes or Woods, as Cinnamome, would be infused in Wine, to the
begetting of some reasonable store of juice in them which have but a little,
and to keep the aromaticall fragrantnesse in those which smell sweet, which
might otherwise euaporate and spend, through the heat of the fire, their best
and most precious parts, they being of so thin and subtle a substance. It is
true, that the best and surest course is not to infuse Spices, or aromaticall
things, neither in Wine, nor in Aqua vitae, but rather in common water: because
in distilling of them, as proof will make trial, the vapors will rise too
soon, and leave behind them the virtues of the aromaticall things, whereas
water will not go up before it have them with it. What mat^er or things are to
be infused (...) vinegar, or ^ine.
Such matter and things as are hard and mettallous, as Pearls, Coral, shells
of eggs, Crystal, Emeralds, (...), and other such, are infused commonly in
raw or distilled vinegar, or else in urine distilled or vndistilled: but such
waters are not to be taken inwardly, but only to be applied outwardly. In like
manner, when it is intended that a water shall have an opening quality, and
pierce deep or swiftly, the matter thereof may be infused in raw and crude, or
in distilled vinegar: as for example, the waters distilled against the stone,
or gravel, or to take away the great obstructions of the liver, spleen, and
matrix. When you desire that the water should retain and keep in good sort
the virtues of the matter whereof it is distilled, it may, for the better
infusing of it, be distilled in his own juice, or in some juice obtaining the
like virtue. Things are likewise sometimes infused in blood, either of Men,
Swine, or Goats, Infusions in the blood of Man, a Swine, or mal^ Goat.
for the increase and strengthening of their virtues; as the water used to be
distilled for to break the s^one, whether it be in the reins, or in the
bladder, may first have received an infusion made in the blood of Goats. As
much, in like sort, is to be thought of the Whey of Goats milk, wherein things
are wont to be infused to draw waters off, which are to serve in the cleansing
of ulcers of the reins or bladder.

Generally, Infusion must he^p or increas^ the force of the things distilled*
regard must be had, that all infusions be made in such liquor as will
strengthen and increase the virtue and force of the things intended to be
distilled: as also, that such matter, before it be set to infuse, be shred,
stamped small, or brui^ed, putting into it sometime the twelfth part of salt,
as unto those that are too moist, The addition of salt.
as flesh, blood of men, or other beasts, as well to keep them from
corrupting, as also to help forward the separation of the humor that must be
distilled.

Sometimes the things which are to be distilled, are suffered to putri^ie, and
then afterward they are distilled: yea, and sometimes the very putrefaction
Putrefaction.
it self is the way and whole work for the distilling of such things, as we
will declare hereafter.

Fermentation is accomplished and performed upon the matter of infusion alone,
or the whole infusion together, in the heat of the Sun in the Dogge-daies, or
else in some Furnace, or Horse-dung: it requires many days continuance, as
four, or more: and by how much this fermenting and preparing of the thing is
the more substantially performed, by so much the greater quantity of water
will be distilled and drawn ou^.

CHAP. LXIIII.
General precepts about the distilling of Waters.
AFter that the matter is in this manner and fashion prepared (as we have said)
there remains nothing more to be done, but the putting of it into the
Stillitorie: and herein you must carry your self very wisely and discreetly,
in observing certain general precepts for the ordering and directing of the
whole work unto a good and perfect end.

First provide, Furnaces must be set in a place where they may not do^ or take
hurt.
that your furnaces be set in such a place, as where they may not endanger the
setting of your whole house on fire; as that they also may not be subject to
have any thing to fall upon them.

If you distill Quicksiluer, or any other such thing which has a venomous
malignitie, When we are to stand far off from the (...), and not to come
near them.
come not near unto your Stills all the time of the distilling of such matter:
for the smoke or fume which at that time they breath out, does draw upon a man
the Palsy, exulceration of the Lungs, Lethargy, or oftentimes sudden death:
as you may see by experience in such as are Plummers, and employed in melting
of Metals.

If you distill in Glass vessels, The choosing of Glasse-stilles.
you must make choice of such as are well baked and seasoned, having no bubbles
or knots, but equal on every side, and smooth, thick, and proved before hand.

The coals must be thoroughly kindled and half burned before you put any thing
into the Still, that so the fume, or yet any other noisome quality of the
coals, may not remain to breath upon it: or, at the least, put some few ashes
or small quantity of sand betwixt the Still and the furnace, that so the
coals may not infect the water with the smoke. Likewise the fire is not to be
made with wood half rotten, or that stinketh, or with charcoale burned and
made in a pit, or of coal drawn and dug out of the earth, whether they be
of stone, or earth, for fear the stilling vessels and water should be infected
and marred with the filthy and stinking vapor thereof.

The fire must not be hasty or headlong at the beginning, A gentle fire at the
first.
as well for the safety of the vessels, which might thereby be broken, taking
too sudden a heat, as also to the end, that the matter distilled may become
acquainted with the fire by little and little, and that so far, as until the
fire be come to the third degree, if need do so require.

You must not put into your Stills or Limbecke too great a quantity of matter,
What quantity of matter is best to be put in the still.
for so it might run over, and be cast forth again; and furthermore, that
underneath would be parched and dried away, and that above would remain as it
was put in: but it is rather the safer course to shift them often, and so by this
means you shall have greater store and plenty of water.

The water of Mary's bath may not be hoter than the finger may endure to slay
in it: howbeit, oftentimes there come things to be distilled in the double
vessel, for the distilling whereof, if it should come to pass that the heat
of Mary's bath should not be vehement enough, then mix therewith some small
sand, to increase the heat of the water.

If the glass still happen to crack being set upon the fire, you shall let
the spirits from euaporating, if you dip diverse linen clothes in the whites
of eggs well beaten, and apply them upon the crack of the glass hot one
after another: in such sort that so soon as one shall be dried like a crust,
another be ready by and by to put upon it, and so to continue.

If you distill your waters in the heat of sand (as many do and that very
often) or of ashes, To distill in the heat of sand.
or the filings or scales of iron made in powder, the body of the still must
be armed (whether it be of glass or brass, or any other matter) with very
fine ashes that have been sifted, or with sand, or with the filings of iron
finely powdered, in such sort as that the ashes may be higher about the glass
than the matter is within by a hal^e foot good. The ashes shall be placed in
the upper part of the furnace, or in a place of hold made upon the furnace, and
heated with a coal fire which shall be below in the bottom of the glass. The
waters so distilled endure much longer than those which are distilled in Mary's
bath: but in all other points they resemble and are like one unto another.

If you have not the leisure to make your distillation in a still, To make a
spe^dier distillation than o^di^arie.
and that yet you would gladly distill some certain juice or liquor: then
cause your juice to boil in some vessel, and over this vessel set a glass:
in this glass the vapor will turn into water: Vinegar distilled in that sort.
by this means vinegar is turned easily into a water which is very
profitable for the spots and stayne of the eye, especially if before the
distilling of it you cause some few slips of Rhue to be boiled in white vinegar.

Hot things, To distill one water many times.
that they may prove effectual, would be distilled three or four times,
putting and adding unto every time new matter, or else to rectify them by
themselves: but as for cold things, such as the rose is, once distilling is
sufficient: for by this means it holds still his cooling quality in better
sort, seeing the force of the fire begets heat and sharpness in things.

When you would distill one water three or four times, The heat required to
the distilling of one thing o^^.
you must at every distillation diminish the heat of your fire half a degree,
and afterward a whole degree, and so consequently until in the end you come
back unto the first degree spoken of before, and called such a heat as is but
vvarme, the reason is, because that the matter becoming more and more subtle
at every distillation, craves not so great a heat at the end as it did at the
beginning when it is in his gros^est state and condition. But it is contrarily
practiced in the extracting of quintessences out of any thing: The extracting
of quintessences
(...) then the heat is to be increased and augmented more and more.

In all manner of distillations of waters, To separate the phlegm in distilled
liquors.
you must carefully see to the seperating of the phlegm, The time of the phlegm
his coming forth.
that is to say, the gros^est, thickest, and most waterie part of the humor
distilled: and for the doing hereof you must carefully consider of the matter
which you distill: because the ^legme comes forth sometime first, sometimes
the last in the distillation, as in the distilling of Aqua-vitae is stays the
last, notwithstanding that it be distilled diverse times: in the distilling of
the most part of other things it comes forth first, as in vinegar, honey, and
such things: and the thing is discerned by tasting of the first and last
distilled waters. And if it happen that the phlegm be not severed in this sort,
as indeed it is not in some such, as with which it is mixed: then the next
course is to set such waters in the Sun certain days in vessels covered
with linen clothes, or parchment pricked full of small holes, that so the
excrementous part by such means may be consumed and wasted: or if the Sun
fail, as in Winter time, then you must set your vessel containing your
distilled waters in other vessels full of water, and cause them to boil to
the consumption of the third part.

The distillation is to be judged to be in good state and case, When the still
is in good temper, and stilleth not too fast nor too slow.
if betwixt the fall of every drop, you can account to the number of twelve:
and hence also is the judging of the force and quantity of the fire to be
learned and fetched.

If any man desire that waters should have some smell, To give a good smell or
taste to distilled waters.
taste, or other quality of something, as of honey, cinnamome, camphire,
musk, or other like sweet smelling thing, (whether it be to give such smell to
the thing that has none at all, or unto something that has a bad and
unpleasant smell, as we will speak of by and by in the water distilled of man's
dung) it will be good to annoint and besmeare the head of the still with
these things, or else to tie up the same in some little knot of linen cloth,
and hang them at the very point of the spout or pipe, to the end that the
water distilling through this matter, may retain that smell or other quality
intended.

And whereas distilled waters by force of the fire are evermore seen to
retain some impressions and printes of the heat, it will be good presently
after they be distilled, to let them stand some time uncovered in the vessels
wherein you mean to keep them, having yet therewithal regard, that neither
their small nor any part of their force do waste or spend: and therefore to
take the fittest course, it will be best to set your vessel close and fast
stopped in some cold place in moist sand to diminish and take away the great heat
of the same. Notwithstanding you must mark and know that cold waters, which
shall be distilled in Maries-bath, will have no great need to be so uncovered,
but that they rather must be set in the Sun in a glass vessel not
altogether full: or else that they with their vessel be set over head and
ears in hot sand for the space of forty days, to the end that their phlegm
and thickest humor may be consumed.

If your distilled waters become troubled, Troubled waters.
you shall restore them to their clearenesse by putting thereinto some one or
two drops of Vinegar for every pint of water.

CHAP. LXV.
Of the particular manner of distilling of Herbs, Rindes, Flowers, and Roots.
DIstilled waters are of diverse sorts and virtues: some are physical or
medicinable, as the water of roses, sage, marierom, and such like. Others are
nourishing, as restoratiues, and many both medicinable and nourishing, as
nourishing restoratiues: whereinto are put medicinable things. Others are
purgative, as the water or liquor of rhubarbe if it were new and green. Others
serve to grace the face and hands, and to make beautiful. Others for to
gratify the nose by yielding a sweet smell, as those which are drawn out of
spices and sweet smelling simples, used also to vvash the hands, face, and
whole body, and again all these waters are either simple or compound: but we
will first speak of the simple medicinable ones.

Wormwood Water of wormwood.
must be distilled in Maries-bath to draw out his water in such sort as that
it may express by smell and taste from whence it came: and for the better
doing of it, you must see that you distill it not very new, but somewhat
dried, and afterward infusing it a little in wine to distill it in Maries-bath,
or in hat^ ashes: Mugwort, Agrimonie, Sorrel, and such other like plants, are
thus distilled also, but with observation had of the general things specified
before. Thus the water of Winter cherries Water of Winter Cherrie^.
is distilled, serving against the stone and gravel as well of the reins a^
bladder.

The uttermost pilling of common vvalnuts, Water of common Walnuts.
whether it shale willingly or no, may be distilled in the month of
September: and the water drawn from them, drunk in small quantity with a
third part of Vinegar, is a certain remedy against the plague, if before
drinking of it you cause the party to be let blood: it is singular good also
to make gargarismes of, for the ulcers of the mouth: it is good also to foment
goutie places withal, and good to color the hair black. Water distilled of
the leaves of the Walnut-tree Water of Walnut* tree leaves.
in the end of the month of May is singular for to dry and cicatrize ulcers,
if they be washed evening and morning with a linen cloth moistened therein.

To distill strawberries, Water of strawberries against ve^ime spots. To
procure terms.
you must let them putrify in a glass vessel, putting thereto a little salt
or sugar, and then afterward to extract and draw out their water, which is
very sovereign against venime: as also to take away spots, to provoke the
terms, and dry up weeping eyes: To dry the weeping eye.
it will perform all these virtues in admirable manner, if there be mingled
with it a little Aqua-vitae.

The inward rind of the ash-tree being distilled, The water of Ash-tree.
does yield a singular water against the plague, if it be drunk in equal
quantity with aqua-vite, as three (...) of either, especially if the same
drink in the same quantity be drunk again within three hours after: it is
good also being dropped into the ears for the noise in them.

The stones of black cherries, Water of cherrie stones and kernells.
being broken, or the kernells alone distilled, make a water which does quite
take away the fit of the Falling Sickness in young children, presently after
that there has been put into their mouth about an ounce. The falling (...).


The distilled water of new filberds, Water of filberds.
drunk the weight of two drams, is a present remedy against the collicke and
gripings of the belly, a thing that will not fail^, having been proved and
tried.

The water which is distilled of the bark of Danewort, Water of danewort.
or Elder-tree, being oftentimes drunk, does euacuate and draw the water out
of such as have the dropsy.

The water of betonie: The water of Betonie.
You must stamp the leaves of betonie and infuse them a certain time in Wine,
and after distill them. The water of balm and sage is distilled in like
manner. The water of betonie is good for the diseases of the head, reins, and
bladder. The water of balm rejoices men, keeps away the fits of the
Apoplexy, and Falling Sickness, it causes a good memory, takes away the
pain of the teeth, breaks the stone, heals the dropsy, preserves from
venime such as have swallowed any spider, if it be drunk presently after.

The water of Gentian: The water of Gent^an.
Take four pound of the new roots, or rather of the dried roots of Gentian:
chop them small, infuse them in wine, or besprinkle them only, then afterward
distill them. This water is singular against the plague, The plague.
all sorts of venime, the stone as well of the reins as of the bladder, and to
heal inward Apostumes and ulcers.

The water of pellitorie: The water of pelli^^ri^.
Take the roots of pellitorie new or old, cut them small, and infuse them in
very good Wine: the water is good for no appease the ach of the teeth, Pain
of the Teeth.
to strengthen them, and keep them clean, if the mouth be washed therewith in
the morning, or else when it seems good to do it.

To make water of eyebright: Water of eyebright.
Take the leaves and flowers of eyebright, distill them: the water thereof
does clear the sight.

The water of Nicotian The water of Nicotian.
is distilled as the other going before: but of this we have largely
discoursed in the second Book, and have showed that it has marvelous
effects, against the Noli me tangere, cankers, ringwormes, scabs, shortness of
breath, and the dropsy.

In this sort also you must distill Paul's betonie: The water of Paul's betonie.
the water whereof is singular to heal wounds, scabbes, and other diseases of
the skin. The use of this water is ve^^e excellent for the leprosy,
Leprosy. Scabs.
pestilent feauers, obstructions of the liver and spleen, and exulceration of
the lungs. In this sort also is Mouse-^are distilled, whereof we ^^ue spoken
in his place in the second Book.

The water of hyssope The water of Hyssope.
must be distilled upon hot ashes: it is excellent for the pain of the teeth,
to provoke vvomens terms, for the cough, and other diseases of the lungs.

The water of turnips: The water of turnips.
Take whole turnips with their skins and all, or else the skin alone, you shall
distill a water (especially of the pilling or skin) which will be profi^able to
provoke urine and sweat^ng.

Water of lymons Water of Lymons.
or the juice of them does help very profitably in the stone of (...) reins.

The water of fennel: The water of Fenell.
Take the roots and leaves and distill them, or else boil them in water,
afterward put them all hot into a tin or copper platter, and cover the (...)
with another platter: the liquor which shall be upon the uppermost platter
shall be kept in a viole, to put a drop or two thereof into the corner of the
eye, for the ^iseases of the eye.

Water of parsley of the garden: Stamp in a mortar the leaves of parsely, The
water of parsley.
then di^till them: it cleanses the stomach, and comfort the reins.

After the same manner are distilled the waters of smallage, Water of smallage,
basile, (...), buglosse, etc.
basil, buglosse, mi^es, cammomile, marigolds, Carduus benedictus, clarie,
succorie, capillus Vene^i^, che^uile, end^ue, aller, fumitorie, broom, Iuie,
horse-taile, lauander, marierom, mehlo^, mallows, holihocke, water lillies,
nigella, organie, pionie, poppie, pellitorie of the wall, burnet, plantaine,
purcelaine, penniryall, rue, rosemarie, madder, sage, sauorie, scabious,
scolopendrium, nightshade, houseleeke, willow leaves, groundswell, thyme, white
mulleine, tansey, valerian, veruaine, of the flowers and leaue^ of the stinging
nettle, as well as of the dead nettle, and of many other plants, observing the
general precepts, which we have set down before.

This is the manner of distilling cinnamome: Take a pound of fine cinnamome,
The water of cinnamome.
break it lightly, and infuse it a certain time in the distilled water of
Roses the quant^tie of four pounds, and of very good white wine half a
pound, after put it all into a glasse-still to be distilled either upon hot
ashes, or else in Maries-bath: such water is forcible against all cold
diseases, A bad stomach (...).
especially of the stomach, spleen, liver, brain, matrix, sinews, faintings
and swo^nings, to provoke the terms of women, and retained urine, Venime.
to stay vomits, to repress the malignitie of all sorts of cold venime, and
for the delivery of wo^en that are in travel of child.

Rose Water Rosewater.
is distilled either of new roses or of dry roses, and they are either white
or carnation. The fashion and manner of distilling of it is diverse: for
sometimes it is distilled by defluction tending downward, which is called in
Latin Distillatio per descensum, according to the matter which we shall
declare in the seventy first Chapter hereafter following. Sometimes it is
distilled by insolation, as we will likewise show in the same place: sometimes,
and that oftest, as also best, in Maries-bath, and before the distilling of it,
if the roses be dry, it is good to moisten them with the vapor of some
boiling water, or some Roses. The water which is distilled of red Roses, is
more cordial and corroboratiue, as that which is made of white roses is more
cooling. Then to distill good rose water, you must infuse roses in distilled
Rose Water, or else in the juice drawn from them, and that by the space of two
or three days, your vessel being well lured and stopped, and afterward put them
in a glasse-still, covered with his head, and they both well luted and fitted
one to another, and finally, set them thus conjoined in your vessel of
Maries-bath.

Water of Orange-flowers, Water of orange flowers.
called water of Naffe, being distilled by a bell, is good to procure vomit, as
also to make a good smell.

The water of vvild Apples, Water of wild apples.
and of Oak Apples unripe, of chestnuts, and of veriuice that is half ripe, is
good against the red pimples, and hard knobbes in the face.

The waters of flowers (as of Rosemarie, The water of elder, rosemary, and
marigolds.
which is good to rejoice the (...) of Elder-Tree, which keeps the face
clear from Sunne-burning: of Marigolds, which comfort the eyes: and such
others) are distilled after the manner of Rose Water.

CHAP. LXVI.
Of the manner of distilling liquors.
WE have heretofore declared that the singular and rare efficacy and (...) of
things distilled, have in such sort ravished and carried away the spirits and
studies of men, as that there is scarce any thing to be found which has any
good property and special quality in it, but it (...) been brought under
the yoke of distillation. What is meant by liquor in th^^ place.
But in this place I call liquor all th^^ which has a liquid consistence,
whether it be juice, humor, excrement, or any such like floting thing, as
wine, vinegar, honey, urine, juice of herbs of fruit^^* and you cannot but
think that the juice of herbs or fruits being distilled does afford a far
better water, than that which is distilled of herbs, yea or of fruits either.
We will begin therefore with distilled wine.

Aqua-vitae is thus distilled: (notwithstanding that all manner of Wine is fit
to make Aqua-vitae of, Aqua-vitae.
so that it be not sour, spent, or otherwise tainted, yet indeed the
strongest and noblest Claret wine is the best, whether pallet and inclining
to white, or high colored and inclining to red:) Take then of claret wine a
certain quantity, according to the bignes^e of the vessel wherein you
distill it (which is called the bladder, as we have declared before, namely, in
that it is fashioned like unto a straight gourd) even so much as may fill it
within one third part of the top, The bladder still to distill Aqua vitae in.
that so the vapors may have space to rise, then set the head upon it, having
a long (...), and this must be well closed with the mortar of wisdom (being
the same which we have before described) to the end that no vapor may pass
out there by: and thus cause it to distill with the heat of hot, but not
boiling water: or else at a reasonable heat in ashes, or in small sand,
increasing the fire continually by little and little, and yet taking heed that
the wine do not boil: and to the end that you may have excellent good
Aqua-vitae, you may distill it over four or five times: for by how much the
o^ter it is distilled, Aqua vitae often distilled.
by ^o much the better will it be, as we have said already. For the first
distillation, it shall be enough to draw the tenth part, that is to say, of ten
pintes of wine one pint of Aqua-vitae, more or less: for the second half of
that which you shall have put in, that is to say, half a pint: for the third
likewise, the half or a little less, which should be a quarter of a pint:
in such sort as that the ofter it is distilled ^ou must have less in
quantity, but more in value and worth; and therefore in the beginning you must
either take a great quantity of Wine, or else have many vessels. It is true,
that if the distillation be well made, the fourth will yield the like quantity
of water to that it received, and there will be no loss in it: and herewith
likewise it is to be wished, that every man would be contented without going
over it any more: because so many repetitions and redistillations is a matter
of great labor and cost. In the meanetime this must be remembered, namely, to
lessen the fire at every distillation half a degree, and afterward a whole
degree, that so in fine you may come to the first degree called bl^^d vvarme.
And truly by mine advise, the first distillation should be in the fire of
ashes, and the other in Maries-bath. This repeating and going over with it by
distillation after distillation shall be to take from it his phlegm, that is to
say, his grossest and most waterie humor, which rests in the bottom, and is
accustomed to come forth last, after that it is well digested by being often
distilled. Finally, Signs sh^wing that the Aqua-vitae is sufficiently
distilled.
it may be gathered that the Aqua-vitae is sufficiently distilled by these
signs; If there come back the like quantity of water; if being set on fire,
it consume and waste all away, not leaving any sign of moisture behind it in
the bottom of the vessel: if a linen cloth that has been dipped in the
Aqua-vitae being set on fire do not burn any jote at all; if a drop of oil
being put into it, go to the bottom; if a drop of Aqua-vitae being powered in
the ball of your hand, do wast away and vanish very speedily; if yellow amber
being set on fire do burn in the Aqua-vitae; and likewise if ca^^phire being
put into Aqua-vitae be dissolved of it. You must also note, that Aqua-vitae is
sometimes distilled of lees of very good Wine, Aqua-vitae is distilled either
of wine, or wine (...) or beer.
being neither sower, nor spent, nor otherwise tainted; and such Aqua-vitae
sometime is not inferior but superior in goodness unto that which was
distilled of the Wine it self: Again, if it be often distilled over, it
becomes more hot and dry* then that which is made of the very Wine: but yet
indeed that which is made of Wine is more pleasant unto the taste, and of a
more delightsome smell: Aqua-vitae is also sometimes distilled of beer, but
that is not so good as the other of Wine. The vessels for the distilling of
Aqua-vitae are diverse, that is to say a good still, Vessels for the distilling
of Aqua-vitae.
sitting in ashes or sand, or a resort in Maries-bath, or the bladder:
Aqua-vitae may also be distilled in a caldron or pot of Copper or Brass, made
in manner of a Beefe-pot, covered with a cover, and having a straight nose
coming out of it, and rising up on high, and turned downward again with a
direct angle, and so passing through a bucket full of cold water. After that
the Aqua-vitae is distilled, you must set it out into the Sun a certain time
to make it yet more and more subtle. After this (...) you may distill all
juices and liquors, as man's blood, urine, vinegar, the deaw, milk, whites and
yolks of eggs, Virtues of Aqua-vitae.
man's dung, or beasts dung. The virtues of Aqua-vitae are infinite: It keeps
off the fits of the Apoplexy and Falling sickness, in such sort, as that they
which are subject unto that disease in the time of Winter, must every morning
take a spoonefull of Aqua-vitae sugared, and eat a little bit of white bread: it
drives away venime: keeps Wines from spending themselves, from putrefying,
and from growing thick and troubled: it cures speedily all the cold diseases
of the sinews, muscles, and starued members, if they be fomented therewithal:
it kills worms, and assuageth the pain of the teeth, etc. See more in our
Book of secret remedies.

For the distilling of Vinegar, Distilled vinegar.
you must understand, that there is some difference betwixt the distilling of
Aqua vitae and Vinegar: for seeing that Wine is of a vaporous and fiery
substance, The difference betwixt Aqua-vitae and Vinegar in their manner of
distilling.
the chiefest and principallest parts in it do run at the first
distillation, that is to say, with the water that first comes forth:
insomuch, as that that which remains and stays behind in the vessel,
tastes no better than common water, having in it no force or virtue. On the
contrary, the first that distilleth of Vinegar tastes nothing at all, save
only that it shows it self somewhat more in his earthie parts by the
alteration of his quality (for Vinegar is no other thing but a corrupted Wine,
made eager by putrefaction:) for indeed his true, na^^rall, and proper quality
of eagerness and sowrenesse, as also the force and strength thereof, stays
behind with that in the vessel, till after the first water be past. And by
this it appears, that that which remains in the Wine after the first
distillation of it, should be called phlegm, as that should also which comes
out first in the distillation of Vinegar, be called phlegm of Vinegar.
Wherefore, to have good distilled Vinegar, after you have put it in like
quantity (as we have said of Wine for to make Aqua-vitae) into the
Stillitorie, you must let the phlegm (that is to say, the watrie humor)
distill, and set it aside in some vessel by it self: afterward, when the
Vinegar shall be consumed unto the third or fourth part, and that it shall
relish in tasting of the distilling drops, that the eager parts of the Vinegar
begin to come, it will be good to set that aside to serve for infusions: and
then afterward to increase the heat of your fire a little, and so continue your
distillation, until such time as the water begin to look red, and to have the
consistence of Honey or of Pitch, and then you may be bold to set it aside for
your special use, not in medicine, but otherwise in all things concerning
metals and corrosiues: for this water making the third alteration in
distillation, What vessels Vinegar would be distilled in.
tastes of ad^stion, and is called the sanguine part of Vinegar. Vinegar would
be distilled in the same vessel that Rose Water is distilled in, especially in
ashes or hot sand, rather than in Mary's bath. In like manner, and after the
same sort, you shall distill Vinegar of Roses, of Elders, of Cloves, and other
things. Distilled Vinegar is good to dissolve hard and mettallous things, The
virtues of distilled Vinegar.
as Pearls, Coral, Egge-shells, Crystal, and Emeralds: notwithstanding, Gold
and Silver cannot be dissolved by it. This is the cause, that when Alchymists
would distill any metal or stones, to draw out their oil, they use first to
dissolve their matter in Vinegar or Urine distilled.

Salted water or sea water is made sweet by this means. Fill a pot of salt
water, Salted water, or Sea water.
let it boil by the fireside, and afterward distill with a stillitorie, as
you do ros^-water, and the salt will stay in the bottom. And this is also the
way to try what mettalls are mixed with mineral waters.

The manner of distilling of honey is such. When the honey is once well
purified, Honey distilled.
put it in small quantity into a stillitorie (for in a great quantity it
would swell over, after that it should once feel the heat) distill it in
Maries-bath with a gentle and warm heat: the water that comes first forth,
is the phlegm, which must be kept by it self for to color and make long the
beard and hair. Afterward increasing the heat a little, To color the hair.
there will come forth a water of a yellow, and as it were a golden color,
which you may keep in another vessel, seeing it is good to cleanse vvounds
both shallow and deep ones: your distillation continuing, there will come
another water high colored and more red than the former, and then if you do
well, you shall change the heat of the water into the heat of the ashes or
sand, that is to say, that you should remove your Still, and set in ashes or
sand even almost up to the very mouth, and that there be not above three
inches in breadth betwixt the fire and your Still, continuing to increase your
fire, and to make it bigger than it was before, and by this means there will
come forth a water more clam^ie than the former, and may be called the oil of
honey. After this manner you may distill turpentine, Turpentine distilled.
and such other thick and clammie liquors. Indeed to distill such thick
liquors, were better to be done by a re^ort, rather than in Maries-bath, as we
will manifest when we come to speak of the distillation of oils.

For to distill the blood of a male Goat: The blood of a male Goat distilled.
Take the blood of a young male goat being well fed, but not that blood which
shall come forth first, nor that which shall be last, but that which shall come
forth in the midst: let it stand and settle for some time, and then cast out
the water that shall swim above: after with a tenth or twelfth part of salt,
stir it well a long time, and work them together very thoroughly; this done,
put it up into a vessel well stopped and luted, and bury it in a dunghill of
horse-dung for the space of forty days: afterward distill it oftentimes over,
pouring it still again and again upon the dros^e or bottom of the
distillation staying behind. After you have thus distilled it four or five
times, you shall have a maruailous water, and yet it will be better if it be
set in horse-dung forty days more after that it is distilled. This water is
singular for the breaking of the stone. The stone.


The blood of a young man is distilled Man's blood distilled.
in the same sort, but the man must be of a good complexion, and sound body,
of the age of twenty years or thereabouts, of a well fed and fleshie body:
and it serves in steed of restoratiues unto those which are in a consumption:
it is good likewise against rheumes and distillations falling upon the joints,
if the diseased places be fomented therewithal. Howbeit I do not greatly
approve the distilling of man's blood for any such end, seeing it is an
unworthy and heinous thing, and not beseeming Christians, and a thing likewise
which in the midst of so many other helps may easily be spared. See more
amongst our secret medicines.

The blood of a Drake is in like manner distilled against poison: and after the
same sort may the blood of a Calfe, The blood of a Drake distilled.
Badger, or Hare be distilled.

You may distill milk Distilled milk.
also alter the same manner that Aqua-vitae is distilled. It is reported, that
in Tartarie the water of distilled milk The virtues of distilled milk.
makes men drunk: such milk therefore must be good and fat, such as is the
milk of a heyfer. Some physicians hold that distilled milk is good against
the jaundise, as also against a quartaine ague, if it be distilled with the
like quantity of Wine.

The milk of the she goats is often distilled, The milk of a she Goat distilled.
to serve for the cleansing of the ulcers of thereines and bladder, whereunto
the milk it self would serve a great deal better, if they be fed for the
most part with burnet.

Man's dung is distilled in a glass stillitorie in such manner as Aqua-vitae
The distilling of man's dung.
is distilled: the water that it distilleth (especially if it be of the dung
of a red or freckeled man) is sovereign good to heal and cicatrize deep,
Deep ulcers.
hollow, old, and rebellious ulcers, and to take away the spots of the eyes.
Taken also in manner of a drink, it delivers from the Falling Sickness: and
in like sort if the head be rubbed therewithal, it delivers also from the
stone of the reins and bladder, and from the dropsy, and does them very much
good that are bitten of a mad dog, or of other venomous beasts. The biting of
^ mad dog.
Notwithstanding whereas such water simply and without any manner of mixture
distilled, does retain the smell of the said excrement, it will be good, to
the end to give it some good taste, To give a good smell to the distilled water.
to clap to the end of the nose of the Still some nodule or little knot of
linen cloth containing musk in it; or else to anoint the head within with
the said musk or some other such like thing that is of a good savor. And thus
may the dung of kine or pigeons be distilled; the distilled water whereof is
good to break the stone.

CHAP. LXVII.
Of the manner of distilling of living creatures, or their parts.
TO distill the body of any beast, To distill living things.
you must first strangle it, that so it may not shed any blood, and after take
away all his fat (if he have any) and the entrails: then chop the flesh small,
and cast upon it the tenth o^ twelfth part of salt, and so distill it in
Maries-bath, or upon hot ashes after the manner of Roses. Thus the young and
tender storke which did never fly is distilled; but he must first be bowelled
and stuffed with an ounce of camphire, The water of a storke.
and a dram of amber: the water that comes thereof is excellent to make
liniments and fomentations in palsies and con^^lsions. After the same sort is
the pie, frog, snailes, ants, livers, and lungs of calves, of a Fox, and other
such like beasts distilled: howbeit, without any such long and teadious
preparation they may be distilled by and by after the manner of other waters,
as we will forthwith declare in the distillatio^ of restoratiues.

The water of Swallows: Take Swallows the weight of six ounces, Water of
Swallows.
and cast^reum an ounce, let them infu^e a whole night in water, and put into
a Limbecke, be distilled: This water is singular to preserve one from the
Falling Sickness, if it be taken but once a month to the quantity of two
spoonefulls, and that in a morning fasting.

The flesh of beasts is distilled on this manner: Cut and chop the flesh small,
The Water of flesh.
incorporate and stamp it with a tenth part of common salt: after put it in a
(...) (like unto a gourd) well stopped, that so you may bury it in the earth,
set and (...) passed round about with vnquencht lime, and dung of horses half
rotten, to be digested in the same for the space of a month, or thereabout,
during which time you shall water the said vnquencht lime and dung often with
vvarme water to stir up their heat, and you shall renew the lime and dung
three or four times every weeke^ for you must think that for want of heat,
the flesh might putrify in steed of digesting. And after they have been
sufficiently digested (which you may know by seeing the grosser parts
separated from the more thin and subtle) the vessel shall be taken out of
the dunghill, and the head of a Still set thereupon, the nose or (...) being
well luted, and so it shall be distilled in Maries-bath diverse times over,
pouring the distilled water again upon the residence or dross remaining in
the bottom, so often as you redistill it. And after the fifth distillation, you
shall set aside the water to keep, if so be you had not rather circulate it,
to give it the nature as it were of a quintessence.

As well the vvhites as the yolks of eggs are distilled after the manner
abo^^sayd: Water of Eggs.
but they must not be digested in the dung above five or six days at the most.

The waters thus distilled are more than restoratiues, having the virtue to
increase the substance of the body and members, as natural flesh and
nourishment does.

CHAP. LXVIII.
Of the manner of distilling of restoratiues.
REstoratiues Restoratiues.
are prepared after diverse sorts, notwithstanding the most usual and best is
thus: Take the flesh of a Veale, Kid, or Weather, cut and chopped as small as
possibly may be: or else take musculous flesh, which is called the vvhites of
capons, pullets, fat and well fleshed hens, after they have been well hunted
and tired, cut likewise and chopped small: put unto this flesh, calves feet,
pieces of gold, or rather the thin beaten leaves of gold: put all in a glass
Still well luted with mortar made of flower, whites of eggs, and a little
masticke: into this Still, you shall cast (for the giving of some grace unto
the distillation, and somewhat to mitigate the heat which it might get by the
fire) half a handful of clean barley, a handful of dry or new red Roses,
which have been infused in the juice of pomegranates or rose water, and a
little cinnamome: place them all in the Still, as it were after the manner of
little beds, and strew thereupon the powder of the electuarie of cold
Diamargariton, or of precious stones, and a little coriander prepared and
finely powdered to discuss and waste all windy matter. If you would make your
restoratiues medicinable, you may add thereunto things concerning the disease
that presses, as roots and herbs respecting the head, in the diseases of
the head, as betonie, penniryall, staechados, organie, sage, and others such
like: for the diseases of the reins, the roots and plants that are good to
break the stone: for the Falling Sickness, the seed of pionie, and misletoe
of the oak: for the quartaine ague, polopody, scolopendrum, and the roots of
Tamariske: for the French disease, the roots of gentian, enula campana, and
the wood guajacum, and so of other things: yet it seems unto me that it were
better that the cordial powders (...) not be mingled among the rest, for fear
that their force, which is thin, subtle, and very fragrant, should euaporate
through the heat of the fire, and that it would be far better to strain the
distillation through a linen cloth that is very clean, and which should have
the cordial powders in the bottom of it: there may likewise be added a
quantity of Treacle, with some conserues, as occasion shall be ministered: the
matter thus disposed of, it shall be distilled in a stillitorie of glass well
luted (as we have said) and in Maries-bath; or else in ashes, grauel, or hot
sand: for by this means the distillation will taste least of the fire. It
will be good before the flesh be put into the still to be distilled, that they
should have boiled a boil or two in a new earthen pot, to take from it the
gross excrements hanging about the same. Again, it must be remembered, that if
there be any gold put into the distillation, that it will be better to put in
such as is wrought into leaves than gross pieces: because that gross pieces
in respect of their solidenesse consume but a very little, and with much ado.
This is called a divine restoratiue, The divine restoratiue.
and must be given unto the sick party pretty and warm.

Another manner of restoratiue after the Italians fashion: Take a Capon,
Another restoratiue.
or a good Hen, which yet never laid eggs, let her or him be pulled alive,
that so the blood may be stirred and dispersed throughout the body: after you
have pulled them, ^^ke ^out the guts, and afterward stamp bones and all
together in a Mortar, putting thereto as much ^rummes of new bread as there is
stamped flesh, pound all together with a handful of Seabious, either green or
dry, and the weight of a French crown of the leaves of gold, let it all
settle a whole night, after distill it, adding thereto three pound of very
good Wine, such as is of a ripe Grape.

Another manner of restoratiue: Boil a Capon, Another restoratiue.
or some such other flying foul, whole and entire, with Borage, Buglosse,
Scariole, Endive, Lettuces, or other such like herbs, as shall be necessary
in respect of the disease: and when it has boiled till it seem as rotten with
boiling, take the broth or supping, and put it into the stillitorie, afterward
put thereinto also the flesh of partridge, hen, or other such flying foul cut
and chopped small, and add unto these such other matter, as you shall know to be
necessary for the present disease, as conserues of roses and buglosse, damask
raisins, the powders of the electuaries of precious stones, aromaticum rosatum,
and such like things: and finally, distill them after the manner above
specified.

Some there are which will not make any restoratiues but of capons-flesh,
Another restoratiue.
the oldest they can get, such they strangle and pluck by feather and feather,
not using the help of any hot water, then they take out the entrails and
chop them small: adding thereto flowers or conserues of buglosse, burrage,
damask raisins, mundified barley whole, coriander-seed, pearls, powder of the
electuarie diarrhodon, or some other like unto it, and the leaves of gold, they
distill all together, and cause it to be given to sick persons, women in
childbed, and old folk.

To make a restoratiue in shorter time, A restoratiue to be made presently.
and that upon the sudden, with less cost, charges, as also pain and labor:
chop your flesh small after the manner already delivered, put it into a glass
viole or bottle of a sufficient bigness, and in such sort as that all your
pieces of flesh be strung or put upon a double thread and hold one by another,
and the double thread vvhereupon they hang be without the bottle, which must
be well stopped above with a linen or cotton cloth, wet in a mixture made with
whites of eggs and barley ^lower: set this bottle in a caldron full of water,
boiling at a small fire, and there let it stand four hours more or less,
until such time as a good part of the flesh be converted into moisture: See
that the bottle stand in the water up to the neck, and that it touch not the
bottom of the caldron, and vvithall well stayed up on every side, that so it
may not slip or bend more one way than another. When the four hours are
spent, rebate the fire gently, that so the bottle also may cool by little and
little, which if so be that you should take all hot out of the water, it
would break presently. Afterward, unstop the bottle with vvarme water, if
you cannot well otherwise, and then draw forth the string and the flesh
softly, that so the liquor may remain alone: strain the water after the
manner of Hypocras, and aromatize it with Sugar and Ci^^^mome, that so it may
be given to the sick that are waste. You may after this manner make
restoratiues such like as you shall think good, either cheaper or dearer, more
or less pleasant and delicate, and more or less medicinable, as occasion may
require.

CHAP. LXIX.
The manner of distilling compound waters.
WAters are not only distilled of one only or simple plant, liquor, or other
matter: but also of many mixed together; and such waters are called compounded
waters, Compound wate^s.
by reason of the mixture of many things. These compound waters are of three
sorts: some are for physic, Three sorts of common compound waters.
othersome for sweetness, and the other for ^ukes and painting, as ornaments
to the body: we will first and before the rest speak of those which serve
for medicine and physic.

Sage water compounded: Sage water compounded.
Take equal parts of sage and penniryall, stamp them in a mortar, and distill
them. This water takes away the pain of the belly, and stays cold rheumes
if it be drunk with a little quantity of castoreum.

Water of turnips compounded. Turnep water compounded.
Take turnips either garden or wild ones, or both together, the roots of
smallage and parsley, and anise-seed, infuse them all in white wine or vinegar,
and distill the water as good against gravel.

Angelica water: Take equal parts of Angelica, Water of angelica compounded.
as well the roots as the leaves, (but especially the roots) and the flowers
of lauander, infuse them in Wine, and there will distill from them a singular
water against the Falling Sickness, Falling sickness.
if it be taken in the quantity of two or three spoonefulls.

Water of Celandine: Water of celandine compound.
Gather in the beginning of the month of May the leaves of celandine,
veruaine, rue, and fennel, pound them, and draw from every one of them three
ounces of juice, which you shall mix together: put unto them some buds of
roses, of sugar-candie three ounces, of very good Tutia four ounces, and as
much of dragons blood: distill them all in a stillitorie: This water takes
away the redness and spots in the eyes.

Water of the Vine: Water of the vine compound.
Take the water that distilleth from the vine-stockes at such time as they are
cut, which is in the Springtime, distill it with like quantity of honey:
this water heals itchings, heat, and redness of the eyes: the very water
of of the vine alone vndistilled does the like.

Rose Water: Take roses three parts, Rose water compounded.
fennel, and rue, of each one part, shred them small, and mingle them very
well together afterward distill them, and let the distilling water fall into a
vessel wherein is a handful of the foresaid herbs, It preserves the sight.
this water preserves the sight, if the eyes be vvashed therewith in Summer.

Water of Eyebright: Take Celandine, Eybright water compounded.
Fennel, Rue, Eyebright, Veruaine, red Roses, of each half a pound, Cloves
and Long-pepper, of each two ounces: bruise them all, and distill them in a
glass stillitorie. This water is singular good for a vveake sight.

Water of Rosemarie: Take Aqua-vitae distilled of white Wine, Rosemarie water
compounded
the distilled water of rosemarie and sage, of each five pound, of sugar two
pound: in these infuse of the flowers of sage and rosemarie for the space of
eight days, Fistulaes of the eyes.
of each two ounces, strain them, and keep the water to heal the fistulaes
of the eyes.

Water of Treacle: Water of trecle.
Distill in a glass stillitorie Treacle, with a like quantity of Aqua-vitae
and Vinegar: This water is good to touch the ulcers and rawnesse of the mouth
vvithall, Ulcers of the mouth*
especially if there be added unto it a little bole-armoniacke.

Another Treacle water: Treacle water*
Take old Treacle a pound, of the roots of Enula campana, Gentian, Cypers,
Tormentill, of each an ounce, of blessed Thistle half an ounce, of conserues
of Borage, Buglosse, and Rosemarie, of each an ounce, infuse them all together
in three pints of white Wine, a pint and a half of Cesterne water, and two
pints of Rose Water: distill them.

Water of Cloves: Water of cloves.
Take equal parts of Cloves, Ginger, and flowers of Rosemarie, infuse them in
very good Wine the space of eight days: distill the whole: This water
comfort the stomach, Pain of the stomach and belly.
assuageth the pains and vvringings of the belly, kills worms, and makes
fat folk to become lean, or makes fat the lean, if they drink it mixed with
sugar.

Water of Saxifrage: Saxifrage water.
Take of the juice of Saxifrage two pound, of the juice of Pearlewort, The
Stone.
Parsley, Anise, and Clotburre, of each half a pound, of white Vinegar eight
ounces, distill them all: This water drunk in the morning, breaks the stone.

Water of Swallows: Water of Swallows.
Take Swallows and dry them in an oven, make them into powder: mix it with
a little Castoreum, and a little Vinegar, distill it all: this water cures the
Falling Sickness if it be drunk four mornings.

Water of horse-taile: Horse-taile water.
Take horse-taile, plantaine, red roses, Winter-cherrie-berries, roots of
holihockes, and scraped licorice, of each an ounce, of bole-armoniacke half an
ounce, of the seed of gourds and cucumbers, of each three drams, of the seed
of white poppie, six drams, of the seed of quinces half an ounce: Infuse them
all in vvhay made of goats milk the space of two days, afterward distill the
water: which will serve for the ulcers of the reins and bladder, Ulcers of
the reins.
if there be four ounces of ^^taken vvarme in the morning.

Water of corneflag: Corneflag water.
Take equal parts of corneflag, hyssope, and southernewood, stamp them
thoroughly, and leave them so a certain time, afterward distill them: this
water provoke women's terms, and kills worms in young children.

Burnet-water: Burne^-water.
Take the seed of burnet, parsley, smallage, the leaves and roots of clotburre
and smallage, of every one equally: stamp all together, after put thereto of
draggons blood an ounce, and a little good vinegar: ^et all to infuse together
a certain time, afterward distill it: this water has a marvelous virtue
against the stone and gravel.

A singular water for the gravel, Stone.
which the deceased Monsieur de Tillet had great use of with happy succes^e:
Gravel.
Take the roots of parsley and fennel made very clean, and the vvooddie
part taken out, of each ^oure handfulls, boil them in twelve pintes of river
water: when they are half boiled, put thereto of the tender buds of Mallows,
holihockes, violets, and sea-weed, of each four handfulls, boil all together
to the consumption of the half, after strain them through a white napkin:
distill them, putting thereunto two pound of Venice turpentine.

A singular water for the eyes: A water for the eyes.
Take celandine, veruaine, betonie, eyebright, rue, and fennel all new and
fresh, of each two handfulls, stamp them together, sprinkling them with half
a pound of white Wine, press out the juice, and afterward infuse in the same
pepper and ginger made in powder, of each half an ounce, of saffron three
drams; of myrrh, aloes, and sarcocol, of each one ounce; of very good honey a
pound: distill them all in a glass stillitorie at a small fire, and keep the
water for the spots of the eyes.

Take four ounces of the pills of Oranges dried in the shadow of the Sun
six days: An imperial water.
nutmegs, and cloves, made into powder either of them by themselves, of each
four ounces, infuse the said aromaticall powders in a glass viole with
rosewater the space of seventeen days in the Sun: after cast upon the said
powders, the rindes of oranges, which you shall let steep there a certain
space of time. Afterward, take of new red roses gathered two days before a
pound, of the root of cype^us half a pound, of the leaves of rosemarie,
hys^op, balm, roses of the bush, of each two handfulls, of bay-leaues a
handful, lay them all to dry in the Sun for two hours, after infuse them
in rose water the space of three hours: this done, put them all into a Still
after this manner. In the bottom of the Still make a bed of one pound of new
red roses, then next a bed of aromaticall powders and the rindes of oranges, in
the third place a bed of Violet flowers, and in the fourth place the last and
fourth bed of the before named herbs: distill them all in Maries-bath with a
gentle fire. Add unto the distilled water two pound of rose water or
thereabout, so that it may be in proportion equal to the third or fourth part
of the water drawn out by distillation. This water taken in the morning the
weight of a dram, keeps the body sound, lusty, and renews youth. It is
singular for the pain of the head, tteeth, belly, gripings, palsy,
con^ulsions, apoplexy, faintings, and other such cold diseases. This is the
water that is so much esteemed in the courts of kings and princes, and amongst
the great and renowned ladies.

An Allome-water: An Allome water.
Take Verjuice, the juice of Plantaine and Purslaine, of each a pound, seven
whites of eggs, ten ounces of Roch-allome, mingle them together, and distill
them. Otherwise, take plantaine, purslaine, sorrel, gourds, nightshade, and
verjuice, of each a handful, poune them grossly, mix therewith ten or twelve
whites of eggs, put them all in a glass stillitorie to distill, mingling
amongst them half a pound of Allome, as you lay bed upon bed: this water is
good for ca^kers, for the redness of the face, and for ulcers, applying linen
clothes thereunto, that have been wet therein.

You may likewise distill purging waters, Purging waters.
in infusing purgative medicines both simple and compound, seeing that they be
as new as may be, and that in Aqua-vitae, wine, milk, whay, distilled waters,
or convenient decoctions, and such waters will have the like virtues as the
purging medicines have; thus you may distill Catholicum, Catholicum and
Diap^oenicon distilled.
Diaphoenicon, confectio Hamech, and Electuarium de ^ucco rosar^m: Thus you may
distill rhubarbe, agaricke, hellebor, scammonie, and such other purgatiues that
are sound and new.

The manner of distilling rhubarbe may be this: Water of Rhubarbe distilled.
take a quantity of new and green Rhubarbe, whether it be a pound, or half
a pound, more or less, make it ^^to small pieces, or make it into gross
powder, and upon it cast of the juice of Borage and Buglosse, of each two
pound, for one of Rubarbe, infuse them all together for the space of four and
twenty hours upon hot ashes, then distill them in a Stillitorie in Mary's
bath.

This distilling of purgative Medicines, is for such kind of people as are
very delicate, and cannot abide the smell of the purging medicine to be
ministered otherwise unto them.

CHAP. LXX.
Of sweet Waters particularly described.
SWeet Waters serve to wash the hands, Sweet water.
face, hair of the head, and beard: as also to make Linnens, Garments, Gloves,
and such other things, to smell sweet.

Water of Lauander: Lauander water.
Take the flowers of Lauander new or dry, be^prinkle or infuse them in
Rose Water, Wine, or Aqua-vitae, afterward distill them. The water will be
sweeter, if you dry the flowers in the Sun in a Glasse-violl close stopped,
and cast upon them afterward some white Wine. And if in the time of want and
lack of distilled water, you would have a water presently made which should
resemble the smell of the water of Lauander; cast a drop or two of the Oil of
Spike into a good sufficient quantity of pure water, and swill them well
together in a bottle or Glasse-violl with a narrow neck: This water, though it
be not distilled, yet it cease not to have the sweet smelling sent and savor
that the distilled has.

Water of Cloves: Take half an ounce of Cloves well bruised, Water of Cloves.
set them to infuse in a pound and a half of Rose Water the space of four and
twenty hours, after distill them in Mary's bath.

The water of sweet Smells: Take Basil, The water of sweet smells.
Mints, Marierome, roots of Corneflag, Hyssope, Sauorie, Sage, Balm,
Lauander, and Rosemarie, of each a handful: of Cloves, Cinnamome, and N^tmegs,
of each half an ounce: then take three or four Citrons, and cut them in
sufficient thick slices: which done, infuse all this in a sufficient quantity
of Rose Water for the space of three days, distilling it all afterward in
Mary's bath at a small fire: the distillation done, put thereto a scruple of
Musk.

Water of Roses musked: Take the buds of Roses, Rose Water musked.
and cutting out the white, put them into the Stillitorie, and in the midst
thereof, upon your Roses, put a little knot of Musk, and so distill them.

Water of Spike: Take Spike before the flower be altogether blown, Water of
Spike.
and taking away all the wood from it, lay it on a bed within the Stillitorie:
afterward, lay upon that bed a bed of Roses almost blown, and thereupon some
dozen of Cloves: but and if you have not Spike, then you may put Lauander in
his place: distill it at a moderate fire, and with as little air as possibly
you can give it: And when the distillation shall be as good as finished,
be^prinkle the matter with a little very good white Wine, and so finishing
your distillation, keep your water in viols well stopped.

Damask water: Take two handfuls and a half of red Roses, Damask water.
Rosemarie flowers, Lauander and Spike flowers, of each a Pugill: of the
sprigges of Thyme, flowers of Cammomile, flowers of small Sage, of Penyryall,
and Marierome, of each a handful: infuse them all in white Wine the space of
four and twenty hours: then put them into the Stillitorie, sprinkling it
with very good white Wine, and scatter thereupon this powder following: take
an ounce and a half of well chosen Cloves, an ounce of Nutmegs, of Beniouin
and Styrax calami^a, of each two drammes, make them in powder: The water that
shall be distilled, must be kept in a vessel very well stopped.

There is also made a very sweet water of clear Myrrh, Water of Myrrh.
if it be new, gu^mie, and divided into small gobbets, and set to steep in the
juice of Roses six times as much in quantity as the Myrrh: It must be
distilled upon hot ashes at a small fire; for and if you should increase it,
there would come forth oil with the water. Such water being dropped but only
one drop of it into an hundred of well or fo^^taine water, makes it all to
smell most sweetly.

Rose Water sweetened with Musk: Rose Water sweetened with Musk.
Take a Glasse-vessell of the fashion of an Vrinall, that is to say, wide
below, and straight above; therein put twelve grains of Musk, or more, and
stop it close with good Parchment, setting it in the Sun for four or five
days: then take another vessel of the fashion of the first, which you shall
fill with Roses dried a very little, and stamped: then stop that vessel also
with a very thin Linen cloth, or with a Strainer: afterward put the mouth
of the vessel wherein the Roses be, into the mouth of the other wherein the
Musk is, lu^e them well together, and set them in the Sun, in such sort, as
that the vessel with the Roses may stand above that wherein the Musk is, and
that in some window or such other place, where the Sun shines very hot: and
by this means there will^ water distill down upon the Musk, which will be
good either to be used above, or mingled with some other. Otherwise: Take
twenty grains of Musk, (...), Cloves, Galingall, Schaenanthum, grains of
Paradise, Mace, and Cinnamome, of each an ounce, bray them all together, and
put them into a Stillitorie with a (...) and a half of Rose Water, then let
them stand so four or five days, and afterward distill them.

Water of Oranges: Water of Oranges.
Take the pills of Oranges and Citrons when they are green, of each half an
ounce, of Cloves five or six, of the flowers of Spike or Lauander newly
gathered, six ounces, infuse all together in six pound of Rose Water the space
of four or five days, afterward distill them.

Water of Orange flowers: Take flowers of Oranges, Water of Nasse, or Orange
flowers.
and distill them in a Glasse-Stillitorie, or in an earthen one very well
baked and glased, having but a small fire: you may also put unto them the
flowers of Citrons, if you think good. The water must be kept in
Glasse-bottles covered with fi^e Mats, and well stopped.

The counterfeit water of Orange flowers: Take the buds of red Roses, The
counterfeit water of Orange flowers.
the most double that can be found, but take their yellow from them, make a bed
thereof in the Stillitorie, and above it another bed of the flowers of Lillies:
afterward again another of Roses, and then another of the flowers of Lauander,
and then another bed of Roses again: and betwixt every one of these beds cast
and sow some bruised Cloves, and in the midst of all make a little pit, in
which you shall put certain grains of Musk, or Ciuet, or Ambergreece, or
some sort of perfume: afterward distill them all at a little fire: Reserve the
water in little bottles, covered with fine Mats, and well stopped.

A sweet smelling water: Take Marierome, A sweet smelling water.
Thyme, Lauander, Rosemarie, small Penyryall, red Roses, flowers of Violets,
Gilloflowers, Sauorie, and pills of Oranges, steep them all in white Wine, so
much as will swim above the said hearbe^^ afterward distill them in a
Stillitorie twice or thrice: keep the water in bottles well stopped, and the
dross or residence to make perfumes.

CHAP. LXXI.
The fashion of distilling water for Fukes.
NOw, A water for Fukes.
albeit that a good Farmers wife must not be too bufie with Fukes and such
things as are for the decking and painting of the body, because her care must
wholly be employed in the keeping and increase of her household-stuffe;
notwithstanding, I would not have her ignorant of the manner of distilling of
waters for Fukes: not that she should make use of them for her self, but that
she may make some profit and benefit by the sale thereof unto great Lords and
Ladies, and other persons, that may attend to be curious, and paint up
themselves. The uses of waters for Fukes.
Now all such waters in general serve for three purposes: The one is to smooth
and keep neat the skin, as well of the face as of the other parts of the
body: The other is to color the hair of the head and beard: and the third,
to make white the teeth. Some of these are simple, as the water of the flowers
of Beans, of Strawberries, the water of the Vine, of Goats milk, of Asses
milk, of whites of eggs, of the flowers of Lillies, of Dragons, and of Calves
feet: others are compounded of maine ingredients, as you shall know by the
brief collection that we shall make of them.

Water of Strawberries: Water of Strawberries.
Take ripe Strawberries, set them to putrify some certain time in an earthen
vessel, putting thereto a little salt or sugar, and afterward distill them:
This water will clea^se away the spots of the face and the spots of the eyes,
caused either of hot or cold humors: it will be more effectual, if you infuse
the Strawberries in Aqua-vitae before that you do distill them.

Water of Beane-flowers: Water of Beane-flower.
Take the flowers of Beans, infuse them a day or two in white Wine in a
Glasse-violl in the Sun, afterward distill them: This water takes away the
spots of the face, if it be washed therewith morning and evening.

The roots of great Dragons distilled, The water of Dragons.
makes a singular water to take away the prints and marks which the pocks have
left behind them: so does likewise the distilled water of the root of wild
Vine, of Corneflag, Sowbread, Costmarie, Angelica, Elicampane, Tutneps, wild
Cucumbers, white Onions, Gentian, Capers, Lillies, Madder, Alkanet,
Cinquefoile, Crowfoot, Tasell, and many other herbs.

Water of Guaiacum: Water of Guaiacum.
Take Guaiacum, and cut it in small pieces, infuse them a certain time in the
decoction of other Guaiacum, and a third part of white Wine, afterward distill
them in a Glasse-Stillitorie: The water that shall distill thereof is singular
for the taking away of all spots out of the face, especially if you join with
it, in the distilling of it, some Lilly roots.

The water that is distilled in equal quantity of the leaves of Peaches and
Willowes, The water of Peaches and Willowes.
takes away the red spots and rubies of the face.

The water that is distilled in equal quantity of the whites of eggs and
juice of Limons, Water of whites of eggs.
scoureth the face, and makes it fair. In stead of this water, if you have
not the fit means to distill it, you shall take seven or eight Limons, or
Citrons, which you shall cut into quarters, and after infuse them in white Wine
in the Sun.

Another water: Take six ounces of the crummes of white bread, Water of (...)
of bread.
infuse them in two pound of Goats or Asses milk, mingle them diligently
together, and afterward distill them.

Water of Snailes: Water of Snailes.
Take white Snailes about thirty, of Goats milk two pound, of the fat of a
Pigge or Kid three ounces, of the powder of Camphire a dram, distill them in
a Glasse-Stillitorie.

Water of the whites of eggs: Water of the whites of eggs.
Take the whites of new eggs, about twelve, fine Cinnamome an ounce, and Asses
milk twelve ounces, distill all in a Glasse-Stillitorie: This water makes a
woman look gay and fresh, as if she were but fifteen years old.

Water of Calves feet: Water of Calves feet.
Take the feet of a Calfe, and (taking away their skin and hooues of their
hoofes) cut the rest in pieces, that is to say, the bones, sinews, and marrow,
and so distill them: This water makes the face Vermillion like, and takes
away the blemishes of the small Pocks.

A singular water to make one white: A water making white.
Take the dung of small Lizards, or of the Cuttle fish, the Tartar of white
Wine, the shauing of Harts-horne, white Coral, the flower of Rice, as much of
one as of another, beat them a long time in a Mortar, to make them into fine
powder, afterward infuse them a night in an equal portion of the distilled
water of sweet Almonds, Snailes of the Vine, and white Mulleine, and put
thereunto likewise the like weight of white Honey: distill all together in a
Stillitorie.

Water of bread crummes compounded: Water of crumbs of bread.
Take the crummie part of Barley bread, indifferent betwixt white and black,
two pounds, of Goats milk three pounds, of white Wine half a pound, of the
four great cold seeds of each two ounces, of the flowers of Beans, or dried
Beans and Cich Pease, of each two pound, of Rice half a pound, of the flowers
of water Lillies and white Roses of each two pugill^, the whites and yolks of
twenty eggs: distill them all in Mary's bath, and the water will be a great
deal more excellent, if you put unto the distillation some Venice Turpentine.

Water of the broth of a Capon: Water of the broth of a Capon.
Take of the broth of a Capon, Hen, or Pullet, three pound, of the juice of
Limons one pound, of white vinegar half a pound, of the flowers of Beans and
water Lillies of each three pugills, the whites of two or three eggs, the
weight of two French crowns of Camphire, distill them all: This water is of a
marvelous virtue to take away the spots and stains of the face, and other
parts of the body.

The water of Branne: Water of Bran.
Take Branne the best that you can find, sift it diligently, and afterward
temper it with strong vinegar, put them into a Still, and cast upon them ten
or twelve yolks of eggs: distill them all: This water makes the face clean,
glistening, and very fair.

Another water: A sweet water.
Take the flower of Beans and water Lillies of each a pound, of bread crummes,
Rice flower, flowers of Corneflags, of each six ounces, of Honey a pound, of
white Wine and water of the fountain of each three pound, let all be well
mingled together, and afterward distill them in Mary's bath.

Take the roots of Corneflag and wild Cucumbers of each three pound, Another
water.
of the roots of Holihockes and Lillies of each two pound, of ripe Grapes
half a pound, of Bean flowers and leaves of wall Pellitorie of each a pugill,
of water Lillies and Mallows of each a handful, of the crummes of Barley bread
a pound, infuse it all in white Wine or in the household store of Goats milk,
putting to the infusion half an ounce of the roots of Turnips, and of the
four great cold seeds another half ounce, of the urine of a little girl
half a pound, let all be distilled together: This water is singular good to
take away freckles, scarres, the prints of the small pockes, and all other
spots of the skin.

A water used amongst the Ladies of the Court, A water to paint the face
withal.
to keep a fair white and fresh in their faces: Take a white Pigeon, a pint
of Goats milk, four ounces of fresh Butter, four pugills of Plantaine, and
as much of the roots and leaves of Salomons seal, (...) ounce of Camphire,
half an ounce of Sugar candy, and two drammes of Allo^e, let all settle
together, and afterward, distill it.

Another w^ter: Take of the crummes of white bread two pound, of the flowers of
Beans one pound, of white Roses, the flowers of water and land Lillies, of
every one two pound, of Goats milk six ounces, and of the flowers of Cornflag
anounce, distill all: this water is good to keep the hands clean and white.

Take Cowes milk in the month of May (in other months it is not worth ani^
thing) two pounds, Water of Cowes mi^ke.
four Oranges, and five Citrons, Roch Allome and fine Sugar of each an ounce,
cut the Oranges and Citrons into small quarters, and infuse them in milk,
afterward distill them all: this water is good to keep the color neat and
fresh.

Take a certain number of eggs, Water of eggs.
the newest you can get, and lay them to steep in very strong Vinegar three
whole days and nights: afterward pierce them with a pin, in such sort, as
that you may cause all the water that is within them to come forth: and then
distilling this water, you shall find it excellent to beautify the face.

Likewise to wash the face with the water of Almonds, or Sheep or Goats
milk, A water to color or paint the face withal.
or else to lay upon the face, when one goes to sleep, a white Linen cloth
dipped in these liquors, is available for the beautifying of the face.

Another water: Take two Calves, feet, boil them in River water to the
consumption of the one half of the water, put thereunto a pound of Rice, of
the crummie part of one white loaf, kneaded with Goats milk, two pound of
fresh Butter, the whites of ten new laid eggs, with their shells and
skins, distill it all, and in the distilled water put a little Camphire and
Roch Allome: this water makes the face very fair.

Water of Lard: The water of Lard.
Take such quantity of Lard as you shall think good, and scrape it as clean
as possibly you can: afterward stamp it in a Marble Mortar, so long, as that
it become like paste, and then distill it in a Glasse-Sillitorie: The water
will be white, and it is singular to make the hair of a Straw-colour, and
glistening.

Water of Honey distilled, Water of Honey.
as were have said before, makes the hair beautiful and long.

Water of Capers: Water of Capers.
Take green Capers, and distill them: This water dies hair green, if after
they have been washed with this water, they be dried in the Sun.

Another water: A painting and coloring water
Take a pound of very good Honey, and of the leaves of male Sothernewood two
handfuls, mingle them, and distill them: This water is good to (...) the hair
of the head and beard fair and beautiful.

A water to cleanse the teeth: A water to cleanse the teeth.
Take Sage, Organie, wild Marierome, Rosemarie, and Pennyryall, of each a
handful, of Pellitorie, Ginger, Cloves, and Nutmegs, of each the weight of two
French crowns, put all together, and water them with white Wine, afterward
distill them.

Another water for the same effect: Take long Pepper the weight of two French
crowns, of Pellitorie and Stauesacre the weight of one French crown, sprinkle
them all over with half and ounce of Aqua-vitae, after put an ounce and a
half of white Honey thereunto, and so distill them.

CHAP. LXXII.
The manner of distilling per ascensum and per descensum.
ALl manner of distillation which is made by virtue and force of fire, To
distill (as it is called) per ascensum.
and such like heat, is of two sorts: the one is made by raising up of vapors
up on high, which the Alchymists call per ascensum: and there is another which
is after the manner of falling of sweat, or defluxion of humors descending
downward, and this is commonly called per descensum. Waters are for the most
part distilled by the way called per ascensum; as Oils are for the most part
distilled per descensum: I say for the most part, because that certain Waters
are sometimes distilled per descensum, as also some Oils per ascensum, such as
are the Oils drawn of leaves, flowers, fruits, seeds, and other such like
matter.

The waters that are distilled per descensum, Wha^ (...) of Oils are distilled
per desce^sum.
are chiefly sweet waters, such as are made of flowers and leaves of a good
smell, which being so distilled, do not euaporate or spend their best vapor
so quickly by distillation, and thereupon they retain in better sort, and for
a longer time, their natural smell.

The way is this: Take new Roses, or other such flowers, and put them in a
Linen cloth, Rose Water distilled per descensum.
spread and stretched over a basin of Brass, or earth, well glased: above this
basin set another vessel of Brass, or of earth, in manner of a round
Frying-panne, having the bottom covered with hot coals; but therewithal you
must look, that you let not the fire remain any long time upon the vessel,
for fear it should grow too hot, and that the water should smell of burning.
Thus way is better than any other, to make a great deal of water in a short
time, and without great charges, of flower^ and all sweet smelling, cooling,
and astringent matter.

After such sort is the Sea-Onion distilled: The Sea-Onion distilled per
descensum.
Cut in slices the Sea-Onion, put it into an earthen vessel which shall have
many small holes in the bottom, let the bottom of this vessel go into the
mouth of another vessel made of earth, and lute them both together very well,
and let the earthen vessel be set in the earth up unto the throat, and then
lay it round about with coals of fire, thus give fire unto the upper vessel
for the space of ten or twelve hours: it will distill his water downward,
which if you mix with flower or bread, you shall make Pastils, which will be
good to kill Rats or Mice, To kill Rats and Mice.
and that quickly, if you mix therewith a small quantity of Litarge.

You may make your distillation of flowers per descensum otherwise, Another
manner of distilling waters per descensum, and that without heat.
without the heat of any fire: Take two vessels of Glass one like unto
another, both of them being made large in the bottom, and narrow at the top
(after the manner of an Vrinall) and see that the mouth of the one will fit and
go into the mouth of the other, and then lute them well and close together,
having put betwixt them a fine thin Linen cloth: the uppermost must be full
of Roses, or other flowers, somewhat bruised* the other must be empty: set
them in the South Sun where it is very hot, and so it will distill a water
that is very pleasant and sweet.

Thus is Rose Water (sweetened with Musk) distilled, Water of the yellow parts
of Violets.
whereof we have spoken* before in the Chapter of sweet waters: And thus are
the yellow parts of Viol^^^^ stilled; and the water thereof is very singular
for the redness of the eyes: And (...) are the tender buds and shoots of
Fennel distilled, being gathered before the Fennel do put forth his flowers;
the water wthereof is very sovereign for to cleanse away the filth of the
eyes, and to comfort and amend the sight.

CHAP. LXXIII.
Of the manner of distilling by the Filtre.
THe causes of distilling by the Filtre we have before declared, To distill by
the Filtre.
as namely, that they are either the separation of liquors in general, or else
the separation of liquors, of such or such qualities, as the separating of
muddie and earthie from the finer and subtle parts; which is the proper and
ordinary way to distill juices which have a thick consistence presently upon
their cooling after their first pressing out; as namely, the juices of Citrons,
Limons, and Oranges: again, the prudent and expert Apothe carry, when he
makes sy^^ups of the juices of Citrons, or Limons, does first distill and
strain the juices by a Fittre, before the go about to dispense the syrrups.

But the manner to distill by a Filtre, is to have three dishes, bowls, or
basins, or other vessels, of such fashion as the matter or liquor that you
would distill does require, and so placed and seated, as that they may either
stand higher and higher, or lower and lower, every one above or under another,
and the highest to contain that which is to be distilled, and the lower that
which is distilled. In the uppermost shall be one or more pieces of Cloth, or of
a Felt of sufficient length, and dipped into the i^ices, and these must be broad
at the one end, and sharp at the other: the broad end shall lie in the juice,
and the narrow-pointed end shall hang without, by the which the thinner part of
the liquor shall rise and ascend, running down drop after drop into the
vessel below, in such sort, as that the muddiest and impurest part shall stay
behind in the other vessel: and sometimes you must wring out this piece of
cloth; when it begins to become black, or that the drops distill but
slowly, because of the thick matter that is carried into it along with the
thin: and having washed them, to put them afterward again into the vessel.
If a man be disposed to distill one liquor many times, he may place many
vessels after the manner of stayres* and in every one of them, except the
lowest, put a Filtre, in the same sort as we have said: for the last and lowest
must serve only to receive from all the rest.

In stead of a piece of Felt, the Apothecaries use oftentimes sleeves of
Woollen cloth, otherwise called sharpe-pointed Hose; through which, they
purify and make clear their Sirrups, Ap^zemes, and Iuleps: These manners of
distillations may supply the place of that long, tedious, and painful
circular distillation; which fitteth the Alchymists better, than either
Country people, Physicians, or Apothecaries.

Virgins milk is thus made with a Filtre: Virgins milk^.
Take Litarge of Gold made into powder three ounces, infuse them in six ounces
of white vinegar, either raw, or distilled, or else in Squils vinegar the space
of three hours, in a vessel by it self: in another vessel set likewise to
insuse Sal nitrum, or common salt in common water, or in water of Plantaine,
Nightshade, or some other fit for the purpose: distill them by Filtre each of
them apart, and after that they be distilled, mingle them together. This
virgins milk is good to heal Ringwor^nes, and saucy and red faces.

A brief Discourse of the distilling of Oils and Quintessences.
CHAP. LXXIIII.
Of the profit of distilled Oils and Quintessences: and what manner of
Quintessences shall be here entreated of.
NOw, after our short discourse of the distilling of waters, limited by the
matter which Farmers store will afford, it shall not seem strange, or
wandering from our scope and platform laid down already, to make some slight
and brief description of the distilling of Oils, to (...) as a pattern and
guide to the Mistress or good wife of our Country Farm, seeing we are
desirous to have her qualified with all those good parts and virtues which
Xenophon the Greek Author does so highly esteem of and commend in a good
Huswife: and namely, that of readiness and charitable provision to relieve her
folk and family, as also her neighbors, when the case of necessity, through
sickness, requires, by such remedies as her Gardens or Orchards may minister
unto her, with the help of a little ordering of them, which she by her skill
and knowledge may bestow upon them. And seeing that distilled Oils, amongst
other remedies, are found by experience to be the most forcible and effectual,
the pleasantest, and of most speedy operation, in the ouercomming of all sorts
of rebellious diseases, but chiefly, wounds, ulcers, aches, swellings, and
other outward accidents; it shall be very commendable and beseeming for the
Farmers wife, or M^stres^e of our Country Farm, to have some insight into
this kind of Distillation: not that I would have her to busy her brain about
the matter much, or otherwise frequent and accustom it, but even as a pleasure
and recreation, and so far forth, as the matter of her Gardens and Orchards
only, o^ not much more, do minister unto her. For as for the distilling of
Metals, Min^rals, S^ones, and other such things, which are not governed and
husbanded with (...) handieworke, labor, or skill, they belong rather unto the
Alchymist and (...) of Quintessences, or other idle or rich persons, than unto
a good Husbandman, Now the things that she may extract and distill, after the
manner of Quintessences, are these.

Of Herbs: Herbs.
Rosemarie, wild Thyme, Rue, Calamint, Organie, L^^^nder, C^momile, Sage,
Hyssope, Basil, Smallage, Mints, Sto^chados, Sauorie, Wo^^wood, Louage, Thyme,
Penyryall of the mountain, Iua Arthritica, Sauine, and g^^^^ally all herbs
which are of a hot and dry temperature, and which have a good and strong smell.

Of Seeds: Seeds.
Fennel, Annise, Cummin, Pe^sley of the mountain, Dill, Z^n^onicum, or
Wormeseed, black and white Nigella, Sauine, black Poppie, wild Carret, and
many other sorts of Seeds, which are of good or strong (...) and smell.

Of Flowers: Flowers*
Lauander, white Mulleine, Hypericon, flowers of Oranges, damask Roses,
Iesamin flowers, and Rosemarie flowers, etc.

Of Fruits: Fruits.
Juniper, Bay, and Iui^ berries, Pine-kernels, Capers, Abrico^^, and Peaches,
etc.

Of Spices: Spices.
Cinnamome, black Pepper, Cloves, Mace, sweet Costus, Angelica, Imperatoria,
Galanga, grains of Paradise, Nutmegs, Ginger, Cube^^, Cypress, rindes of
Oranges and Citrons, pillings of Walnuts and of Capers, and many other.

Woods, (...).
and barks of Woods: Rosemarie, Sauine bush, Juniper, Ash, G^^i^cum, Elder,
the loppings and slisfts of Trees.

Gummes and thick liquors: Gumme^.
Masticke, Frankincense, Myrrh, (...), Labdanum, Turpentine, Storax Calamite,
Pitch, Tar, etc.

Beasts, Beasts, or the parts of Beasts.
or the parts, or excrements of Beasts: Serpents, Frogs, Scorpion, (...),
Man's blood, Man's dung, Goose-grease, Eggs, Honey, and Wax. To be brief, all
things that are of a hot and dry temperature.

It is true, that of cold things, such as are the herbs and seeds of Poppie,
He^bane, and other such: or of moist things, such as those are which have a fat
juice; one may, in some manner, draw an oily Quintessence, but not without
great pain^^-taking, and in a long time, and such also, which in the end will
not have the na^^^all and true force of the herb whereof it was made: for it
will be either less cold or less moist than his simple, by reason of the
impression of the heat and dryness, such as it is, which the fire has left in
it at the time of the distillation: as also for that the Oil which is gathered
of cold or moist simples, is rather a waterie, ^ager, (...)* Peter-like, or
salt liquor, than an oily substance: Wherefore it is better to distill cold or
moist simples by putrefaction, Which ^e the distilled Oils.
than by resolution made by the work of the fire.

To make an end therefore in a word, the Oils drawn of things by
Quin^^ssence, or resolution made by force of fire, are an vnctuositie or
radical humor, which is, as it were, the life and form that gives being
unto the simple whereunto it bel^^geth, and that no otherwise than the natural
form gives being unto all parti^^lar things whatsoever; and wherein also
lies the principal force and (...) o^ the simple: so as that if it be once
separated by distillation, there remains no other thing of the substance of
the simple that is distilled, but only his (...), and impurities.

CHAP. LXXV.
What manner of Furnaces must be made for the extracting of Chymicall Oils.
THe Furnaces which serve to distill Chymicall Oils, are of diverse fashions,
according unto the diversity as well of the matter which is to be distilled,
as of the vessels which are to serve to distill them withal: and yet the most
common and commodious or profitable fashion of all is this.

Build up a Furnace of Brick, or of Tyle, and fat Earth, or Mortar, or of
Plaster alone, and make the same of a round shape (or at the least let it be
so within) to the end, that the fire being carried up on high, may disperse it
self all over in a more equal measure: and withal, make it of a reasonable
length and thickenesse, and not more than three foot high; and bearing a foot
round of compass^ and every way within at the least. There shall be also
three several spaces or rooms in the whole height: the first, of one foot;
the second, of a foot and a half; and in the third, all the rest of the
Furnace. In the first room there shall be a grate of iron to lay the coals
upon for the making of the fire: in the second room, or loft, there shall be
two rods of iron, which shall be distant the one from the other about four
fingers, whereupon shall rest an earthen vessel of the fashion of an earthen
pot or pan, and after such form and manner as we will declare by and by.
Underneath the first distance, and also above the grate is the second distance,
you must make two opening places, square, and having their couers to shut them,
after the manner of the mouth of an Oven: by the lower of those two mouths you
shall empty and take out the ashes which are made therein, and at the higher
of them you shall put in coals, and kindle the fire also. Furthermore, in the
highest part of the Furnace, and likewise in such place there as may be most
commodious, there must be left certain other holes for the smoke to pass out
by. See the picture and draught of such a Furnace before in the distillation of
Waters. Sometimes, for a need, the Furnace is omitted and let pass, and a
brandrith made to serve, setting upon it the vessel for to distill in, and
that in a pot, bowl, or pan of earth or iron, and making a fire underneath
the same.

CHAP. LXXVI.
What manner of Vessels must be used for the distilling of Oils.
Certain it is, that many do use diverse sorts of Vessels for the distilling
of Oils: but leaving the examination of this variety for such as propound
unto themselves to entreat exactly of Chymicall matters, as intending my self
only to give some instructions unto the good Huswife, being Commaundresse of
this our Country House; I will here set down but two sorts o^ Vessels for the
distilling o^ Oils: Two sorts of vessel^ for the distilling of Oils.
The one being fit and very convenient to distill Herbs, Flowers, Seeds,
Fruits, Roots, and Beasts, or parts and excrements of Beasts: And the other,
for Woods, Gummes, gummie drops, and other thick and unctuous Liquors. And
now for to speak of the first.

Let there be made a vessel of very choice earth, such as is very clean and
very well kneaden, made up with like pain and industry as the Potters make
up theirs; let it be of the thickness of a finger, or thereabout, fashioned
like an egg, and yet not like an egg when it is whole, but when it is cut
round away, almost to the one half: it must be great, and conta^ning much,
after the greatness and wideness of the Copper vessel: and yet
notwithstanding so great only (especially in respect of his height) as that it
may agree with the third and last loft of the furnace, and the wideness even
and iumpe with the mouth of the furnace wherein it must stand: and in like
manner the bottom must bear such breadth, as that it may be a little flatter
than the space which is betwixt the two rods of iron, made fast and set
overthwart at the end of the second distance of the fu^nace, to the end that it
may rest upon them the more firmly. And therefore to do well herein, the
furnace would be builded before that the vessel be made. When there is need of
a great fire to distill withal, then it is provided, that the pot, in this
place, be not of earth, but of iron: as I my self have seen at the
Apothecaries.

This second vessel shall be of Copper, or of La^ten, and shaped also like
unto an egg, or a gourd, having a wide mouth, whereunto there must be fitted a
long or stretched-out neck, being at the least a foot in length, coming down
from the head, by the which neck the vapors in the gourd shall rise up into
the said head. This vessel shall hold twelve or fifteen pi^ts, or otherwise
shall be made of greatness answerable unto the quantity of the matter which
you mean to distill, which generally is (as we will declare by and by) that
for every pound of matter, as of herbs or seeds, etc. there be put into
this vessel nine or ten pound of water. Besides this, there must be such an
agreement betwixt the greatness of this Copper vessel and capacity of the
earthen vessel which stands within the furnace, as that they may be free one
of another some two or three fingers, for the filling in of sand, as we will
hereafter declare: And as concerning the height thereof; it, together with his
head, must stand above that of earth a foot and a half at the least.

The third vessel shall be the head, The head.
which shall be round above, and not sharp^-pointed, to the end that the vapor
arising out of it may not fall down again: and it must be set about (as it
were) with a little Stand, or Tub, wherein must be put cool water, for the
easier thickening and fixing of the vapors: at the one side of this little Tub
there shall be a spout, or pipe, which shall come out of the head, and by this
the Oil shall drop down into the vessel receiving; on the other side of this
little Stand must be a tappe with a spiggot, and it must come from the
capacity of the same, that so it may empty it of the water which it holds
when it is become too hot. This head shall be joined with the orifice and
throat of the last aforementioned vessel, by the means of a large and wide pipe,
which shall come dow^e from the head, and set it self in the mouth and throat
of the said Copper vessel very closely, to the end that no vapors in rising
may pass ou^ thereby any way: and for the better perfecting of this
inarticulation, there are two edges or brimmes, that so they may the better
join together. This sh^^ke may be called the neck of the bladder, by which
the vapors shall rise up into the head.

The fourth vessel shall be the receiving vessel, which shall receive the
Oyl^ distilled, and it must be of Glass, because of the clearenesse and
cle^^enesse of the same.

This is the proportion and shape of the first sort of the vessels, and it is
to distill Oils of herbs, seeds, flowers, and so forth.

A Does represent the bladder, containing the matter from which you mean to
draw your Oil.

B The mouth or throat of the bladder, which is articulated or close joined
with the shanke that comes down from the head.

C Is the shanke, which must be a foot long at the least, and is otherwise
called the neck of the Stillitorie, which sets it self as into a joint upon
the mouth and throat of the bladder.

D The round head not sharp pointed above.

E The little Stand or Tub which compas^eth the head, and contains cold water
for the cooling of the head.

F The vessel which receives the Oil, and is made somewhat long.

G The spout or pipe by which the oilie liquor droppeth down into the
receiving vessel.

H The tap, which with his spiggot emptieth the water out of the little tub
when it is too hot, that so there may fresh and cold be put in his place.



The two distilling vessels, that is to say, the Gourd and the Head, The Gourd
and the Head.
for as much as they are of Copper or Latten, must be tinned within, to the end
that the Oil may not get any strange quality by these metals, seeing
especially that the Copper being (...), and not tinned, may cause the Oil to
smell of the Brass, or of some other (...) quality. It is true, that besides
the help coming by this tinning of the vessels, the ve^ie action of the fire,
which works and dispatcheth speedily and violently where as there is great
quantity of water, does keep the Oil from being ^ainted with any evil
smell, or other accident that is not natural, and therefore there needs no
fear to be taken for the using of Copper vessels in the distilling of Oils
for the occasions aforesaid, although that earthen or glasse-vessels would be
far better and more natural (seeing in them there rests no jot of
mettall-like matter) than either those that are of Copper, or molten, or of
any other metal, save only there is some danger of breaking or cracking of
them, being the things whereunto earthen and glasse-vessell are very subject
when they are hot, yea, though they were armed with mo^tar, fat earth, cement,
or any other matter of defense; and then such breach or crack proves a
matter of no small damage or consequence in the distillation of Oils,
especially those which are precious. Notwithstanding, it is free for every man
^o use vessels of earth or glass, upon pain that they be careful to keep
them that they neither crack not break: and the rather, seeing that in the
extracting of some Oils there must needs be used glasse-vessels, or earthen
ones, vernished and leaded, and not Copper or Latten; as which will very
hardly let run any Oils from things that consist of an eager taste, whether
it be that the Copper has the like it self, or of some secret virtue and
faculty which is in it. And this thing we see sufficiently tried in the
seeds of Grapes, whose Oil conuerteth and turns rather into a green rust
in such vessels, than into any airie or thin exhalation, do a man what he
can either about the fire, or any other way whatsoever: but in the
distillation of fragrant and aromaticall things, as also those which are sweet
in taste, or have a diverse quality from the Copper, it might seem that a
molten vessel might be more convenient.

CHAP. LXXVII.
At what time Oils would be distilled: and how the matter and things whereof
they are made must be prepared.
THe matter of every Oil is to be distilled at such time, as when it is best
disposed: that is to say, seeds and aromaticall things, when they are fresh
and new gathered; for the fresher and newer that they a^e, so much the more
excellent Oil will they yield, especially the things that are of a sweet smell
and aromaticall. And as for herbs, they must be gathered when they are come
to their full force, that is to say, when they are in flower: for and if they
be deferred longer, the Oil that comes of them, for the most part, will be
more full of scumme and rank, as also there will not so much be gathered of
them. Being gathered at such time, they must be dried in the shadow for the
space of a month or two, to the end, that some portion of their moistness and
feeding humo^ may be diminished and taken away, and that the oily and radical
humor may be extracted more pure and sincere: and thirdly, that the herbs
themselves may be the more easily crushed and bruised. But on the contrary
side, if the herbs be (...) and fresh gathered when they are distilled, they
will yield sufficient store of Oil, in as much as their natural moisture will
abound: but the Oil will not be of such ^fficacie, nor yet so odoriferous, as
when the merry and good mean betwixt both is kept.

But as concerning the preparing (...) such matter as you mean to make your
Oils of, The preparing of the matter.
there is not any need to use infusion, or putrefaction, as is done in the
distilling of waters, as we have said before. For if one should bestow an
infusion upon them, either in water, wine, or Aqua-vitae, it would but breed a
confusion and mix^ure of the natural savor and smell of the Oil with that of
the liquor: and again, i^ would make them more moist than need would require,
in respect of the pure and since^e extracting of the Oil. Again, if you
should take the way to putrify them in Horse-dung, earth, hot ashes, or
boiling water, the better to distill and draw out your Oil afterward, and
following the way that we will speak of by and by, yet thereby you shall give
occasion of infecting your Oil with some ill vice. For the matter being
putrified, it is not possible, but that the Oils should have a smatch of it,
seeing it is one part of the matter. That it so falls out with Oils that are
so distilled of matter aforehand so putrified, although it do not by and by
corrupt, appe^^eth sufficiently: for in some space of time it is without all
doubt corrupted, and that in a great deal shorter time, without comparison,
than other Oils which are drawn^ without putrefaction of their matter going
before: by which it may appe^^e, what my advice and counsel would be to
every man; namely, that the matter (...) you would extract your Oil be not
infused or putrified, but only crushed, b^^ised, brayed* and brought into
small pieces, so as that afterward they may be si^ted through some wide sieue:
which course shall do as well, yea, rather better, than your infusing or
putrefying of them without stamping, braying, and bruising of them; besides
that, the business is sooner dispatched: yea, and if you would infuse and
putrific the ^^^ter, you should not thereby gain three drops of Oil more,
than you should (...) by only beating and stamping of them.

CHAP. LXXVIII.
Of the manner and order that must be kept in distilling of Oils.
WHen you have prepared the matter whereof you mean to make your oil, that is
to say, bruised it, and brought it into small corns, then pass it grossly
through a scarce, casting it into the vessel of copper with certain measures
of fountain water, that is to say, to match two pound weight of matter, with
eighteen pound of water, and for that cause it is meet that the vessel
should contain betwixt twelve and fifteen pintes, and yet the third part
remain void and empty, when the water and matter are both in. This water
stands in steed of a coach or wagon unto the matter to be distilled, for the
carrying up of his vapors, and to separate the humors by the decoction and
boiling that it there makes. You may add or diminish of the quantity of
water, according to the matter his quantity which you are about to distill,
upon pain notwithstanding that you put in nine or ten times as much water as
you do matter, and that your vessel of copper, glass, earth, or any such
matter as shall seem best, be of bigness, proportionable, and agreeing with
the quantity of matter which you would distill, for being too great or too
little, it would prove but cost cast away. It is true, that the two pound of
matter, and eighteen of water here mentioned, is the most certain rate that
we can stick to, for the most easy and plentiful manner of drawing of oil:
for if you put in more, the longnesse of time will become teadious: and if you^
put in less, you shall hardly draw ten drops of oil. And yet in this point
Lady experience must be more than quarter ma^ster, in as much as there is some
matter which yields not any oil, except it be put in a great quantity, such
as is Anise-seed and others, as we will declare hereafter more particularly.
Again, you must observe and mark this one point, that herbs require a far
larger vessel and quantity of water than seeds and spices when their oil is
to be extracted: because that weight for weight they take more room than the
seeds and spices do: for herbs lie not so close and round together, and
therefore they require also in proportion a greater quantity of water, for
fear that they should become parched and dried away within the copper vessel.

After that you have put the water and matter together into the vessel of
copper, let them infuse five or six hours, more or less, according to the
nature and substance of the matter: or without infusing of them at this time
(forasmuch as their boiling within the belly of the vessel, will serve in
steed of an infusion unto the matter) cover the vessel, and fit the head unto
it, lute them very well stogether with whites of eggs and meal kneaded
together, and spread upon a cloth in the place of their joining and
articulation. This done, set your earthen vessel in the furnace upon the two
iron bars, and make it fast to the furnace with potters-clay or cement well
beaten and wrought about the edges and brims: after set the vessel of copper
well stopped into the earthen one, and yet in such sort, as that the bottom of
the one stand from the other ^ome two or three fingers: and this void space
must be filled up with pure and clear sand, even so high as there is any space
and distance betwixt vessel and vessel, yea, and further if one be so
disposed even to the neck of the copper vessel: provided, that the nose of
the head by which the oil descends do stand either to the right hand or to
the left of the furnace: and yet this one thing comes here to be marked,
that in distilling of aromaticall seeds only there is use and need of the said
sand betwixt the said two vessels, and not in distilling of herbs: for seeds
and spices are of a more subtle and delicate substance (as their great heat do
testify) and the matter they yield is more delicate also and firm: For which
causes it might fall out that the force of the fire might somewhat trouble
their distillation, that is to say, might cause their distillation to come
forth a little troubled, and that even in the very beginning, if the fire be
not moderately kept, and brideled by the sand put in the void place betwixt the
said two vessels: but in the distilling of herbs you must si^ the vessel of
copper and the furnace together without the earthen vessel and the sand in the
empty space: for as much as the herbs in respect of their solidenesse and
harder substance do crave a greater force of fire: No oil can be drawn in
Maries-bath.
whereof you may gather, that no oils can be extracted by distillation in
Maries-bath, that is to say, in setting of boiling water about the copper
vessel in a caldron: ^or so the distillation would be longer than it were meet
it should, and yet never a whit the more commendable: for Maries-bath, that is
to say, boiling water, does not aff^rd a well proportioned and sufficient
tempered heat, but is long in doing, and the oil does still draw unto it some
corruption if the work be too long in doing, especially if the matter be not
moist of it self: for thereupon and by that means can the oil hardly rise so
high as that it may find the way into the vessel that should receive it, and
because also that it wants force and might, in as much as the boiling water
cannot lift it up so high of it self alone, as the clear fire, ^arthen
vessel, and sand, all vvorking together.

The copper vessel being thus fitted in the furnace, The order that must be
kept in distillation.
make fast unto the nose or pipe thereof, the receiving vessel, rested upon
some p^ettie ^toole, in such sort as you see above in the figure: stop and
close up the joint of the said pipe and receiving vessel with paste, and bole
armoniacke, or the white of an egg and flower spread upon a cloth. Then kindle
your coals that you have laid upon the gra^e, and make a soft and gentle fire
for the beginning, to the end that the matter may grow ho^ by little and
little, and that so long as till the matter within the copper and the fountain
water do boil, but yet so gently as that it boil not up, to stick and hit
against the head with the vvalmes thereof, as we see it sometimes to happen in
some seeds, as anise seeds, which by reason of their thin substance, as also
of their viscositie, do cast up their vvalmes and billows with great might and
force, and in such case the fire must be rebated: or and if that yet the
rebating of the fire cannot stay the f^rie of the billows or boiling, then you
must take off the head, and with a staff stir about the matter, for so the
scum will vanish away in vapors, and after that it may be governed, stayed,
and dried up by a reasonable fire, putting the head upon it again afterward,
and luting it as before. Feed and continue the fire in an equal degree, until
you pe^ceiue by feeling, that the head of the Still is grown hot: then, or
sooner if you please, you may fill the little tub at the top, which stands
round about the head with cold water; for it cooling the head, will make
thick and fix the vapors and spirits of the oil, which are very subtle
and hot, and turn them into oil: when this cold water thus powered in shall
become hot, it must by and by be let out at the top of the cooler, and fresh
put into his place. It is true, that some do not allow of cooling the head
with cold water, because the vapors by this cooling of the head do congeale
too soon, as being before that they come into the pipe, and thereupon fall
back again into the vessel, from whence they breathing the second time, and
congealed, and falling back again as before, do in fine by these manifold
risings and fallings, spend and waste unto nothing; or at ^he least by
continual boiling, it falls out that but a few vapors do come into the
vessel of receipt, and again, those same vapors so congealed do not easily
and presently come fo^th, and so there is less oil gathered of the matter
than would be, and that which is drawn, is somewhat tainted with burning. And
therefore in steed of this cooling of the head for to congeale and fix the
vapors raised up thereinto, they set veri^ near unto the furnace a vessel
with one bottom, having a pipe of tin pa^^ing overthwart the said bottom
through holes bored sloping in the same vessel: and this pipe is shut up into
the pipe coming down from the head, and both these being well luted together,
then the foresaid pipe crossing through the vessel aforesaid, is fastened to
the vessel that is to receive the distilled oil: this foresaid vessel having
this pipe passing through the sides thereof, and close fastened therein, must
be filled with cool water, by the cooling whereof the vapors sent or
carried from the head in this pipe of tin are congealed, fixed, turned into
oil, and so drop down easily into the receiving vessel with greater profit,
and in greater quantity, and better, than and if they had been turned into
oil in the head by the cooling thereof with cold water. Who so is minded to
use this means of cooling the vapors, may do it, but notwithstanding that
former of ours is no less beneficial, commodious, and profitable, neither
does it work that discommoditie before charged upon it, as experience teaches;
and put case that it did so, yet the inconvenience is taken away, i^, in steed
of cold water you put in that which is vvarme, or else by only covering the
round of the head with clothes dipped in cold water, using to renew them
oftentimes.

Continue in this sort your distillation without ceasing, and keep your fire
in the (...) degree, or if need be, augment and make it greater, until such
time as all the vapors be congealed one after another, and that all the liquor
which carries them, and which is within the copper vessel be runned into the
receiver: The signs of the distillation ended.
the sign and mark whereof is, when ha^^ng put in eighteen pound of water
or thereabout, you have received back about ten, as also, when as the drops
distilling shall not any longer r^lish any thing of the matter: then you must
give over your distillation, for fear the matter within your copper vessel
should either be inflamed, or else set fast to the bo^tome of your vessel,
ceasing to flote above. It shall be judged to distill in good sort and order,
and in reasonable temper, if betwixt the drops distilling, there be not as it
were any space from the falling of one drop to the following of another, in so
much as that a man shall hardly be able to account the number of one or two,
and from hence (as before) is gathered the quanti^ie and force of the fire. By
this means the whole copper vessel is emptied in a short time, for very
seldom is it longer in doing than six or seven hours, if so be the matter
agree in heaviness and weight with the water of the vessel, as from two
pound of matter to eighteen pound of water.

You must note in this place, that the oil comes forth now and then with the
water; and that the water which distilleth with the oil, comes not only of
the simple, but also of the water which was put in for the use of the
distillation: which, by the force of the boiling which it has had with the
said simple, during the time of the distillation, is become mixed by the force
of the fire with the brayed matter, and so has brought along with it the
whole strength of the same, as may be judged by the smell and taste thereof, A
comparison betwixt the water of the simple and the water used in the distilling
of the simple.
being no other than that of the simple. Wherefore this water which distilleth
oil therewith, is not less effectual, yea rather more forcible, powerful,
and of better effect, than that which is distilled of simples by a stillitorie,
because it tastes more strongly of the simple, than the others which were
drawn by a stillitorie: betwixt which there is no other difference, but that
the water distilled by a limbecke or stillitorie is that which the Sun
(heating the earth) has brough^ in for the growth, nourishment, and nature of
the simple: and the other which is mixed with the simple, from which the oil
is drawn, is so deeply engaged, incorporated and mingled in and with the
brayed matter by the force of the fire, as that it carries away, obtayneth and
holds all his virtue, as the taste and smell do show which is in it, for
both the smell and taste do draw very near unto that which the oil has in
it self, howsoever it may seem that the oil should contain and keep all
the savor and smell unto it self, seeing the oil is as it were the soul and
form which gives being to the said simple: but in the vehement boiling of the
said simple and water, there is such a great dissolution and relaxation of the
dissimilar par^s of the said simple, as that the smell and taste thereof is
communicated with both, so that as well the water as the oil does retain
(though yet not equally) the taste and smell of the simple. To distill already
distilled water.
Furthermore, you shall be assured how this water has se^sed upon the virtue
of the simple, wherewith it has been mixed in the distilling of his oil, by
this, that if you would distill it once again, or many t^mes, you shall find
collected and gathered together in it the whole smell and taste of his simple,
as it falls out in Aqua-vitae, which has in it the force of a great
quantity of Wine. For the doing of this, make clean the copper vessel, power
in thereto all the water which was distilled with the oil, dispose and see in
order all things necessary, in such ^ort as is wont to be done in the
distillation of oils of herbs: when you see that of seventeen pound you have
received one, that is to say, the first running, that you must keep: for into
it will be gathered all the virtue of the whole matter, and so as that the
virtue of it will be little less than that of the oil.

CHAP. LXXIX.
Of the means how to separate the oil which is runned with the water in
distilling.
IT is very certain that the oil which shall have been distilled, i^ a
liquor which by the means and ^orce of the boiling water wherewith it is
mingled, has been separated and forcibly drawn from his ^^^ter, and held off
the same, and with it also conveyed along into the (...). And for this cause
the oil will be always with the water, bu^ notwithstanding not always
swimming upon the water: for sometimes it will be in the (...), and sometimes
mingled all amongst the water: if the oil be more heavy measur^ for measure
than the water, it will be in the bottom: but if it fall out that the oil
by coldness be congealed as it were into clouds and small tufts of wool,
then it will be mingled amongst the water. Again, the oil will go to the
bottom, if it be made of a thick substance and w^ll compact, as is that of
cinnamome, cloves, and other such like. The oils which confusedly (for the
time that they are congealing through the cold) go cross the water, are the
oils of anise and fennell-seed, and that by reason of a certain proportion
which they have with the weight of the water. Therefore for the seperating of
the oil which the water has carried along with it, it were good, first that
the receiver should have his bottom somewhat sharp pointed, and that in the
said bottom therewithal there should be a small hole, which having been
stopped during the time of the distillation with Wax o^ cement, should now
after the distillation (the water and oil being grown cold by the operation
of the air) be unstopped, if so be that after attentive beholding of the
receiver, it appear that the oil is gathered into the bottom of it: for so,
the ceme^^ or wax taken away, the oil will come out, and the water stay
behind in the vessel, if by stopping the hole in time it be your mind to keep
it there. If the oil (...) aloft upon the water, if you unstop the foresaid
hole in the bottom, the water will run out below, and the oil will stay
behind in the receiver, if by mishap it do not fall down into the bottom of
the receiver first, before it come into the viole prepared for it, but this you
must take heed unto: but and if the oil be mingled amongst the water in
manner of a cloud, strain the water through a fine linen cloth, which
afterward will be easily gathered together with a knife, in such sort at that
you may put it up in a viole, wherein afterward if need be, you may turn it
into a thin liquor by a small heat set in the Sun, or upon hot ashes: if the
oil swim upon the upper face of the water, you shall separate it in a furnace
of digestion with a silver spoone: you may also use other means to separate
your oil from his fellow water, as for example, by a funnell of glass,
putting your finger toward the point of it and underneath, and doing the like
oftentimes unto t^^t, which has been done by the receiver, that is to say, by
pouring of liquor into the said funnell. You may likewise do^ the same by the
sucking of the water out of the receiver; for so you may suck out all the
water and lea^^ the oil in the bottom, which sucking may be performed by
pipes of pla^e made after the fashion of those which you see pictured here:
which will draw all the water in a short time out of the receiver, as you
see them used in France, to cause water to run in manner of a fountain, out
of any bucket or other vessel wherein water is con^ayned.

CHAP. LXXX.
Of the faculties or properties, continuance, and use of distilled Oils.
SEeing that distilled oils, as we have before declared, are the radical
humor of every matter: and that such radical humor, is as it were the soul
and form which gives being unto all matter, and vvhereupon depend the
virtues, powers, faculties, and actions of the said matter: you need not doubt,
but that the whole and entire virtues of simples distilled is imparted unto
the Oils drawn from them, and that in a purer and most subtle man^^r, in as
much as by such chymicall resolution, the most subtle substances are separated
from the gros^er, by being mingled wherewith, they were greatly weake^ed and
hindered from doing their effects: and so it also comes to pass, that ^ooke
what virtue was in a pound of the simple, is contained in a dram more or
(...) of the oil: besides this, such oils have this property amongst others,
that by a marvelous subtilenesse of substance which they have gotten by the
fire, they do (...) pierce into the most profound and deep parts, and quickly
work their ^ffects.

As concerning their lasting and continuance, The continuance of distilled
oils*
they will keep long, especially (...) (after they have been rectified, that
is to say, yet once more distilled upon ashes with a s^all fire in a retort)
you stop them up in bottles of double glass, and such (...) are armed and
close stopped with Cement or Masticke, or Wax and Masticke (...) tegether,
without giving them any air, except at such times as you would ^se them, and
which then you cannot do without damage done unto them: for ^^^ing they be
all ayrie and fiery, they cannot choose but easily euaporate and spend, and that
in such sort as that it may be evidently seen and discerned, as amongst the
(...) will easily be found true in oil of camphire.

As for the use; The (...)*
that is in drops, if you take them simply and alone by themselves, ^^hether
it be into the body or without, as you shall understand hereafter. But to use
them to the most profit inwardly, you must dissolve sugar in violet, rose,
cinna^ome or other such like waters, and into it cast one or two drops of the
oil which you would use, and so make up lozenges thereof.

CHAP. LXXXI.
A particular description of certain Oils that are distilled according to the
former method.
But the oils of Seeds, as of Anise, Fennel, Elder-tree, Cummine, and others
are distilled after this manner: Take such quantity of Seeds as you please, as
five or six pound at the least, and for the better bruise them gros^y, seeing
carefully to it, that not so much as one seed con^inu^ ^vhole, put them into
the vessel of copper: pour in upon them of clear fountain^ water ^iue and
twenty or thirty pound, mingle them diligently together, cover the vessel
with his head, and do in manner as has been said before.

The oil which distilleth first, is of greater effica^i^ than any one for
which cause, the receiver may be twice or thrice changed.

This thing is vvorthie observation, that oil of anise-^eeds in the time of
So^^er cannot well be distilled, because that the spirits thereof are too
subtle, and much more subtle indeed than those of Fennel: vvhereupon it
follows, that at the (...) of the fire they do easily spend by euaporation,
though it be guided and kept very low and soft: But the fittest time to
distill them ^s Winter; for how much the colder that Winter is, so much the
more it becomes coagulate and resembling the cafphire when it runs down
into the receiver. After that you have s^rayned it through a clean linen
cloth, all the water passes away, and the oil (...) behind in the linen
cloth, and which you must dissolve shortly after in a great glass by the heat
of a ^ire-pan, and so the ^legme is easily separated. This is a singular oil,
whether it be taken alone by drops with wine, or broth, or sugar Lozenges, for
to comfort the stomach, help digestion, and discuss winds; for the (...)
also, and diseases of the lungs; as also for the mother; whereupon it comes,
that it s^ay^^h the whites of women.

Fruits, Fruits.
as of Juniper berries, etc. by reason that they are somewhat more oily than
herbs and seeds, do not require such quantity of water as herbs and
seeds: so that for a pound of fruits, five or six pound of water will be (...)
They must be brayed sufficiently small, put into the gourd, and dealt with as
seeds and herbs are dealt withal: The Oil comes forth first, and
afterward the water.

Spices and aromaticall things are distilled after the same manner that seeds
are* Spice^ and ar^maticall drugs.
but in their distillation mingle not Wine or Aqua-vitae, as some do, but
only pure fountain water: for Wine and Aqua-vitae rise up presently, without
carrying wi^^ them the virtues of the aromaticall things; whereas the water
rises no^ up, without taking with it the aromaticall things. The Oil of
Nutmegs swimmeth alo^t, and so does that of Mace.

For to distill Oil of Cinnamome in excellent manner: Oil of Cinnamome.
Bray a pound of Cinnamome in such sor^ as that it may go through a sieue, but
beat it not all to powder; put it in a gourd, and power upon it water of
Buglosse, Borage, Endive, and Balm, of every one half a pound, let them
stand together four or five days in the vessel well stopped: then out of this
gourd power them into another gourd, and set this gourd in an earthen pot, with
sand betwixt the pot and it, and so set them both in the furnace: first make a
soft fire, but after make it greater by little and little: after that there is
a measure distilled out after this manner, take it away as the best, for that
which (...) loweth is of a great deal less virtue than the first, but yet may
be kept to (...) new Cinnamome in. After the same fashion you shall distill
Cloves, Pepper, Angelica, Galanga, etc. See in our secret remedies.

CHAP. LXXXII.
Of the manner of extracting Oils out of Wood.
FOr as much as the oily substance of wood is more ^enacious and clammie, by
reason of the slyminesse thereof; therefore the extr^c^ing of the ^ame is
diverse from that of herbs and seeds, and is not (...) but (...) greater
cost, and drawn and gathered with greater (...) and industry, than those of
seeds and plants, which we have entrea^ed of before. know well, that some do
accustom to draw Oils per des^^nsum^ as they use (...) call it, in two
vessels of earth set one upon another, and a plate of iron with a hole in it,
betwixt them both: but such Oil is nothing worth, and tastes, for the most
part, of I cannot tell of what adustion: but the best is to draw it per
ascensum, that so you may have that which is excellent good, fair, and
penetratiue; the manner is such: Make your furnace of matter and form as
above, saving that in the uppermost part of it you must have a cleft or open
place, for the more easy placing and disposing of the neck of your vessel.
The vessel shall be fashioned like a Bladder, Corner, or bag of a Shepherds
Pipe, called of the Chemists a re^ort: it must be of glass, or else of earth,
and varnished and leaded within, and of such bigness, as that it may contain
a dozen pound of water, having a neck of a foot and a half long, or a foot
long at the least, and bending downward: It is to consist of two parts; the
one of them stretching from the bell^e of the said bladder forward, some six
fingers long, and for thickness so made, as that ones hand may go into the
orifice of it, to make clean the said vessel within: and the other growing
ever less and less, even unto the end, must be made to join with the former
part by the mea^es and help of some fastening matter, as glue or cement of
Bole-armoniacke; and yet in such sort, as that they may be set together, and
taken asunder, when need shall require. This is the figure and shape.

A The Retort of glass, or earth, vernished within, and leaded.

B The orifice of the Retort, for the taking in of matter into the belly and
body, and for to give way also for the making clean of the said belly, and
which for that purpose must be made larger than it is pictured here, for else
the hand cannot enter into it.

C The other part of the Retort, into which must be inserted the nether part of
the Retort, which must have a ring about, in the place where the two parts
shall be cemented and luted together.

D The Pipe, which must be narrow and sharpe-pointed, to the end it may be
inserted and put into any sort of glasse-violl, or bottle.



If you have not the benefit of a furnace, you shall place the Retort in fit
and convenient sort within an earthen pan: or in stead thereof, in a vessel
or pot of iron good and wide, and filled with sand or ashes, or without any
thing in it, and that upon a brandrith, if there be need of using a very great
fire, as we see it daily practiced amongst the Apothecaries.

Wherefore, The preparing of wood for to draw oils (...) of.
to draw oil out of oily wood, you must first make it small, and bring it
into pieces, in such sort as Turners do, with turning of wood, and not with
any Saw, or any other edge-toole: neither yet must you make it like powder,
for in boiling it would too lightly and easily rise and swell, as also those
gobbe^s and lumps which are cut by edge-tooles, or other instruments, do
hardly and with great difficulty yield any oil: put into the Retort two
pound of this wood, divided into pieces after the manner of the Turners, and as
much Aqua-vitae, for the steeping and infusing of it, let them infuse together
certain days. This Aqua-vitae, by reason of his subtlenesse, pierces more
easily than any other liquor, and likewise without any difficulty separateth
and forcibly draws the oil from his proper subject, and yet in the mean
time in neither changes nor corrupts, any manner of way, the nature of the
said oil, because it draws near unto the temperature of oils; which is the
cause why we mingle with the wood Aqua-vitae rather than common water:
howsoever, I do not any thing doubt of the manner before described about the
distillation of oils, herbs, and seeds, in which is used the vessel of
Copper with a head, pouring thereinto some clear fountain water, as though
it could not be very certain and profitable for the extracting of oils of
vvood: were it not that we do ^eare more than any thing else, the over great
and vehement boiling thereof, proceeding of the disagreement of the dryness of
the matter, and moisture of the water which might hinder the course of our
distillation. Add hereunto also that such kinds of oiles can hardly rise to
the inner top of the head, if we see this fashioned copper vessel.

When as the vvood has been sufficiently infused, The placing of the vessels.
place the earthen pan in the uppermost part of the furnace upon the bars of
iron, set the retort within this earthen pan with sand in the empty spaces
betwixt, as also covered over with sand, cause the neck to pass through the
cleft made in the uppermost part of the furnace, and to turn downward toward
the receiver, into the mouth whereof it must be close joined, and as carefully
and firmly luted with cement as may be: afterward by little and little put
the kindled coals upon the grate, and sometimes it will not be amiss to lay
them upon the retort wherein the matter to be distilled is enclosed: if it
like you not better to set an earthen pan over it in form of an head, and that
to reuerberate and beat back the heat again upon the said retort. These
things accomplished, you must see to the ordering and continuing of your fire,
increasing it by little and little as reason shall require, evermore carefully
looking unto the sequence and success of the work, until such time as the
Aqua-vitae before infused be all of it distilled, for this is it which comes
^orth first in the distillation, and is gathered into the receiver: then after
this comes the oil pure and all alone, without any thing mixed with it, and
that in such store, as a man could not look for the like of any manner of
putrefying of the matter whatsoever: keep well this Aqua-vitae to serve you
again for the some use, because it still is getting some part of the faculty
of the matter wherewith it is mixed, and there is nothing to let why it may
not serve twice yea thrice. When the receiver is taken away, you must put
another in his place half full of clear water that the oil may distill into
it: this water we allow in the receiver, in respect of the impressions which
the fire may have made by too veh^ment a boiling in the oil, that by the
means of this vvat^r the same may be conected and taken away, and the oil
also kept the better from euaporation, which thing is yet the more f^^ly
achieved, if you set your receiver in a basin or other vessel full of cold
water, changing and renewing the same from hour to hour, till the
distillation be finished. You may also change your receiver if you think good,
once or twice, the better to know the differences of your oils. The
distillation accomplished, which you shall gather by the marks before set
down, you shall sep^rate the oil from the water by the means also above set
down, and at the same time or before any of these things done, take your
retort from the fire, and take off his neck, emptying the belly of the dross
and excrements settled and staying behind: which afterward you shall temper
with water so often, as that having strayned them and boiled them again, they
come fo^th thick and small like pap-meat, which is also good for the same
diseases, Oil of ^uaiacum wood. Oil of Ash-tree wood.
that the oils are good for. After this order is the wood Guajacum distilled,
which is singular good for the ulcers and pains happening in the
French-pockes. The oil of the Ash-tree: and this is good to be used in cold
distillations, and to the helping of the morphew and palsy: taken also
inwardly, it is singular good for the diseased of the spleen: the oil of
Iuniper-wood is a special good thing in the comforting of the reins and matrix.

CHAP. LXXXIII.
Of the manner of drawing Oils of Gums, and first of those that are liquid.
FOr the distilling of Oils of Gummes, you must use the same furnace and
retort wherein you distilled your oily vvoods: but to tell you the truth, they
are not distilled without much pain, by reason of their glutinous clamminesse,
given to hold fast their radical humor and moisture. And which is more,
there are as many ways of drawing oils of Gummes, as there are differences of
Gummes. For some are liquid, that is to say, in substance like birdlime, which
will hardly be kept within his bounds, such is Turpentine, liquid Storax, and
such other like, which participate more of an oily quality than of an
earthie, and so are easily resolved with a small fire. The others are hard, as
is incense, benjouine, and masticke, which require a reasonable heat to be
mollified with. Some again are resolved with a vvaterie humor, as Myrrh,
and Gum arabicke.

Therefore to distill liquid gums, Two ways to extract oils out of liquid
Gums.
and to draw out their oils, there may two ways be taken: the one is such as
has been used of a long time, and the other is new; after the first way, you
may distill oil of Turpentine thus: Take clear Turpentine as much as you
please, and for ^uerie pound take of the ashes of some hard and strong vvood
two ounces, or small sand, vvashed gravel, or the powder of brickes, to keep
the Turpentine for rising high and swelling, Oil of Turpentine.
put all these in the retort, which you shall set within the earthen pan in
the furnace, as you did in oily woods: in the beginning you shall have but a
gentle fire to draw out the water which will first come forth, Thus (...)
Oil o^ wax distilled.
and after make it bigger for the distilling of the Oil. It is likewise
distilled another and that a new way. Take two pound of Turpentine, and eight
pound of fountain water that is very clear, put both into the retort
together, and distill them at a reasonable fire, following the order set down
for oily vvoods. The Oil which you shall gather, will be most pure and
fine, of a very clear and bright color, of a sweet smell and pleasant taste,
which properties are not to be found in the oil which is drawn after the
common and ordinary fashion: and this comes to pass by reason of the water
tempering the qualities conceived and b^gotten in the matter distilled by the
force of the fire and heat of the vessel, which otherwise would have begotten
some fiery impressions, therein had not the resisting quality of the water
withstood the same by his moisture, and that so much the more, for being
likewise received into a receiver half full of fair and fresh water, which
affords another good help likewise unto the same: of all which helps, the
common manner of distilling this oil with sand and ashes has not one, as is
too apparent in the unpleasant taste and blackish or sad yellowish color, and
that it is not fit to be used about the body outwardly, so far is it off
from being worthy to be taken inwardly, without the endangering of the sick
party; beside the unpleasantness of the taste: but this which is distilled
with water is singular good for all manner of diseases, for which it is so
highly commended of all men, as namely for the shortness of breath, stone,
colicke, and diseases of the lungs being taken inwardly in the quantity of two
drams: as also, to take away scarres remaining, freckles, stains, and other
spots of the skin, being applied outwardly.

But and if you desire to know when your Oil is all distilled, When the
distillation is ended*
then you must mark and see when it cease to run out of the retort into
the receiver, for then the distillation of the best and most excellent Oil is
finished. And in case you yet desire to draw some more oil out of the rest of
the matter remaining within the retort, you may do it very easily, if you
cast into the said retort some little lump^ of lead to the quantity of an
ounce, and that by the orifice of the first part of the retort, which must be
very well fitted and luted again with the other part as it was before; for
the lead being molten, does resolve the gum remaining, in such sort, as that
whatsoever is oily, will distill as oil, and you shall gather it in another
receiver. All which ^inished, you shall take the retort handsomely out of the
furnace, reserving the same to serve you again in like time of need.

CHAP. LXXXIIII.
Of the manner of extracting Oils out of hard gums.
YOur hard gums, such as is frankincense, benjouin, masticke, and wax, seeing
they are of a more earthie substance, have a faster and (...) consistence, and
are resolved more hardly than the liquid ones, and so ask not only more
labor to have their oils drawn from them, but stand in need also to have
some sort of oil, and a reasonable fire to ^ollifie and soften them, to the
end that afterward they may the more freely yield their own Oil. It is true,
that even of these there are some of them more tedious and s^i^^yer resisting
to be dissolved, as Frankincense, and Benjouin: and othersome more easy to be
molten, as Wax: and there are others that are indifferent betwixt both, as
masticke. So as that all these gums, according as they are more or less hard
to be resolved, must be more or less mollified and melted before hand, by the
means aforenamed in the distilling of liquid gums: the water only excepted,
which must never be put into the retort with any thing to be distilled. It is
also to be considered and weighed, how that hard gums do very hardly endure
and abide any water, vvhiles (enclosed within the retort) they sustain the
violence of the fire, but in steed of fire, one may put thereto of oil of
Turpentine, to the quantity of three ounces, as well because this oil is most
pure and distilled with a reasonable heat (as we have said before) as because
it has a property drawing near unto the nature of these gums, whereupon it
seems the more fit to be used in the distilling of these gums, as serving
notably to correct their hardness: again, this way more oil will be drawn,
than by using of vvashed sand and gravel cast upon the matter: and according
as we see commonly practiced of Oils of all sorts of gums. And in case you
have not oil of Turpentine in readiness, you may use some other sort of oil;
provided, as much as possibly may be, that it incline not notably either unto
any color of smell: notwithstanding by this means you shall not do more good
than by the former. For there is some kind of gum so troublesome to be
resolved, as frankincense, as that you must be feign to draw the oil thereof
after the same manner that you used in the extracting of oils from the dross
and residence of Turpentine, that is to say, by casting into the retort amongst
it small morsells or lumps of lead, and with raising of the neck of the
retort a little higher than is usual in the distilling of Turpentine and oily
vvoods. By this means without all doubt you shall see some ounces of oil
swimming on the top of the water within the receiver, after that the matter
has grown hot: which (for as much as they would be tainted with some ill
smell and unpleasant taste, because of such quality as they have gotten
through the vehementnesse of the fire, then enclosed with the retort) must be
corrected by the changing of the water in the receiver, that so you may keep
them for the uses which shall hereafter be declared.

These things aforesaid well understood, when you desire greater quantity of
oil, and that more clear and excellent; you shall take two pound of the said
ma^ter and gums, whereof your rese^ued oils were made: you shall put them in
a clean retort, which you shall set over the fire, having the neck hanging
down somewhat more low, and in a short time (and that without any great force
of fire) there will be wrought a certain kind of butter, which will run out
in great plenti^, being as it were of a middle consistence betwixt the gum and
the oil before distilled. Again, you shall take this butter-like matter and
put it into the retort, having first made it very clean, and then set it upon
the furnace the second time, with certain ounces of purged oil which you
shall have drawn before from the same kind of gum. By these means, and the
help of a reasonable fire given unto it, you shall draw as much oil (and that
most exquisite) as Art and Nature could jointly give together. And thus much
for the sure and certain way of extracting of oils of hard gums, which though
it be costly, ought notwithstanding for the excellency thereof be rather
practiced than the other common way which is by gravel, ashes, or washed sand,
cast into the retort with the matter. By such means you shall make oil of
amber, jet, brimstone, and other such kind of things, being first made into
powder, and putting thereunto common oil, which has been first cleansed and
purged in a leaden vessel or warm water.

Oil of Wax is thus prepared after the common manner: Oil of Wax.
Take a pound of new Wax, you shall wash it thus: melting it at the fire you
shall cast it by and by into a vessel full of white Wine, work it well with
your hand after the manner of pas^e, sometimes drawing it out at length,
sometimes breaking of it, and sometimes doubling of it: melt it once again,
and cast it into the same Wine, then also work it with your hands as before,
and thus you shall do three or four times, till you see the wax to have spent
about the quantity of a pint of wine; this done, put it thus prepared into a
retort, and cast upon it gravel, washed sand, or powder of brickes,
notwithstanding that it may be distilled without gravel, sand, or brickes, as
is tried by exper^ence: lute the retort all about, even unto the midst of the
neck, and set in an earthen pan full of small ashes upon the fire, which must
be but soft and gentle at the beginning, but augmented and made greater
afterward from degree to degree, the oil will distill and come forth very
clear.

Others prepare it after this manner: Another manner of making oil of Wax.
They set an earthen vessel full of white or red wine upon the fire, whereinto
after that the Wine is become hot, they cast the Wax divided into many
morsells: after they cause the vessel to boil being close covered, and when
the wine is spent, they power in other, until that every pound of wax have
wasted ten pound of Wine: and when they see that there is yet a little wine
with the Wax, they take away the Wax from the fire, that so it may not burn,
and presently cast the Wax into another vessel wherein there is a little
white wine: after that it is cold, and the moisture thereof taken away, they
distill it in a retort. In any case there must heed be taken that it boil not
in distilling, as in Turpentine and honey, for such liquors being heated, do
easi^ie swell and rise up. Wherefore there must be made but a soft and gentle
fire at the first, and then afterward increased, and the stillitorie cooled:
again, to hinder the boiling up of it, you may cast in some small lumps of
lead wrapped up in paper, or the leaves of Iuie or small gravel, etc.

This oil is singular good for to suppurate and ripen impostumes, The (...) of
the oil of wax*
as^wage pain, comfort the hard and strayned sinews, and for the palsy. The
water distilled before the oil does meruailously heal all sorts of wounds, if
they be washed therewith, and a linen cloth wet therein, laid upon them.

You may distill after this manner, benjouin, ben, ladanum, and other such like
gums: you must also note here in this place, that hard gums may be distilled
with water, as the oils of herbs, and seeds before specified.

CHAP. LXXXV.
Of the manner of extracting Oils out of Myrrh, S^^rax Calamite, Gum
arabicke, and such other like.
MOst certain it is, that the liquor which is extracted and drawn from
Myrrh, Storax calamite, and Gum arabicke, is not an oil, but a gross,
slymie, and glewie matter: which is perceived and known, because they take
not fire, yea and if you meet with any of them at any time that will burn,
then know that it comes by the mingling of some other oil therewith, and
Aqua-vitae.

Take therefore very new eggs, and make them very hard in hot water,
afterward cleave them in the midst, and take out the yolks: and in their
place putting as much Gummes, and that before they be cold, join the two parts
of every one of them together again, and making a hole through the pieces of
the smaller end, hang them in a cave, to the end that the moisture of the place
may cause the Gum (whether it be Myrtle or Storax calamite) therein enclosed
to resolve the more easily: set under every egg a vi^le, and there will drop
down into it a ma^ter much like unto honey, or thinner. This done, gather that
which is distilled into a viole, and set the same very well stopped, d^epe in
the horse-dung, to the end that by his heat (being good to alter and putrify
the slymie quality of this matter) it may be corrected, and made more moist
and like unto oil.

Fiorouanto, an Italian Empericke, in the seven and fiftieth Chapter of his
second Book, and the thirteenth Chapter of the fourth Book of his Vexations,
prepares the oil of Myrrh six this manner: Take of elected and true Myrrh
(...) ounces, of Aqua-vitae without any phlegm twelve ounces, mingle them
together in a retort of glass, which you shall set under horse-dung very
hot the space of (...) days, afterward distill them in Maries-bath till all
the water be risen and wholly gone: then you shall see in the bottom of the
retort, oil, which you shall strain through a linen cloth, and keep it to
preserve the face a long time, and continue it in his young and youthful
brightness and freshness. This oil is a veriebalme to conglutinate and heal
wounds speedily, as also to cure all other inwarddisease in taking two drammes
thereof inward: it is good also for the deafness of the ears. Look for the
larger handling of the distillation of oils, in our Book of secret medicines.

The Silke-worme.
CHAP. LXXXVI.
Of the profit coming of the Worms that spin silk.
THe good Huswife, which has the oversight, government, and d^sposing of the
cattle, must not make less account of the Silke-worm^ than of the Honie-bee.
For, besides the pleasure which she may conceive of the marvelous
industriousnesse of this little beast in making and spinning of Silk, she may
also reap an incredible profit of so excellent a work, which honors and
makes men glorious, being attyred with the pomp of this workmanship and piece
of cunning skill: insomuch, as we see, that Kings, Princes, Gentlemen,
Prelates, Justices, and other great and notable personages are usually decked
and apparrelled with the travail of these pretty creatures. And which is
more; the silk serves not only for the apparrelling of men, but also for a
singular remedy to comfort the heart that is sick, and to rejoice and
recreate all the heavy and troubled spirits of any one: as we may well
understand by that famous con^ection, called of the Physicians Alkermes; which
being compounded, for the most part, of the decoction and infusion of Silk in
the juice of Kermes, and being taken inwardly, it is a very sovereign remedy
against faintings and swownings. Wherefore the good wise or Mistres^e of our
Country Fa^me shall make great account of the keeping of Silke-wormes, to the
end that she may reap the profit of the sale of the Silk which she shall
gather from them yearly: which profitable practice is very well known
amongst the wives of Tourraine here in France.

CHAP. LXXXVII.
Of the situating of a place to keep Silke-wormes in.
IT is necessary also, that the careful Huswife, for the undertaking of the
government of Silke-wormes, and for the making of her best commodity thereof,
do choose out some convenient place about the Farm for the better ordering and
keeping of them: and it must be rather high than low, having a good air, and
without moistness, being so provided of Windows, as that the Sun may come
in at them both morning and evening, if it seem good unto such as have the
charge to govern them. These Windows must be such as will shut close, or else
are glased, or paper Windows, or of fine Linen Cloth, to the end, that when
it raineth or blows, in cold weather, or in moist, they may be kept very
close and fast shut: for who so fails to govern and provide for them in this
sort, it comes to pass without doubt, that these pretty creatures being
tender at all times, cannot escape, but die, when any hard weather comes. He
must likewise have Nets and Cords before the Windows, to the end, that the
paper-Windowes being opened, the Sparrowes, Swallows, and such hu^tfull birds,
may not g^t in, to feed upon these Worms. Neither Cock nor Hen must come in
here: for they would so rauenously feed upon this little Worm, as that they
would be ready to burst. The ^loore must be kept very clean; and the walls
without holes or cr^uises, by which neither Crickets, Lizards, Rats, or other
like vermin, may enter and get in, to kill and spoil these little things,
either night or day. In it there must be overthwart partitions with pillars,
and upon them shall be fastened many boords or hurdles, made of the stalks of
Ro^e-trees, for to pleasure this small wretch withal: and these, before you
set any Worms upon them, must be sprinkled with a little vinegar, and rubbed
with sweet herbs, because they love sweet smells.

CHAP. LXXXVIII.
Of the governing of Silke-wormes.
THe ^arefull Huswife, so soon as the Spring draws near, and that she shall
see that the Mulberrie-tree begins to bud, shall make in readiness eggs of
Worms, which she has kept all the Winter before, to be brooded and sit upon.
And if she see that the Mulberrie-tree is ^^ow to bud, she shall lay fresh
dung unto the roots thereof during the new Moon of March, thereby to bring it
forward: for otherwise, for lack of theleaves of the Mulberrie-tree, if it
should come to pass that her Worms should be hatched or bred, she should be
constrained, for their food, to have recourse to the heart of the Thorn, Elm
leaves, the tender branches of Nettles, and others. And as concerning making of
choice of such Worms as are to be breeders; you must take the seed which is
but a year old, and which being bathed in Wine, falls to the bottom, and
floteth not above, and withal, has the marks which shall be spoken of
hereafter: The time of brooding them, is the fifteenth or twentieth of April,
from the fourth unto the tenth day of the Moon, but never in the decrease: for
wrapping their silk round about it, they w^ll bring it forth the fourth ^ay,
at such time as they are strong, in such sort, as that their ends and husks
will be greater, harder, and more finely haired, than any other that are bred
at another time: for those which are bred in the decrease of the Moon, are
always feeble, and yield no profit. The means to make them breed, is, after
that you have watered and bathed them with white Wine, rather than warm water,
to lay them near the fire, until they be a little warmed: then to lay them
betwixt two pillowes stuffed with feathers, and made likewise somewhat warm,
or betwixt the breasts of women (provided that they have not their terms at
that time) and so, a^ the Worms do breed, to take them away with
Mulberrie-tree leaves, making choice of those which are most tender: and then
to lay them upon boords, or papers, that have been rubbed over with Wormwood
or Sothernewood, or some such like herb. When they are once bred, they shall
have the leaves o^ Mulberrie-trees given them evening and morning, increasing
them every day, as the Worms shall grow greater and greater, unto the fourth
change: for th^^ also they will stand in need to be fed at noone, because they
eat more at that time than they were wont: but you must be admonished, that
when they (...), or change, you must give them somewhat sparingly, because as
then they are weak and feeble: And in any case let not the leaves be rotten,
moist, or wet: but if it should fall out, that they should be moist, then you
must wipe th^^ thoroughly with clean Linnens, The gathering of the
Mulberrie-tree leaves.
and dry them at the fire. They must also be gathered of Mulberrie-trees
planted upon the tops of hills, and standing open upon the Sun, and of old
trees, rather than of young ones, and such as bear a fruit somewhat red and
black, and not to gather the said leaves in the morning, so long as they are
wet with the d^aw, or other thing, until the Sun have gone over them: and
further, to pick the bad from the good, before you give them unto the Worms
to ^ate. These little beasts may not be touched with your hands but as little
as may be: for the more they are handled, the more they are hindered thereby,
because they are very exceeding tender and dainty, especially at such time as
they do cast, or change. And yet notwithstanding, they must be kept very
clean and neat, and all their little dung taken from them every three days.
The place must likewise be perfumed with Frankincense, Garlic, Onions, Larde,
or broyled Sawsages, that you may minister matter of pleasure unto these little
creatures* and again, if they be weak and sick, these smells refresh and
recover them again. They must also be marked whether they sleep, or no: for
seeing they are wont to sleep four times, especially when the cast and
change; if it happen, that any of them be still eating, and sleep not, they
must be put apart, without having any meat to eat, that so they may fall to
sleeping, for else they would all burst: and it is as true, that if they be
breeding of young, they must be soberly dieted. After that they have cast and
changed the fourth time, within three days after they will eat better than
ever they did, Signs that the worms would mak^ silk^.
until such time as their bodies begin to shine, and that they make manifold
show of the silk thread that is in their bellies: which if it be to come white
from them, their head is as if it were silver: if that it be to come yellow
from them, their heads bear the color of gold: if green or Orange color,
For to know the color of the silk
their heads foretell the same. Thus they feeling themselves well filled and
fed, they seek out some resting place for the purpose to fasten themselves
unto, and there orderly to avoid their silk, every one shu^ting up himself
in his scale or husk, which they make and build up in two days, or a little
more. Then you must be careful to have in readiness for them, round about the
Tables, good store of Broom, Brakes, branches of Vines, Oake-tree boughs,
Chesnut-tree boughs, and other things: and withal, let them be very dry;
for moisture is their enemy: and then not to give them over, until they be
all fastened and hanged upon these branches, there to make their work: whereof
they be so eager, as that they grow mad ^^till they be packed up in their
little clewes and bottomes, and that in such sort, as that a man would think
that they would be sti^eled: then they must have some help, and order must be
taken, that they may not fall down upon the earth: and if they do fall, to
put them up again into some place for the purpose. They have finished their
work in two or three days, more or less, and as the weather grows hot or
cold at that time: And as it is easy to perceive when they are all (...)
work, so they make it to be heard very well when they cease and make an end
of their labor. They dwell thus, and abide altogether, for the most part, in
their husks twenty days, more or less, according unto the tenderness,
softness, or hardness of their bottomes of silk. The choice of the (...).
As concerning the choice of their husks, or ^ods, the Orange colored are
best, and not the yellow, and least of all, the white, or green: and as
concerning the taking of the single, or of the double, the single ^^e more
worth, because that the male and the female are within the double: which ^emale
lays her eggs no sooner in the morning than she coupleth with the male
again. The choice of breeding worms.
The scales or husks being thus chosen, those which are good for encreas^,
must be put into a place where no dust is, and well covered: the double also
must be separated from the single, to the end, that they may make the fairer
silk: and especially there must choice be made of such people as are the best
workefolkes, both ^or to know the silk, as also to draw it out with such
discretion, as that there may ^come the most profit of it. When the Worms
shall be out of their husks, then you must make choice of the best for
increase and breeding: those which are the grossest and blackest, are the
strongest, and afford better eggs than any of the other. You must likewise
take more females than males: and for the knowing of ^he one from the other,
The difference betwixt male and female worms.
the eyes of these creatures do sufficiently testify thereof; ^or the females
have thinner eyes, and not altogether so black, as the males: They must also
be put asunder, and white Linen clothes spread, or rather leaves of Paper,
upon little Tables, for to receive their eggs: The Paper is more natural and
commodious than the Linen, because it may be the better raked over with (...)
knife, to draw together the eggs thereupon, without making of any spoil
(...) all.

As concerning the diseases whereunto these little creatures be subject: When
they have not been so carefully looked unto as they should, The diseases of
silke-wormes.
to be kept clean; when the ^^old Northern wind, or the hot Southern Sun
has molested them, as also when ^hey have eaten too much; then they become
sick: wherefore you must keep them cleanely: stop the windows and holes by
which the cold winds do enter and get in, and carry coals of fire that do
not smoke, into their lodging, setting thereupon Frankincense or Sawsages cut
in slices (for they so love this smell, as tha^ it presently cures them) as
also besprinkle them with a little Malmesey or Aqua-vitae. If they have been
troubled with too great heat of the South Sun, there must be sprinkled upon
them Rose Water: If they have ouer-eaten themselves, the contrary diet will
cure them; as the keeping of them three or four days without eating any
thing: If there be any of them that are spotted with any duskish, bluish, or
yellowish color, and that there appear withal upon their bellies a certain^
humor that does wet them, they must be speedily taken from out of the company
of the rest, and carried out: and in the morning, before the Sun rise, set
the whole and sound in the air for some small time, and afterward put them in
their places again: and then it will be good to sprinkle them with good and
strong vinegar, and to anoint them with Wormwood or Sothernewood, and also to
give them air, making them likewise to feel the force of the Sun, provided,
that the beams thereof do not ^ouch them: and you must look also, that the
windows be so placed, as tha^ the morning air may season and send his breath
throughout the whole house.

The end of the third Book.
THE FOVRTH BOOK OF THE COVNTRIE HOUSE.
That there are two sorts of Meadows.
CHAP. I.
Of Meadows: and their difference.
IN our former Treatise we have run through those things which belong unto
the husbanding and ordering of Gardens and Orchards, and now it requires, that
we speak of Meadow Grounds, vvhereupon consists the greatest means of
feeding and bringing up of Cattle, to the end we may perfect and accomplish
our fore-appointed purpose. The thing therefore, called in our French tongue
Pr^, may seem to be borrowed from the old word Prat, and both of them to
signify and point out a thing that is ready and pressed to do the Master of
the Farm and Farmer service, without putting him to any pains, in respect of
the laboring or husbanding of them: but this must be understood of Meadows
having their prey and maintenance about them; namely, such as are those which
are fed and watered with the Marne on the one side, and the River Aube on the
other, which is about some hundred and fifty leagues of square Country: as
also those about the River called Veselle, which of all others does most abound
in Meadows. It is in like manner in the free and reclaimed grounds from
Barle-du^ to Vitrye in Partois, and from Louemont to Vassie in Thierache, all
along the little Blondelle, as also along the great and small Morin, in our
Country of Beauuoisis. Such meadow grounds do not ^eare storms and tempests,
as Gardens and other arable grounds do: but with little cost and charges they
yield their double revenue and profit every year; the one of Hay, the other
of Pasture. Meadows are of two sorts: the one dry, the other ^oist. The dry
craves not the help of any water to be watered withal, except the rain,
because it is in a fat place, and where it has full store of refreshing ^uice:
and in such places Hay does grow of his own accord, and that a great deal
better than where it is forced by casting of water upon it. The moist meadows
have also seldom any need of watering, because, most commonly, they lie
along the banks of some great or small Rivers, which feeds and nourishes
them: as those which lie here in France, by the Rivers of Marne, Aube,
Blondile, and Morin: and in England, by the Rivers of Thames, Trent, Seauerne,
Auon, Teame, Ouze, Wye, and such like: and these meadows are, for the most
part, plain and level grounds, because the inundations of these Rivers
washing them over at least once or twice every Winter, the Moal^s, and other
silthie vermin, which hurt the earth, are destroyed, and these Meadows are
ever more fruitful and more abundant in their increase than the higher
Meadows are, but the grass is nothing near so sweet and so pleasant, neither
feeds so soundly, nor so suddenly: Whence it comes, that the husbandman
keeps his high-land hay for his cattle which are to be sed, and his
low-ground hay for those which work.

CHAP. II.
What grounds are good for Meadows: and how to make new Meadows.
THe ground that is fat and full of juice, although it be nothing at all helped
either by small River or Brook, is good to bring forth hay, so that* such
place be not exceeding far from some small Brook, standing water, or little
River: or, at the least, that it be moist at the bottom, and such, as wherein,
if that one make a reasonable deep ditch, he may find good store of water: for
moisture is one of the nurses of hay. Where such ^at and iuiceground is not,
there may Meadow ground be made, of what manner of earth soever it be, whether
it be a strong, slight, or lean earth, so that you have close by it but this
one commodity of a little Brook to water it, and that the field lie somewhat
sloping or descending, not very low, nor very flat, as wherein the rain
water, or other of any small River, taking sometimes over the same, do not
use to dwell and stand any long time, but passes and runs away fair and
softly, without any ^arrying. Wherefore I agree and must needs confess, that
some grounds are not so sit and profitable as othersome for the receiving of
Hay-seed, as those which through the neerenesse of some great Floods, and
Pooles, Lakes, and great large Waters, are oftentimes overflowed and covered
with abundance of water, which in Winter drowneth the grounds: Whereupon it
comes to pass, that the hay is nothing fine or delightsome unto beasts, but
great, and full of stumpie stalk: a broad grass also, and nothing pleasing
their taste. But howsoever it is, the hay of standing waters, ill husbanded and
corrupted, as also the hay which naturally grow^th thereabout, and by the large
borders of Lakes, is not such as the fine mouthed beast can delight in, as
neither that which is gathered in grounds bordering upon the Sea, as with the
salt and nitrous relish whereof the appetites of Cattle are overthrown, not
being accustomed thereunto: besides that, the very grass it self is more
rank and unsavory than the common sort of grass is, and in taste very
unlike it.

Yet this holds not generally: for these low Meadows, Salt Marshes.
and those which border on the Sea, are oftentimes the best of all other, and
feed with greater expedition than any other hay whatsoever: as witnesses many
of those salt marshes, which are the most chief nurceries and bringers forth
of fat cattle that are known, and especially Sheep, which never are known
to rot upon the same. And of all cattle which ^eed upon hay, none is so
dainty and choice in its taste, as the Sheep is: for he must have it both
sweet, short, and soft: So that by that beast only it may be seen, that those
low Meadows are not ever unprofitable. And indeed to conclude, there is not any
ground which will bear grass, but by industry, manure, and much rest, may be
brought to bear reasonable good hay, if not to feed, yet to keep cattle in
good p^^ght, and make them go through with their labors soundly: which is as
great a profit to the husbandman as the office of grazing, and more properly
belonging to his profession.

Wherefore if you would make new Meadows, To make new meadow grounds.
make choice of the best ground you can: this ground you shall lay fallow, and
let lie idle a whole Summer: then in Autumn after you shall turn up and plow
the same ground, often sowing therein, for the first year, Turnips or Nauets,
Millet, Beans, or Oats, and the year following with Wheat: then the third
year you shall labor it diligently, and sow it with Fetches mixed with
Hay-seeds: and after this, you shall mow and order it as other old Meadows, as
we will declare by and by.

Yet for the sowing of these many Grains so many years one after another,
it is not altogether so necessary: for though it may be used in some barren
Countries, because Turnips, Nauers, and Fetches are enrichers, and (as it were)
manurings of the ground, and the Oats a great breeder of grass; yet if you
only, Oats a great breeder of grass.
when you intend to lay a ground of grass, do but the last year cast down
the furrows, and lay the lands as flat as you can, and then only sow clean
Oats upon the same, it will be as fully sufficient as all the former labor,
and altogether as fruitful, if the husbandman slack not his labor herein,
but give it such needful seconds as the soil shall require.

CHAP. III.
What manner of Husbandry is required about Meadows.
SVch as obstinately defend and maintain, To sow Meadows.
that there is not any pains or labor to be used about Meadows, seem unto
me (under correction) void of all sound judgment: for every where, in
process of time, the earth becomes weary, and stands in need to be
refreshed in some parts of it, yea, to be sown again, and fashioned, if need
be, especially in feeding grounds, and Meadows, appointed for pasture for
horned beasts: for such cattle as bear Wool, do not desire wa^^ie places
(as Meadows would be) but being contented with Shepherds, graze along by the
ways, and upon the plowed grounds. And as for your herds of young Horses and
Asses, they feed naturally and commodiously with your other cattle. Yea
furthermore, I have seen in Campaine, as it should be about Pont upon Seine, a
Meadow country, the Geese and Turkies daily and ordinarily driven to the
pasture, for the saving of charges at home: which thing would not agree well
about the places of Monfort l'Amaurye, where is kept some part of the Kings
breed of Horses and Mares; for the down, and other feathers of those fowls,
as also their dung, would make these sorts of beasts sick, even Horse, Mare,
Mule, or Ass.

Besides, according to the opinion of all good husbandmen, Geese a greas enemy
to good grounds.
these fowls are of all creatures the most prejudicial that may be, not only
to Meadow grounds, but also to all manner of Pas^ure grounds whatsoever: for
besides the annoyance which their feathers and down make, their dung is so
poisonous unto the earth, that it makes it barren, and forces it to bring
forth nothing but Goose-grasse, which is such a sour and unwholesome weed,
that no beast will touch it, and which, in short space, will overrun a great
deal of ground, and make it utterly vselesse: therefore every husband must be
careful to keep these fowls both from his Meadows and his feeding Pastures.

But whatsoever others say or do, (...)
sure I am, that a good Farmer must not neglect his Meadow ground, seeing the
husbanding of them is a matter more of care than of pain and labor: For the
first care must be to keep it that it grow not with (...) and thorns, or
great high stalks of other herbs, all which would be pulled up by the roots
in Autumn, or before Winter, as bushes, brambles, and rushes: some other of
them in the Spring, as Succories, Hemlocke, and such other weeds, which are
unprofitable for the feeding of the herds of Horses and Mares. Likewise there
must not be left in them any stones, To gather out the stones.
nor yet any other thing, that may hinder the digging of them, when the earth
is to be stirred. The ground being freed of stones, shall be made even and
smooth very handsomely in the Winter time, and after that, tilled and turned
over very diligently and ^inely with the plough, and after harrowed, To horrow
it.
especially that which is lean, and lying with some descent, but not watered
otherwise than the rain uses to water it. It must be dunged also in Ianua^ie
and February, when the Moon is in the increase, that so it may be fatted, and
store of juice brought into it for the growing of grass. The best manuring
that can be bestowed upon it, The manuring of it.
is fine crumbling earth mixed with dung, which will do it more good than the
best and purest dung that you can find in your Neat-house. For the making
hereof, you must gather in Summer the dust that is by the high ways most
haunted, and mingle the same with the dung of cattle, the ^ilth and sweepings
of the house, the dyrt of the streets, the parings of the house, and the great
and little Court, the dung of Hens and Pigeons, Oxe-dung, Horse-dung, and all
other such excrements, which must be let incorporate and mingle together the
whole Winter, until such time as this matter, watered with water, and
thoroughly pierced with the frost, be sufficiently ripened. This mixture when it
is spread, enters better below into the earth (...) dung alone, and also
incorporateth it self better with the earth. But above all, there is no dung
more excellent for Meadow grounds, than the rotten staddell or bottomes of
Hay-mowes, Bottomes of Hay-mowes.
or Hay-stackes, which, putrified with the moisture of the earth, looks
mouldie black, and most filthy; and with this, if you mix the sweepings of
the Hay-barne floor, and the scattered seeds which fall from the Hay when it
is shaked up or bound into bottles, it will be a great deal the better, and
the earth will put forth his increase in much more plenty. These Meadow grounds
must also be very well drained from water, if they be subject thereunto, and
sluices and draines Sluices and Draines.
made either by plough, spade, or other instrument, which may convey it from
one sluice to another, till it fall into some ditch or river: for as the sudden
washing of the earth fatteneth and enricheth the same, by reason of the mud,
slime, and other fat substances which it leaves behind it; so the long abiding
of the water upon it, (...) the soil, rots the roots of the grass, and either
makes it utterly barren, or (...) it to a bogge-myre: Nay, where the water lies
long upon the ground, there it will ^ome the grass to reed, rushes, or other
unprofitable weeds: therefore by all means prevent the continuance of floods,
and only esteem of a gentle washing, and no more. Again, in your Meadow
grounds you must be exceeding careful to know the goodness or badnesse of the
same: as, which is fruitful, which barren, which quick of growth, which slow,
which will bear but one entire crop, and which two, and accordingly you must
lay them, that is give them time of rest for growth; as thus: If your ground be
very fruitful and rich, yet through the coldness of the clyme will not bear
above one crop, it shall not be needful for you to lay it before May day: but
if it be but of a reasonable fruitfulness, then you may lay it at the
Annuntiation of our Lady: but if it be very hard and barren, then it is best
to lay it at Candle^^ss, that it may have the uttermost of the Spring and
Summer to grow in: also, if it be exceeding fertile, and so warm and close
couched, that it will bear two croppes, then you shall lay it at Candlemas,
that you may cut it at the end of May and the midst of September; for to cut it
after that time, is both ill husbandry, and profitlesse: for howsoever men may
be opinioned, either through custom, or the imitation of their neighbors, yet
they shall find it most certain, that the hay, how good soever the growth be,
yet if it want the Sun and kindly withering, it can never be good either to
feed or sustain nature with: but having the juice rotting and not dried within
it, becomes black, unpleasant, and unwholesome, insomuch, that the worst
straw is better than the best of such hay: therefore let every husbandman have
a great care to the good and kindly withering of his hay, and esteem ever the
quality before the quantity. After Meadows are laid, then the husbandman
shall have a great care to his ^ences, least either his own, or other men's
cattle, by day or night break into the same, for they may do him more
injury in an hour than they can do him profit in a month: for the young and
tender grass, if it be nipt or bitten at the first springing, hardly after
prospers, till the sithe have cut it: for it is with grass as with stronger
plants, which if they be nipt or bitten, forthwith loose the beauty of their
flourishing, and grows not straight or upright, but low, crooked, and
ill-fauoredly, neither to fast as before it did, but very slowly, and many
times without seed: therefore by all means prevent the cropping of your
Meadows, by cattle at their first springing. Also, if you have any rivers,
ditches, or small rundles, which butt upon your Meadows, you shall at such time
as you lay your Meadows, be sure to cleanse and scour them both of weeds,
mad, and other filth, that shall any way cloy or fill them, that the water
may thereby have a more free passage and a larger receipt to receive and convey
away any flood which shall happen: for after your Meadows begin to grow, if
any flood shall come upon them, the sand and other filth will fasten to the
roots, and lie upon the grass in such manner, that not being able to be
cleansed by any husbandry, it will make the hay utterly unwholesome, so that
lying in the stomachs of the beasts, it will engender many mortal and
pestilent diseases. And herein is also to be noted, that the mudde and other
compass which you shall take out of these rivers or ditches, would be spread
upon the Meadows, and when it is dry, with small clotting maules be beaten as
small as dust; for this is also an excellent manner of manuring your Meadows.

CHAP. IIII.
What must be sown in the Meadows.
THe way then to reform the old and dry consumed places of your Meadow, To sow
meadows.
if they be become hoarie and rotten, must be by sowing them in the Spring with
good Hay-seed, which is the Meadow Clauer, which is called in some places Sops
in wine, by reason of the flower, Sops in wine, or Snaile-clauer.
which is an herb which men in times past made great account of, sowing it by
it self as the Fetch is wont to be sown, and they did sow it in January, as
Cato and Palladius Cato. Palladius.
do report. The manner of sowing it shall be set down in the fifth Book, in
the handling of Pulse. Likewise the seed of Gallion or petty Mugguet, wild
Fetch, and Hauer-grasse, which the Latin Poet calls properly barren Oats.
Again, the small wild Mallow is not amiss, neither the little Crowfoot,
foreseen it be not that with the bulbous root, that is to say, the Crowfoot
having a round root like an Onions, because that is venomous for the beast, but
it must be that Crowfoot which has a hairie and threadie root. The twofold
Satyrion is good in some place where it grows naturally: so likewise is the
Hyacinth, the one of them being of a blew flower, the other of a purple, herein
differing from the Satyrion, which is more cut and divided into small buds, as
likewise more fragrant. It is not good that there should be any great store of
Plantaine, Plantaine.
except it be that of the least sort, called Birds-toong. The wild Carret, Wild
Carret.
especially that, which in the midst of the white flower, in the round broad
tuft, bears a sweet smelling seed; being rubd in the hand, like unto grains
of Paradise, and of the same color: as likewise wild Wound-wort (which
Dioscorides calls Hercules his wound-wort Wound-wort.
) is very good, foreseen that it grow not too great. Germander Germander.
likewise is good, being called of the Grecians small Oak, by reason of the
figure of the lease. Little Rampions Small Rampions.
likewise is very good, because of the root, which helps forth Lent sallads
as well as the Cresses: wild Saffron Wild Saffron^
is not good, because of his flower, seeing both the root and it do kill
beasts, even as Hemlock does, which is called Birds-bane: neither yet water
Pepper, as being venomous through his heat, and using to grow only in standing
and stinking waters, as laughing Smallage does, Laughing Smallage.
called Herba Sardonica, because it makes men and beasts to seem to laugh
when it kills them: in like manner, wild Woad, Bucks-beard, Hartstong, wild
and low growing All-good, both sorts of Violets, the less Centaurie, all the
three sorts of Daisies, and especially those which are called Gold-cups, or
little Crow-foot, and the three-leaued grass of the Meadows, are all of them
singular good herbs for the fruitfulness of the Meadow ground. The Garlic,
which is called Serpentina, Great and small water Germander in the Meadows of
Cheles.
and which a man would judge to be a little small rush, of a reasonable length,
does not amiss, no more than the true and small water Germander, which is
often found in the Meadows of Cheles, and elsewhere: but great store of it
makes the hay to smell ill: as on the contrary, Penyryall makes it smell
sweet, and so likewise, Organi^ of both sorts, the three sorts of Balm, and
Costmarie: but Mints, and that Hore-hound, which is wild Camomile, are nothing
worth. Great quantity and store of wild Fetch causes the hay to be very full
of nourishment for cattle: the less Plantaine, Siluer-grasse of both sorts,
Peachwort (so called, because it carries a flower like a Peach-tree) and
Burnet: the three sorts of Shepherds needles, called of the ancient Writers
Storks-bills (by reason of the fashion of the peake that follows in place
after the Hour) whereof herb Robert is one, do very well for cattle, and
cure them of the gravel, causing them to make their (...) in abundance.
Millefoile and Prunell (called the Carpenters herb, Carpenters w^rt-^alme.
because it is good for cuts) are also good, and very sweet of smell; but
Quitch-grasse (called Dogs-grasse) does destroy the Meadow as much as Balm does
mend it, and increases milk in Kine, as great Hares-foot does in Goats, and
in like manner as Veruaine and Groundswell are good herbs for Conies. Look
well, that Thistles set not their foot within your Meadow, Blessed thistle.
except it be the blessed Thistle, with the yellow flower, or else the little
Thistle, and that but about the borders or edges of the Meadow, and that it have
the leaves of Sow-thistle, though it be smaller, and spotted (as it were) with
drops of milk, and therefore it is called Mary's Thistle. The red and blew
Pimpernell, Pimpernell.
because of their flowers, as also the white, are as good there, as either the
male or female Mercury, though these herbs delight rather to grow in the
ways, and amongst Vines, as do also the Bindweed and Nightshade. Flax-weed,
which differs from Esula, in as much as it has no milk, and grows high as
Line does (save that it has a yellow flower) is good: but Esula or Spurge is
naught, as is also Hypericum, for these two are both of them very hot and
shrewd fellows. Melilot the small and the great, Myrrhis, which has leaves
like Fennel, and diverse divided white flowers, is of great virtue, and sweet,
after the smell of Myrrh. To be short, the Carret and Cheruile do serve
greatly for the nourishing and goodness of the hay. But above all, there is no
herb nor seed more excellent to be nourished or sown in the Meadows, than
Saxifrage is: Saxifrage a great friend to Meadows.
for amongst all huswiues it is held an infallible rule, That where Saxifrage
grows, there you shall never have ill Cheese or Butter, especially Cheese.
Whence it comes, that the Netherlands abound much in that commodity, and
only (as is supposed) through the plenty of that herb only. And for the
better affirmation or proof thereof, you shall understand, that all good
huswiues, which will carry any reputation for good Cheese-making, do ever
dress their cheslep-bags and earning with Saxifrage, as the only herb that
gives a most perfect season to the same.

Now albeit I have here delivered you a particular collection of the seeds of
all those herbs which are most necessary to be sown in Medows, yet I would
not advise you to be so curious as to bestow your labor in culling these seeds
from the rest, or to sow them in your Medows with that care and respect that
you sow seeds in your Garden; for less pains will serve: only I would with
you, when you intend to sow your Meadows (which would be either in the Spring,
or in Autumn) to go (if you be unprovided) to such a neighbor or Farmer near
unto you, as is owner of some fine and delicate piece of Meadow, void of gross
and filthy weeds, stump-grasse, knot-grasse, peny-grasse, Sweepings of
Hay-barne floores.
speare-grasse, or Burnet, and from him you shall buy the sweepings or
sc^^trings of his Hay-barne floor, as also those sweepings which shall be
under those windows or holes, in at which the husbandman puts hay when he
vnloads it, and these sweepings you shall sow upon your Medows as thick as you
can strew them, for the thicker is ever the better: and you must foresee, that
when you thus sow your Meadows, you cause your ground to be as bare eaten
before as is possible, especially with Sheep, because as they bite the nearest
of all cattle to the ground, so they bestow upon it their manure, or dung,
which is the fattest and most fruitfullest of all other, and makes the seeds
instantly to sprout after the first shower. You shall also observe when you sow
your Meadows (whether it be at the Spring, or at the fall) to see and if the
dung of the cattle which last grazed upon the same, lie upon it still in
heaps, as when it fell from their bodies: and this dung you shall raise from
the ground, and with beetles made for the purpose, beat them into very small
pieces, and so spread them generally over the whole Meadow, and then sow your
seeds amongst them, for by this means your seeds will quickly take root.

There is also another way of enriching of Meadows, especially such as lie
high, and out of the dangers of floods, which for the most part are ever the
barrennest; and that is by the foddering or feeding of cattle Foddering of
great cattle.
upon the same in the Winter season, as thus: The husbandman shall in the
barrennest part of his Meadow ground, which is safest from waters or floods,
make up his hay in a large and handsome Stacke, or Reeke, either round or
square, according to his pleasure, or the quantity of the hay: and this Stacke
thus made, he shall fence about with thorn, or other hedge-ware, to keep
cattle from tearing or spoiling the same, till such time as the Farmer
himself shall think it meet to cut down the same: Then when the extremity
of Winter shall come, as either when the grass is clean consumed, or that by
reason of long Frosts or Snowes your cattle cannot come by any food, then is
the time to cut down your Hay-reekes, and to fodder your cattle therewith
morning and evening, cutting no more down at a time than shall conveniently
serve to fodder your cattle; for spoil herein is the vildest husbandry that
can be. This hay thus cut down, you shall not lay in one place, but in diverse
places of your ground, in little tufts or hillockes, scattering an armefull
thereof in many places: because, if you should lay it in one place, or in a
very small circuit near together, your cattle would disagree and offer to
gore one another, at least, the stronger cattle would ever beat away the
weaker, and so rob them of their food: whereas being scattered into diverse
remote places, those which are beaten away from one place, will go to another,
and so take their food without trouble: in which, you shall ever observe to lay
more tufts or heaps of hay than you have cattle. Neither yet do I mean,
that this manner of foddering shall ouer-spread any great piece of ground at
one time, but according to the number of your cattle, be close packed
together, both for the ease of the fodderer, and for the well husbanding of the
hay, which to be carried up and down too (...), would make much wast by
scattering; so that to lay one foddering within two or three yards of another,
is sufficient. And this I speak of great cattle, as Oxen, Kyne, Steeres,
Horses, or such like: for if you fodder Sheep, Foddering of Sheep.
then you must lay your hay in long rows, one row three or four yards from
another, upon the driest and cleanest ground you can find, because the
trampling and treading of the cattle will else (...) much spoil of the hay.
And herein is also to be noted, that you must not by any means lay your fodder
above twice in one place, but change and alter your ground, finding out still a
dry and untrodden place to fodder in, as well for keeping the ground from two
much foyling and tearing up with the feet of cattle, as also for the ^a^ing of
the hay, which would be half lost, if it should be laid in wet and myrie
places. And thus you may in one Winter run over a great piece of ground, and
not only sow it plenteously with the Hay-seedes which will fall from the Hay
in the carrying, but also manure the ground excellently, by this drawing
together of your beasts into one place, making their l^are, and dunging most
thereupon. Now some will say, that this manner of enriching of grounds carries
with it a discommoditie which equalleth the goodness which is reaped from it,
and therefore not so much to be esteemed; alleging, that the trampling of the
cattle teareth up the greene-swarth, and (as it were) ploweth up the ground in
such sort, that it will hardly bear any good croppe of grass a year or two
after. To which I answer, Commodity of foddering.
that if it do (as happily it will) tear up or dig the ground so, that you
loose the next years croppe in some part: yet, after the first year is past,
the second will double, and the third will treble any increase formerly
received from the same ground; neither will the goodness ever after be abated
from the same: besides, if your ground be subject to any filthy soft moss,
or fuzzie grass, which is both unsavory and unwholesome for beasts, and also
choaketh and deuoureth up all better herbage; this treading of the cattels feet
will utterly kill it, and make the ground fruitful for ever after. Nay, if the
ground have been much subject to small whynnes, or prick-grasse, which is a
most venomous weed in any ground, according to the opinion of the best
husbands, this course only will destroy it. To conclude, ^he Meadow well kept
and maintained, does always bring double commodity, to that which is ill
governed and husbanded.

CHAP. V.
Of the harrowing, watering, and keeping close and well defensed the Meadow
ground.
BEsides the seeds of good herbs, which is very requisite for the Meadows,
yet there are other works needful for the goodness of Hay: for the Meadows
must be harrowed and raked presently after they be sown, to break the clods
into small earth, or dust, that so the mowers may not thereby hurt their
Sythes. If the ground of the Meadow be withered, and dry, it will be a
marvelous commodity unto it, to draw into it, all the winter long, at the
least, some small Brook, for the watering and moistening of it, seeing that
moisture is the natural nourishment of Hay; and this would be done especially
during the months of November, December, January, and February: afterward,
when the earth has drunk her fill, then stop the way whereby the water of the
Brook runs. It is true, that if the Medow-plot lie upon the side of some
hill, or upon some high ground, there shall be no need to water it: for the
first rain that falls, will descend and water such Meadows very
sufficiently, being joined with the juice and goodness of the dung which you
shall have bestowed in the higher places. Neither shall it be needful to water
the ground much, where there is great quantity of three-leaued grass, because
then it would die by and by. Again, you must not cause any water to ouerflow
any old Meadow grounds, in the time of great and excessive cold, except it
should be that they should continue a long time: because that the water
failing, the ground thus boiled again, and drenched, would be very much
annoyed by the vehemence of the frost and ice. Likewise, if there be any
marish or dead water in any part of your Meadow, you must cause the same to
run and drayne out by some Conduits or Trenches: for without all
peradventure, the super-aboundance of water does as much harm, as the want,
scarcity, or lack of the same. You must be sure also to keep Swine out of
your Meadows, because they are always turning it over with their snouts, and
^aying great soddes of earth: Neither must you admit any great Cattle into
them, save when they be very dry, because the hornie hoof does sink into
the earth, and either break off the grass, or cut in sunder the roots,
whereupon they cannot spring or multiply any more.

CHAP. VI.
To mow your Meadows again and again, to gather the Hay and refresh your
Meadows, and to bring your barren Meadows into Tillage.
NOw for the mowing of your Meadows, Mowing of meadows.
it must be according to their growth or ripeness, for some ripen soon, and
some late, and sure there cannot fall to the Husbandman greater loss than to
cut his Meadow before it be ripe, for then the sap or moisture not being come
fully out of the root, the grass in the vvithering shrinketh away, and falls
to nothing but a soft fuzzie and unwholesome substance which no cattle will
eat; and also to let it stand till it be ripe, or that it have shed it seed, is
as ill husbandry, for then will the juice be too much dried out of the
stalk, and that substance which should give nourishment to your cattle, will
be lost. Therefore to know when your grass is truly fit to be cut, you shall
look carefully upon it, and when you see the tops thereof look brown, and
the cock heads, bells, or bottells which bear the seeds, not stand upright,
or look direct into the heavens, but bend their heads downward as looking
back into the earth, then you may be certainly assured it is a fit and good
time to cut it, for the earth has given it all the due it ought to have, and
this will be (if it be in a most fertile and very rich soil, such as may be
cut twice in the year) at the beginning of June, or about a week before
Midsommer: But if it be in a reasonable ground, which has the title of a good
earth only, then it will be about the translation of S. Thomas, which is the
third of Iulie: Best time to cut grass.
but if the ground be extreme cold, moist, and barren, then it will be after
Lammasse, and sometimes in the midst of September. Now for the general
cutting or mowing of Hay, it would ever be done in the new of the Moon, and
at such time as the vveather by all conjecstures is clear, constant, and
likely to continue fair. As soon as your Hay is mowne, if there be plenty
of grass, and that you see it lie thick in the swathes, so as the Air or
Sun cannot pass freely through it, then you shall cause certain with forkes
to follow the ^ythes, and as they mow it, so to cast it abroad thin, whereby
the Sun may wither it, and this is called tedding of hay: The next day after
the dew is taken from the ground, you shall turn it, and let it wither on the
other side; then handling it, and finding it to your feeling fully dry, the
next day you shall with ^orkes and rakes draw it together in great quantity
into long rows, which rows you must draw in that way which the wind blows
most, least drawing it in the contrary way, the vvind scatter it abroad, and
loose both your labor and profit, for these rows are called Wind-rowes; and
as soon as it is thus gathered together, you shall forthwith thrust the hay
close up together, and make those Wind-rowes Wind-rowes.
into good big handsome cocks sharp at the top, and broad at the bottom,
such as six or seven of them may make a Waine-load; for howsoever sloth or
weakness may say that little cocks, because they ask little labor, are
best, yet it is certain that the great cocks are much better, Great
hay-cockes.
and keep the hay safer from wet, if any shall fall, and also makes it sweat,
and hay a great deal more kindly: in these cocks you shall let your hay
stand a day at least, if more it is not amiss, and then break them open
again, and let them ley in the Sun till it have dried up all the sweat and
moisture that was in them; which done, you shall load it according to the
manner of the soil wherein you live, and so carry it to the barn, or elsewhere
according to your pleasure. Now this manner of making of hay you must
understand is for such as is most fine, clean, and the purest grass, without
weeds, stumpes, thick leaves, or other gross substances, for if you find
your grass to be of that rough nature (as for the most part all your
vvood-land-grasse is) or that it is much intermixed with burnet, peny-grasse,
and other thick leafed weeds, then you shall give it double withering, and
after you have mowed it, and tedded it, you shall turn it twice or thrice ere
you cock it, then being put into dry cock, you shall break it open in the
morning, and make it up into dry cock again at night, three or four days
together before you load it, and be sure that in the cock it take a very good
sweat, and then carry it home and stacke it up as shall please you best. But
if your ground be extreme barren, cold, moist, and full of very sour and
stubborn grass, and of that also but little plenty being thin, short, and
hard in the cutting, then you shall not need to ted that hay at all, but in
steed of that labor, you shall (as it is mowne) with your forke make it into
thick little grasse-cockes, as big as pretty little moale-hills: the reason
whereof is this, That such sour and harsh grass Sour and harsh-grasse.
being exceeding slow of growth, must necessarily be very late in the year
before it can be ripe, or ready to be cut, whereby wanting the kindly heat
and strength of the Sun, ^t cannot but with great difficulty wither well:
wherefore you must add unto it all the art which you may to bring it to good
hay, which this casting it into little heaps and cocks will do, for the
grass so laid together will heat of it self, and then being often turned and
tossed that the air may go through it and dry it, and then made into cocks
again every day bigger and bigger, will in the end by it own heat come to
as kindly hay as if it had the full benefit of the Sun. And herein you shall
observe, that as at first you make them into small cocks, so the second day
you shall make them into bigger by putting two or three of those cocks into
one, and the next day you shall put two or three of those bigger cocks into
one, every day increasing the bigness of the cocks as you find them to
wither, till you bring them to so great cocks that three or four of them
will make a Waine-load, and in that estate you shall let them stand four or
five days before you load them: but vvhilest they are in the little cocks,
you shall break them open once or twice a day at least, according to the
fairness of the vveather; for you must understand, that whilst they are in
grass or vnwithered cocks, if you let them lie too long, the grass will
turn yellow, and begin to putrify, which often stirring will prevent.
Lastly, touching the making of hay, you must understand that the greatest
enemy it has, is wet, or rain, and therefore you must be careful to make it
up in the driest and fairest weather you can; and if any rain shall happen to
fall on it, not to turn it till the upper side be dry; for to turn the wet
grass to the wet earth, is the ready way to make it rot.

Now to speak a little touching the choice and use of your hay, Choice and
use of hay.
you shall understand, that the hay which is most long, loggie, and of
greatest burden, is best for horses, being very dry, sweet, and got in a
good season: that which is not very long of growth, but very pleasant and
clean grass, without weeds, hard stumpes, pricks, or such like, is best for
milch-kine, or stall-fed-oxen; only that which you preserve for your Kine,
would be got very dry, and have all the sweetness and pleasantness that may
be: but that you keep for your feeding-cattell would not be altogether
thoroughly withered, but got a little greenish, so as it may take such a heat
in the mow, as may only discolor it and turn it red, but no more; for that
will bring a thirst unto the cattle, and make them drink well: and the
Grasier is of this opinion, that cattle never feed well till they drink well,
and that hay which is the finest and shortest, growing upon high and dry
grounds full of flowers and sweet (...) is best for your sheep, or young
calves, and this must be got very dry, and (as near as you can) utterly
without any rain; for when it is so dry that it will hardly lie upon the
Waine, then is it the best of all: for when the husbandman says that moist
hay is profitable for the increase of milk, he does not mean that you shall
get in your hay green, or any part vnwithered, for that brings it to a
rottenness or ouer-drinesse, which is very ill for milk; but you shall get
it into the barn as dry as you can, without scorching, scalding, or such
unnatural extremities, and this hay taking his kindly sweat in the mow, is
that which is called the Moist-hay, Moist-hay.
and that which takes a little too much heat in the mow, and alters color,
is the Drie-hay, Drie-hay.
and keeps your fat cattle from gripings and other painful griefs in
their bellies, to which they are evermore very much subject. It is an use with
some husbandmen (as well in our France as in other countries) after they have
brought their hay into dry cock, to put it into great stoukes or petty
stackes without doors, and so to let ^t remain a fortnight or more that it
may take the full sweat before it be brought to the barn, or hay-loft: but it
is a needless and a double labor, and may very well be spared, if the orders
be observed before prescribed; for this much curiosity Curiosity.
did but spring from a fearfulness of ouer-heating, or mow-burning, which to
prevent, the Ancients spared not any labor. Nay they were so curious in the
first times, that they would not suffer their hay by any means to lie near
to the sink or smell of the beast-house, or where any other noisome savors
were, supposing that the hay would naturally of it own inclination draw all
such corruptions unto it; but it was a fear might have very well been
spared. Now touching the later crop of hay which is ever to be m^^ne in the
month of September, you shall in all respects use it like the hay of these
barren grounds last written of, for the year time being so much shot on, it can
have no other kindly withering, neither is it to be used for the feeding of fat
cattle, or for milch Kine, but only for dry beasts, or such as only labor,
as the ox, horse, mule, or ass.

If by the gathering of your hay you perceive your meadows to become barren,
whether it happen by your negligence in not having been careful enough in
husbanding of them: or by reason of age, seeing the earth will sometime rest it
self as being vvearie, for the recovering of the strength again, as it is
only seen in barren soyles, and no other; for that which is truly fertile
and good ground, will never be weary of bearing, especially if it lie low, and
be gently washed with waters; but that which lies high or violently against the
heat of the Sun, will many times decay in his abundance, which when you shall
at any time perceive, it shall be good to forbear the cutting of it the next
year, and only graze it with cattle, Grazing with cattle.
especially sheep, which will be as good as a manuring unto it, and make it
bear grass in as good plenty as ever it did before: for often cutting
occasioneth barrenness, and often feeding breeds increase. But if it be
through the natural fertility and hardness of the ground that it waxes
barren, then you shall use the like means, that you would in making of new
meadows; set down before in the second chapter of this book: or else if you
see that you loose your labor in renewing of your barren meadows, set down
with your self to reduce them into arable ground, especially those which are
dry, parched, bringing forth very small store of grass, grown over with a
hard ^^st, and fraught rather with naughty weeds, than good and profitable
grass. For the doing whereof, you must cut the upper face and crust of the
earth in April, with a shallow delfe, in turfes some fadome and a half long,
and half as broad, and to the thickness of two fingers: dry these turfes in
the Sun, and being concocted by the heat of the Sun, fit them one to
another, and lay one upon another, in manner of a furnace: afterward, set fire
to them with good store of straw: when they are burned, let them cool six or
seven days: after spead the ashes thereof equally all over the field: then
look for a good rain in May, to incorporate this ashie earth, and when it is
accordingly performed, then plow it up in June, and presently after sow it
with millet, afterward with rye, and in the end with mastling and wheat.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Ozier-plot.
REmember this, that three things carefully kept and increased by the diligence
of the vvorkeman, do make rich without any great travel, that is to say, the
meadow-grounds, the Ozier-plot, and the Willow-plot, which by the means of
water lightly slyding through the veins of the earth in the fat and well
liking places that are upon the sides of hills, and by the watering of
manifold streams round about, do naturally grow eu^rie year, and yield great
profit unto their master, for the feeding of hi^ cattle, the making of hoopes
for vessel, and binding of them, as also for fuel, the benefit of poles,
wooden vessels, arbours, stakes for hedges, and supporters for vines. We will
therefore speak first of the ordering and husbanding of the Ozier-plot, and
after it of the Willow-plot, which we do not dream to have any other
assigned place, than about the meadows, and far removed from the arable ground;
in as much as their shadow is so hurtful to wheat, line, pulse, and other
grain, as that they never grow well where they are ouershadowed by these: but
on the contrary, meadow grounds receive great profit thereby: as well because
that grass does grow the fairer and more pleasantly in the shadow, than where
it is not shadowed, as also for that the leaves of Ozier, Willow, Aller, and
such other Trees, falling upon the meadows, and there rotting, makes them the
more fat, abounding in grass, and fertile. The Ozier then (which old Writers
call Sea-willow, or Wicker-tree, that is to say, apt to bend) desires not to
come very near to the water, but loves rather to stand upon the descending
side of the valley, and the Ozier-plot would end at the sides of the
Willow-plot: the Ozier-plot must be pricked with a line, and pretty small
ditches drawn out in it betwixt two lines, and every slip must be set one
from another about five foore and a half, to give them their spreading. It
will not abide the shadow of any tree, but loves much to have the fruition of
the South-Sunne. The tame red Ozier requires great husbanding, and is afraid
of frosts, and the showers of rain that fall in March, and very cold water:
the white and the green Ozier, which neither bend nor yet defend themselves
so well, are of a harder nature, and grow higher. It will be good to prick
down more of the tame ones than of the other, and always to set them out of
the shadow, and there must be but a little water at their foot, the most part
of the time: wherefore you must make furrows by the way, to keep and
reserve water. It must be dressed twice in a year to make it grow well, that
is to say, about mid-May, and toward the end of November, presently after that
it is gathered, being also the time of planting of it.

It is very delightsome unto it to have the earth raised with the spade and
stirred, and to cast in again the clods unto the foot some fifteen days after
S. Michael, which is the time of gathering them, and making of them up into
bottles. You must keep your bottles made of the thickness of a fadome, fresh
and cool in some cellar or (...), and if the season be dry, to water them
throughout now and then: some slip off the leaves in gathering of them, thereof
to make good ashes: others let the leaves fall of themselves, and after gather
them for the household, and in Winter-nights by the fire side make the slaves
spend their time in cleaving them, for to make baskets of. some do not cut the
oziers all from the head, but such slips as are about the edges of it, and
leave the maister-twig to stand whole for five or six years, when it must be
renewed and pricked down again: for this is the term of the plant: for in
all the time following the plant does nothing but dry, and the twig harden.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Willow-plot.
SOme say, that the Willow-plot craves the like husbandry that the Oier-plot,
because the Willow differs only from the Ozier in use, bigness, and bark:
for the Willow-tree is for poles, the Ozier (as has been said) for bindings
about the vine and caske: the Willow is thick and growing taller, the Ozier is
smaller and lower: the Willow-tree has a bark of a dark purple color, the
Ozier of a yellow straw color. But whatsoever it is, the Willow loves
vvaterie places, and is planted of the tops cut off, or else of poles: the
poles are taken from above, of a good thickness, but notwithstanding not
thicker than the arm, and they must be planted and pricked down in the earth
so deep as they should stand before they touch the firm ground: the cut of
the top may be of the length of a foot and a half, and be set in the earth,
being covered a little. That which you shall plant, must be cut from the tree
very dry, because it will not thrive if it be wet when it is cut: therefore
you must shun rainie da^es in the cutting of your Willowes. The best time of
planting the Willow is in February in the beginning, or in the end of
January, when as the heart of the great cold is broken, which oftentimes
hurts this plant when it is newly planted: It is true that it may be planted
at any time after the beginning of November, yea it may be then both planted
and gathered. The plants shall every one stand from another six foot square,
and they must be carefully husbanded for the first three years, as if they were
young vines. You shall find a larger discourse of the Willow-tree in the sixth
Book. The distilled water of Willowes is good to be drunk for the staying of
all sorts of fluxes of blood: the decoction of the leaves or the lee made of
the ashes of the vvood being drunk, does kill bloud-suckers which hang in
the throat.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Elm.
MEn of old time did much esteem the Elm for the vine sake, because they
married the vine unto the Elm, The vine married unto the Elm.
as also, it is yet practiced of some unto this day in Italy, but now the Elm
is applied to another manner of use by the husbandman: and for that cause we
have given in charge to every householder to plant a plot of elmes, at the end
of his orchard, as well to make fagots of, as to make wheels and axle-trees
of for his carts and ploughes, as also for firewood and other easements,
besides the pleasure that the Elme-tree affords all the Summer long. For the
planting then of your Elme-plot, make choice of a fat piece of ground, and
vvithall somewhat moist (although this Tree be easy to grow in any kind of
ground) which you shall dig and cast, breaking the clods afterward very
small, in so much as that you shall make all the earth as it were dust, and in
the Spring you shall harrow it and lay it even: afterward, you shall sow it
very thick with the seed of elmes, which shall by this time become little
red, having been a long time in the Sun, and yet notwithstanding retayning
his natural substance and moisture: and you shall sow it so thick as that all
the earth shall be covered with it, then cast of fine mould upon it, good two
fingers thick, and water it a little, and cover the earth with straw or
broken boughs and branches, to the end that what shall come out of the earth
may not be devoured of birds. And when the siences shall begin to show, take
away the straw and boughs, and pull up the bad weeds very carefully with
your hands, in such sort as that the small roots of the elmes which as yet
are tender, be not plucked up therewithal. The ways and squares must be so
discreetly cast, as that he which is to weed them may easily reach to the
midst of them every way. F^r if they were too broad, then he should be
constrained in pulling up the weeds to tread the earth with his feet, by
which means the shoots might be hurt. After when the branches are put up some
three foot high to take them up from their nurserie, and to plant them in
another ground, and after that to transplant them again. The Elme-tree also
may be planted of small branches taken from great etmes, and that a great deal
better in Autumn than in the Spring time: after three years passed, they must
be transplanted and that after Autumn, when as the earth begins to be
moist until the beginning of the Spring, as being the time when the root may
be drawn without leaving of the bark behind: you may plant an elm at every
forty foots end, and not touch them at all for two years after: which being
passed, you must dig the earth all about the body of the Tree, pruning and
picking it with a small handbill, every two years. We will not make any
longer description of the elm: but send you to the sixth book, where you
shall find particularly and amply declared, how this tree is to be planted, and
in what soil it does principally delight to grow.

CHAP. X.
Of the Aller.
WE see that the Aller or Alder-tree is no less profitable for the Husbandman,
than the Elm, in as much as the wood of Aller does serve to make many
implements and working tools, as ladders, ^ailes for the cart, poles, handles
for tools, rackes for horse-meat, and such other things, to lay the
foundations of buildings upon, which are laid in the rivers, fens, or other
standing waters, because it never rotteth in the water, but lasts as it
were for ever, and bears up maruailous strange and huge masses.

The Aller therefore shall be planted near some little brook, in some moist
and vvaterish meadows: for the Aller-tree naturally delights in water more
than any other tree does, and it looks that the most part of his roots should
be in and lower than the water, for else it will not come to any growth. The
aller is not sown because it bears no seed, fruit, or flowers: yet it may be
planted two ways, either of branches taken from the great trees, or else of
live roots drawn out of moist places their earth with them, and so set in
another moist place, and that in such sort, as that at the least the one half
of the roots may be lower than the water, and covered above with earth a
fingers thickness: and vvithall, before it be planted, you must cut the small
branches away till within a finger of the maine root, which afterward will
shoot up many small siences. This tree is easy to take and grow again in
moist places, because it has much pith in it, and puts forth much wood in a
short time. You may (...) your aller to grow high in any place without any
great labor, and to small profit because it would need continual watering. It
is better then that your aller stand in waterie ground (as we have said) that
so it may both please and profit you. See further of the aller-tree in the
sixth book. The fresh leaves do stay inflammations: being put under the naked
soles of the feet, they greatly take away their wearisomenesse, which by far
walking have wearied themselves: full and all moist with the morning dew, being
spread in Summer all over a chamber, they kill fleas. The bark serves to make
ink, and to die leather black.

The Poole, Fish Pond, and Ditch for Fish.
CHAP. XI.
Of the manner of making Stews and Pooles for keeping of Fishes.
THe chief and principal point of a good Country Farm, is to want nothing,
either needful for the provision of the chief Lord, or available for the
profit that may come thereof. The good householder then shall not esteem a
little of Fish, seeing that of them he may make both provision for his table,
and great gain unto his purse: but rather shall provide some place near unto
his house, for to cast Pooles or Stews in, to the end, that when need is, he
may find victuals therein both for himself and his family, and that as
ready, as if it were already in the Kitchen: besides what he may yearly sell
of that his store to make money into his purse.

Therefore for the appointing out of ground for these his Pooles The situation
of the Pooles.
or Stews to breed or feed his fish in, he shall choose it joining unto his
Meadows, in some lean place, and such as he could otherwise make no profit of,
and yet it must be in a firm ground, that is grauellie or sandy, for such
places do feed fishes excellent well: notwithstanding, that the muddie and
dyrtie Poole be best for the Tench, Burbet, Cod, E^le, and such other slipperie
and slimie fishes: but he that loves his health, must not furnish his Pooles
or Stews with such manner of fish. The Poole shall be maruellously well
seated, if the commodiousnesse of the place will afford it continual
refreshment from some flowing Fountain, or some Brook, or little River
falling into it, whereby continually the first water may be removed, and new
supplied in place thereof, not suffering the other to stand too long impounded:
and therefore, if it be possible, the Poole is to have convenient issue in one
part or other, for so by this means the water is renewed the more easily, and
the fish therein made the more cheerful and better thri^ing to every bodies
^ight* whereas on the contrary, the standing and corrupted water affoordeth
them nothing but bad nourishment, making the slesh thereof of an ill taste, and
unpleasant in eating. In the mean time you must not ^orget to set grates of
Brass or iron close fastened, and pierced but with small holes in the
conduits, that so by them the water may find one passage in, and another out,
and yet to stay the fish for getting forth. It will be good that the Poole be
large and great, to the end, that the ^ish which is kept therein may find room^
(...) sport themselves, without perceiving of any impediment or imprisonment
that they sustain. It will be good also to make in these Pooles some corners,
or starting holes, like little lodging rooms, in the wall thereof, to the end,
that thereby the fish may find place for to hide it self, and to avoid the
great heat of the Summer: provided notwithstanding, that they be so made, as
that the water which is in them may easily get out again.

These Fish Ponds also may be made in any low Valley, which the hills
enuironing on every side, send down their waters into the same, making it
continually wet: so that (in truth) without it be applied to this purpose, it
will serve for no other good purpose. In this place, above all other, you shall
make your Fish Pond, To make a Fish Pond.
drayning it at the dryest time of the year, and digging it of such depth as
you shall think most convenient for the receipt of such water as shall fall
into it: then noting how the water descends, you shall just against that
descent make the head of your Pond, mounting it of such a height, that no
land-water whatsoever may ouerflow it, and this head you shall make in this
wise: first, so soon as you have drained the ground, and made the earth firm
where the head must be, you shall drive in four or five rows of piles made of
Elm, and some of Oak half burn^ or scortcht, and then the earth which you
dig out of the pond, together with fagots and bundells of wood, you shall ram
in hard between the pile, till you have covered them, then you shall drive in
more piles, and ram them likewise as before, heaping thus pile upon pile, and
earth upon earth, till you have made the head of that convenient height which
you did desire, and if in the midst of this head you preserve a convenient
place for a sluice or floud-gate, which you may draw up and sh^^ at your
pleasure, it will be a great deal the better: and on the top of the head you
shall make a small sluice or two with five grates in them, to stay the Fish
from passing through the same, which sluices shall convey the vvast water,
which shall at any time rise above the height or level of the banks: the
bottom and sides of this pond you shall paue all over with fine
greene-grasse-turfe which will be a great nourishment to the Fish, and above
the water you shall plant Oziers, and on the top of the head diverse rows of
Willow, because all fish take great delight in the shadows and if you intend
the pond for Carpe or Breame, you shall all along one side of the pond, stake
and bind down diverse fagots made of brush-wood in which the fish shall cast
their young or spawne, and so have them preserved, which otherwise would be
destroyed.

CHAP. XII.
What manner of wild flesh is to be provided for the furnishing of the
Fish-poole.
NOw one great commendation belonging to inheritances, is to have wild flesh
and fish in the fields thereto belonging. As concerning the wild flesh, the
walks thereof are partly in the woods, and partly in the warrens, of which we
will speak in their place: partly in the ^rable grounds and fallowes, as the
great and little Hare, the Partridge, Quail, and Lark: and part in the vvood,
at the Heart, the Hind, the Do, and the vvild-Bore: and as concerning birds,
the Stock-doue, Turtle, Small-henne, Plouer, and others: but to return to our
fish-poole, The wild flesh of the fish-poole.
the vvild flesh thereof (especially of birds) is the Swan, the Heron, the
Woodcocke, Snite, Mallarde, Teale, young wild Duckes, the wild Goose, and the
Bittor. Beasts of a two fold lif^*
Besides, there are belonging thereto as concerning beasts, such as ancient
Writers have called double-liued beasts, that is to say, such as live either in
or out of the water, the Otter, the Badger (which verily has a scaly tail
like Fishes) the Beauer, and the Dormouse, unto which we will add the
Torteise, that dainty dish for Princes and great Lords: albeit the most
commendable of them, and which has the best relish, and in most request, is
that which is called the wood Torteise, and makes her borough in the woods,
the wealth of (...) and Languedoc.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the sorts of Fishes wherewith Pooles, Ponds, and Ditches, are to be
furnished.
IF you desire to furnish your fish-pooles, and feeding stews, it is needful
that you carefully consider the nature of the place wherein you have made them:
for all sorts of fishes do not feed alike in all manner of places: the stony
and rockie places do like well the fishes called thereupon Saxatiles, or fishes
living in stony places, as the Tront, Perch, Loach, Lump, Mullet, and
Gudgeons: In muckie and slimie places, the Tench, Bourbet, Codfish, and Eele
do delight to live: In grauelly and sandy grounds, the Salmon, the Pike, and
the Barbel, do not much dislike to live. Wherefore, to the end that we may
speak generally, in regard of the fish of pooles, ponds, or ditches (things
common amongst the inhabitants of Beaux, though they have no such store of
water as the people of Salongne, Percheron, Tutraine, Anjou, or Mantz) the
most common, and which best ^^ore and furnish the some, are the Carpe, and the
Barbell, Carpe, Barbell. Famous pooles* The pooles of Noue and Gouuieux.
It is true that the Pike is a good meat, especially if he be kept in springing
waters, and into which there runs some river (as the poole of Nau, or
Noui, as also that of Gouuieux, the two most natural and greatest pooles that
are in all France, and such as never dry up) but in keeping of him there is
this danger, namely, that he is a very tyrant amongst all fresh-water-fish,
eating and devouring the small thereof, in such sort as that in fishing there
is not a little one of that kind cast into the pooles again, after they be
once drawn out, which yet is used in the little ones of all other kinds
besides. The small fish, which is called white, are the Perch, White fish.
The Trout.
the Mullet, the Millers-thombe, the Cheuin, Gudgeon, Loach, Menuise, and the
Trout, albeit that the foremost are those which are the most dainty, and
chiefest in request for sick and delicate folks, but the Trout is the
princeliest and most delicate dish of all the rest, which is never sound but in
running waters, or in great springs. The Salmon-trout is a very dainty
thing, and so likewise the flesh thereof is more fast and red, even after the
manner of the Salmon, after whom he had his name given. The Tench, Tench. Eele.
Bourbet, and Cod, are of a courser and more slimie mear, as is also the Eele,
which yet proves singular good in great pooles, and greatly commended being
taken in that of Noue, and at the mills of Gouuieux: Eele ponds.
witness hereof, are the Eele-ponds which have been caused to be made there
by Princes, and therefore that of Noue seems to me to be of greater account,
because of the causey belonging thereunto: but ther^ are some which disdain
the eating of eele, in respect of the vn^auorinesse of her flesh, and also
because (as some say) she coupleth with the snake. But whatsoever the matter
is, I find her as good in a swift running water, The lamprey a venomous fish
in the Sea.
as either the lampreie or lamperne, a venomous fish in the Sea, though when
she is scoured and come up into the great rivers, as Loire, she become a firm
same nourishment, save that it is somewhat slimie, and of a hard digestion, how
well soever it be dressed or handled.

The excrements of the poole (which are eaten after the manner of fish) are the
frogge and the creuisse, The excrements of the poole are the frog and the
creuise.
the first whereof being taken in his season, as when she is not ingendring,
but well flesht and liking, does taste like a little chicken: the other does
more load the stomach than nourish; and yet unto the husbandman and farmer
this i^ as a second manna for his family, which on festival days delight
themselves with the taking of them with the long-bow-net, or with a little
maund of bulrushes, as also the little (...) with the shoue-net, Sorts of
fishing forbidden.
small-net, called a truble and line; for the fire, the tunnell and bait are
forbidden by all right. The net and the hook are chief and principal of all
the rest.

And of nets there are diverse sorts and kinds, Diverse kinds of nets.
as first the long draw-net, which containing many fadomes in length is as it
were divided into two parts, and in the midst a long rod or pole drawn close
together at the furthest end with a heavy stone hanging at the same, and into
which the fish fly when they are taken, then is this net plumbed with lead all
along the lower side, and floated above with big round floats of Sallow-wood
to keep the net from sinking, it is but only poled at the two outmost ends
the just breadth of the net: this net is to draw ponds, rivers, or meares
withal; then is there the flew, and stand net, which are without rods, plain
single nets only, as it were farced or lined before with another strong net,
every mash being six or eight inches square, these nets are to fish within
narrow brooks, blind dikes, and other small rundles, the stand net being
pricked down first, and the flew drawing along unto it; then is there the leap
net, which is made square with many rods running one into another, and this is
fastened unto a leap made of Oziers, and are only to take Eeles or other fish
in mill-dames, or other such lake strait places: for the shoue net, spade net,
or casting net, they are only to fish in holes, so is also the augure, which is
a sharp instrument of iron made thin with many sharp teeth, and so stricken
into holes or mudd^e banks, where they will many times catch a very great
abundance of Eeles: Besides these, there are diverse other engines, as hooks,
lines, the angle, and such like, but none of more use than these already
spoken of.

CHAP. XIIII.
That Fish-pooles must be looked unto, and the sides thereof repaired.
But and if you mind to reap any profit by your fish-pooles or fish ditches,
you must have care to lay them dry every six year at the least, and to
dress them every three year taking away the reeds, bulrushes, and broad
leaves of vvater-lillies, and other vvater-flowers, for these hinder the Fish
that they cannot sport themselves, and makes them eat muddily, and of a bad
taste. To banish water rats.
You must likewise chase and drive away vvater-rats, or else take them with
some engine: as also the Otter and Beauer, as mighty spoylers of the
fish-pooles: These two tyrants are found in greater number in Loraine, than in
our true and natural Country of France. Not to shoot at wild^owle about
fishpoo^es.
Furthermore, you must have care that there be not much shooting in Gunnes at
the vvild-fowle which is found to haunt therein, because such shooting
astonisheth the fish, and kills it oftentimes. Again, there are other means
for the taking of such wild flesh: Gunnes cause fish to ^ie.
neither is the crosse-bow so dangerous, whether it be the tiller, or the
bullet. It is true, that the long-bow is the most singular of all, and
performs the action of killing as well as the Turkish bow, when it is drawn
lustely, and by one which has a good sight.

The greatest charges of the fish-poole is the keeping of the banks and
causey, the vvater-stops, The raising of the sides or banks of the fish-poole.
sl^ces, and ditch over against the poole, made for the receiving of the water
during the time of the fishing, as also to rid it of mud and unprofitable
weeds, as being the cause that the water when it is not of any strong current,
becomes covered as it were with earth: yea and though it be of a good fresh
Spring, yet they are the means of the stopping and drying up of those Springs,
and to cause them to divert and turn their courses another way: wherefore all
good householders must be furnished with iron to repair the grates, and flints,
and hard stones for the maintenance of the causey.

As concerning the pondes and ditches for fishes, Fish Ponds and fish (...).
they must be often dressed, reple^shed with new stores, and also refreshed
with small ware: for to be always taken away, and never adding any thing to,
does pull down the greatest heaps of store. Again, the good farmer is
careful and diligent always in his taking of fish, (...) cast the small back
again into the water, and not to kill them outright if he can avoid it: It is
true, that for further profit and thrift, he uses to prick about such ditch
or pond great plenty of Willowes, and some also do plant the Aller and Elm
in the same place, for to gather firewood of for the household: others again
do plant the Aspe and Poplar-tree, and every one of these, according as they
find their ground best disposed to bear the one or the other.

CHAP. XV.
Of the feeding of Fishes in their Pooles, Ponds, and Ditches.
IT is most certain, that the Fishes abiding in the Sea, or streams, and
running rivers, have greater store of vitaile, then those which are shut up in
pooles, ponds, ditches, and stews* for such as have their full scope of
liberty in the Sea and streams, do always meet with one relief or other
brought unto them by the course of the water, besides the small fishes which
are the food and ^ustenance of the greater: but the other shut up and enclosed
in safeguard, cannot go forth a hunting after any prey. It will be good
therefore some^imes to cast them in of all sorts of small Fishes, the bowels
and entrails of great Fish, tender figs cut down, cracked Walnuts, soft
ceruises boiled, fresh cheese, lumpes of white bread, certain fruits chopped
small, all sorts of salt ^ish, and such other like victual: for and if the
fish be not fed and made fat with meat which the householder or farmer shall
give unto them, when they shall be carried either to hall or market (for my
meaning is that the good farmer should make his profit of all things) the
leanness thereof will manifest, that they were not taken in any full Sea at
their liberty, but in some place of guard and restraynt, and so they will not
sell so dear by much. And sometimes it will be good to cast upon the pooles
and ponds the fresh leaves of parsley, for those leaves do rejoice and refresh
the Fishes that are sick.

Besides, Food for Fish.
to keep your Fish Ponds well tur^t as was before said, so as they may have
store of green grass in them, is an excellent relief for fish, and food
which they will desire as much as any other, for they will suck and feed
upon grass exceedingly: therefore when grass is in the prime, and has full
bit upon it, if you gather large turfes thereof, and pin them fast down under
the water, they will feed and ^atten the Fish wonderfully: the chippins of
bread, or other crusts which come from the farmers table, although they be
greasy and foul, yet are they a very good feed for fish; so is also the
clotted blood of beasts, as sheep, oxen, or any other kind, being cast into
the pond morning and evening; the young brood of Waspes when you find their
neasts, being cast into the water, is a food that fish will delight in before
any other.

CHAP. XVI.
Other more certain and approved ways to take all manner of Fish, especially
with the angle, and other instruments.
AS for that which has been before written, being only the secrets and
experiments of the French practice, I do not hold it sufficient for the
sati^faction of every judicial Reader, and therefore I will wade a little
further in this art, and show you the manner of taking of all sorts of fish by
the angle, which is the most generous and best kind of all other, and may
truly be called the Emperor of all exercises. Art of Angling
To speak them first of this art of angling or taking of fish with the angle,
you shall understand that it consists in three especial things, that is to
say, in the instrument which is the angle, in the intisement which is the
bait, and in the true use of them both together, which is the seasons and
times of the year fittest for the sport. To speak then first of the
angle-rod, it must be generally of two pieces, but particularly, as for the
pike, or other greater fish, it may be made of one entire piece; the substance
of the stock would be a well grown ground Wi^ch^n, an elm, or an Ewe, or a
hasel, and the top would be of hasel, or Whale-bone^some anglers use to
compound their rods of many pieces, as those which are made of cane, wherein
one joint is applied into another, but they are more for pleasure than any
general profit. To these rods do belong lines made of the strongest and
longest horse-haire which can be got, nor are they to be gotten of lean,
poor, and diseased j^des, but such as are fair, fat, and in ^ul strength, and
if conveniently you can, it is best ever to gather them from stoned horses, and
not from mares or geldings: of hair, the black is the vvorst, the white and
gray best, and other colors indifferent: your smallest lines would consist of
three hairs, and your bigger of seven: if amongst your hair you mix a
silke-threed or two, the line will be the better and stronger: you shall twist
your hairs neither too hard nor too soft, but hold a mediocritie, so as they
may twine and couch close together, and the ends you shall fasten together
with a fishers-knot, which is your ordinary fast knot, foulded four or five
times about, both under and above, to make it from loosening in the water: for
the length of your lines, they must answer to the places in which you angle,
some being four fadome, some six, and some more, according to the length of
your rod, or the depth of the water: your lines (though their natural
colors, as being white or gray, is not amiss) would yet sometimes be
colored of other colors, according to the seasons of the year, for so the
shadow of them (which is most dangerous) will least scarre the fish, and
soonest in^ice them to bite; and of these colors the Water-green^ is the best,
yellow next, then russet, dark brown, or tawnie.

To die your lines of a Water-greene, To (...) fishing line^.
you shall take a pottle of Allome-vvater, and put thereinto a handful of
Marigolds, and let them boil well till a yellow (...) rise on the top of the
water, then take the quantity of half a pound of green coperas, and as much
of Verdigrea^e beaten to fine powder, and put it with the hair into the
water, and so let it boil again a little space, and then set it in some
(...) to cool for the space of half a day, then take ^ut your hair, and lay
it where it may dry. This color of Water-greene is good to angle with in all
clayie waters, from the Spring till the beginning of Winter. If you will have
your hairs yellow, you shall take Allome-water (as beforesaid) and Marigolds,
and boil them therein, adding thereto a handful of turmerick, or for want
thereof, so much of green Walnut-leaues, and mixing it with the water, steep
your hairs therein a day and a night, then take them from them, and dry them:
these yellow colored lines are good also to angle with in clear water, if
they be full of weeds, ^edge, and other water flowers, for it is not unlike to
the stalks thereof, and the time best from Michaelmas till Christmas. To make
your lines russet, you shall take a quart of Allome water, and as much strong
lee, then put thereunto a handful of soot, and as much Brown of Spain: then
when it has boiled well an hour or two, set it by to cool, and being cooled,
steep the hairs therein a full day and a night, and then lay the hairs to
dry. This color is good to angle within deep waters, whether they be rivers
or standing pooles, and are best to be used from Christmas till after Easter.
But if you will have them of a dark brown color, then you shall take a pound
of Vmber, and half so much soot, and sees it in a pottle of Ale a good space:
then being cool, steep your hairs therein the space of four and twenty
hours, and then hang them up to dry, and if the color be not dark enough,
you may add a little more of the Vmber, and it will darken it. These lines are
best to angle with in black and muddie waters, whether they be standing pooles
or running streams, and will endure all seasons of the year. Lastly, to make
your lines of a ^awnie color, you shall take lime and water, and mix it
together* and steep your hairs therein half a day: then take them forth and
steep them double so long time in Tanners ouze, and then hang them up to dry.
These lines are best to angle with in (...) and heathie waters, which are of a
reddish or brown color, and will serve for that purpose all the seasons of the
year. Now if with this color, or the green, you mix a silver thread, it will
not be amiss, and with any of the other colors a gold thread they will be
much better to angle withal. Also you must remember to make at each end of
your lines good big loopes, the one, to fasten to the top of your rod, the
other, to the hooke-line, which commonly is not ^boue a foot long at the most.

To these lines there does also belong Corkes, (...)
or Floats, which you shall make in this manner: Take of the best and thickest
Cork you can get, and with a fine rape ^^^ing pared it clean, cut it into the
fashion of a Pear, big and round at the one end, and small and sharp at the
other, ever observing, according to the bigness of your line, to make the
bigness of your cork: as, for a line of three hairs, a cork of an ynch, or
little more, long, and to the bigger lines, bigger corks: through this cork
you shall thrust a quill, and through the quill the line. The cork serves
only to let you know when the fish biteth, therefore the less it is, the
better it is, for it only gives the less shadow, provided that it be ever in
your eye: for though some Anglers will fish without corkes, yet it is not so
good, nor so certain. In placing your cork upon your line, you must put the
small end downward, and the big end to the topward. Now there be some
Anglers which make their corkes of the fashion of Nutmegs, small at both ends,
and big in the midst: and it is not much to be (...), only it is a little
sooner apt to sink, and you may thereby strike before the fish have fully
bitten: others shape their corkes in the fashion of a Whirle, or of a little
Apple, round and flat on both sides: and this cork is not amiss to angle with
at great fish, because it being not so apt to sink, will flote till the hook
be fastened, and that the fish begins to shoot away with the bait: so that
the Angler then striking, can seldom or never loose his labor.

The next instrument to these which belongs to the Angle, is your Hooks,
Hooks.
which are of diverse shapes, some being big, and some little, and some of a
mean between both, according to the fish at which you angle. The best thing
to make your hooks of, is either old Spanish needles, or strong wyar drawn as
near as can be to that hardness of temper, which being nailed and allayed in
the fire, you may bend any way. Now the best way to soften your wyar before
you work it, is to hold it in the blaze of a candle till it be red hot, and
then let it cool softly and gently of it self: or if not thus, then roll
your wyar up, and put it into a charcoale fire till it be red hot, and then let
it cool at leisure. As touching the making of your hooks, you shall only
with a pair of plyars bend them to what proportion you please, and then with a
sharp file make the point and ^eard as sharp as may be, and batter the lower
end flat to which you must warpe your line. But because the trouble of making
is a little noisome, it shall be best to buy them from such as make a living or
trade thereof, and to buy of all sorts, even from the least to the biggest, as
well double hooks as single: the double, which is for the Pike or bigger fish;
and the single, which is for the Perch, Trout, or middle sort. Your double
hooks are (as it were) two hooks of one piece of wyar, turned contrary ways
one from the other. This double hook must not be fastened like the single to
the line, but to a strong wyar joined unto it, of a handful long, or more,
being well wound about and warped with a smaller wyar: then to it another wyar
of the same length, warped as aforesaid, and by linkes joined together, and
then the line fastened to the last link: To fasten the ^ookes.
and these are called armed hooks, because they desend the hook from shearing
or biting in pieces with the teeth of the greater fish. Now for your single
hooks, you shall thus fix them unto their lines: Take a length of your
twisted hairs, containing that number which is fit for your hook, and having
made a loope at one end, lay the other end upon the inside of your hook: then
with a silk thread, of the color of your line, whip and warpe the hook round
about, as thick, close, and strait as may be, and then running the last end
through the whole warpe, draw it as fast as you can, then cut it away close by
the warpe. After your ^ooke i^ thus fastened, To plumbe the lin^.
you shall plumbe your line: which is, to fasten certain pieces of lead
according to the bigness of your line, about it, some being in length about a
quar^er of an ynch, some half an ynch, and some more, according to the
bigness of your cork, and the weight of the hook: for these plummets are but
to carry down the hook to the bottom, neither being so heavy to make the
cork sink, nor so light, as not with the smallest touch to make the cork dip
into the water. You shall understand, that your first plummet would be a foot
from the hook, the rest not above an ynch one distant from another, and not
being above five or seven at the most: yet some Anglers use nine; but it is not
much material. There is in the plumbing of lines three several fashions of
plummets used: Three several fashion^ of plummets.
as, one long, another square, and the third in a diamond form, yet all to one
purpose, and the long ones ever the best, being smoothly and well fastened to
the line, for fear of catching hold upon weeds or other things in the bottom
of the water. Besides these instruments before spoke of, you must hau^ a Musket
bullet, A musket bullet to sound the depth.
which fastened to a line, shall serve to sound the depth of the water where
you angle, that thereby you may plumbe your lines the righter, and set your
cork in his due place: then you shall have a large ring of lead, six inches at
least in compass, and made fast to a small long line, through which thrusting
your rod, and letting the ring fall into the water, it will help to unloose
your hook, if it be at ani^ time fastened about weeds or stones which lie in
the bottom of the water: then you shall have a smooth board, six or seven
inches square, and cut battlement-wise at each end, upon which you shall lap
your lines: you shall have a box for your hooks, a bag or horn for your
baits, and another box for your flies, both alive, or dead: you shall have
needles, silk thread, wax, and loose hairs: then a roll of pitch^ thread to
mend any crack in the angle-rod: also a ^ile, a knife, a powch with many
purses: and lastly, a fine basket of small wands, which shall hang by his side,
to put the fish in which the Angler takes, and a small round net fastened to a
poles end, wherewith you may land a Pike or any other great fish. Again, an
Angler must be very careful in his apparel, by no means wearing light or
gaudie suits, which may give affright to the fish, Apparr^ll for an Angler.
but of the darkest color you can provide, as russet, tawnie, or such like,
and of the plainest fashion, without hanging sleeves, or any other wavering
thing, because they are blinks or scarres which afright fish: it would be warm
for your own health sake: you must also keep your head and feet dry, for the
contrary breeds feuer^ and other ill sicknesses.

Touching the seasons best to angle in: Best seasons for fishing.
they are from April till the end of October: and the best hours, from four
in the morning till nine, and from three in the afternoon till five in the
evening, the wind blowing from the North, South, or West, and the air
temperate, as inclined to warmenesse: but to speak a little more particularly,
you shall understand, that if the day be dark, close, and lowering, or have a
gentle whistling wind playing upon the water, it is good to angle in: or if a
fine mi^zeling dew of rain fall gently without violence, the fish will bite
the faster: also after floods are gone away, and the rivers are come within
their own banks, and the water clearest, Winter and Summer fishing
it is good to angle in. Again, for your Summers angling, you shall choose the
coolest time of the day, for the heat is not good: but for the winter angling,
you shall not make any difference of times, if the day be calm, for all
hours of the Sun are al^ke, only the noone-tide is esteemed best. If the
water where you angle, ebb and ^low, the best time of angling is at an ebbing
water; but in those places where the ^yde is not great, there the time of
flowing is preferred also: lastly, whenever you see the T^out play or leap
above water, and the Pike shute in the pursuit of other ^i^hes, it is then a
very good time to angle in: and all times and seasons contrary to these
before rehearsed, are vild and naught to angle in.

After the knowledge of seasons, The best manner of fishing.
you shall know the best manner how to stand and place your body whilst you
angle: for if you angle in any pond or standing water, then you shall choose
that place which is deepest, blackest, and least transparent, shadowing your
self under the bank, or so, as your shadow may be carried from the water; for
it ever breeds a fright unto the fishes: but if you angle in any river, you
shall choose that place which is deepest and clearest; and here also you shall
strive to conceal your self as much as is possible, by standing behind trees
or bushes, or any thing else that may cover you.

Next to this, The haunts of fishes.
you shall know the haunts of fishes: as thus, the Carpe, Eele, and Tench do
ever haunt muddie places; the Carpe lying in the bottom thereof, the Tench
amongst the weeds, and the Eeles under stones, or other covert: the Breame, the
Cheuine, and the Pike haunt ever the clear and sandy bottom; the Pike, where
you see great store of small fry* the Cheuine, where the stream runs
swiftest, and the shade is greatest; and the Breame, where the water is
bro^dest, and the depth gives greatest liberty: also these three delight more
in ponds than in rivers. The Salmon has his haunt in the swiftest and broadest
rivers, whose channel falls into the sea: The Trout loves smaller brooks,
the current being clear and grauellie, and lodges most in deep holes: so
does the Perch also, only he abides most in the creekes or hollow places
which are about the banks. The Gudgin, the Loach, and the Bulhead haunt
shallow waters: The Barbel, Roche, Dace, and Ruff, haunt the deep shadie
places of those waters which are mixed with more ^and than gravel, or where the
clay is firm, and not ^^imie, and love to lie under the shadows of trees or
bushes that grow on the bank. The Luce or Lucerne haunteth the broad and large
meares, being deep and still, and ever lodges in the bottom thereof. The
Shad and Tweat haunt those waters which are brackish, deep, and accustomed to
ebb and flow: and where they haunt, there commonly is found both the Muller
and the Suant, all which love to lodge close and flat at the bottom, so it be
rather clay than gravel.

Next to the knowledge of the haunts of fishes, Baits.
you shall learn to know the several baits, which, besides those formerly
described (which are indeed French secrets) there are many other, and may be
reduced to two kinds, Liue-baits, and Dead-baits: your Liue-baits are worms of
all kinds, especially the Red-worme, the Maggot, the Bob, the Door, brown
Flies, Frogs, Grasshoppers, Hornets, Wasps, Bees, Snailes, small Roches,
Bleakes, Gudgins, or else Loaches: your dead-baits are pastes of all kinds, of
which we have expressed diverse before, and their use; young brood of Waspes, dried
or vndried, clottered Blood, Chee^e, Bramble-berries, Corne-seedes, Cherries,
and all sorts of flies made of silk and feathers so lively, that they will
many times deceive a good judgment, of which there are diverse, as the dunne
fly, the stone fly, the red fly, the yellow fly, the black fly, the dark
yellow fly, the moorish fly, the tawnie fly, The fit times for every bait.
the Waspe fly, the shell-flie, and the cloudie dark fly. Now for the
seasons in which all these several baits are to be used, you shall know, that
the Red-worme will serve for small fish all the year long; the Maggot is good
in Iulie, the Bob and Door in May, the brown flies in June, Frogs in March,
Grasshoppers in September, Hornets, Waspes, and Bees in July, Snailes in August:
all pastes are good in May, June, and July, dried Waspes in May, Sheep blood
and Cheese in April, and for Bramble-berries, or Corne-seeds, they are good at
the fall of the lease only. Lastly, for your dead flies; the dunne fly is
good in March and February* the stone fly is for April; the red fly and the
yellow fly are for May; the black fly, the dark yellow fly, and the moorish
fly, are for June; the tawnie fly for part of May and part of June; the Waspe
fly and the shell fly are for July; and the cloudie dark fly for August.

Now for the preservation of all baits, To preserve (...).
especially the living ones, for the dead do not so soon perish; you shall
understand, that they must not be kept all together, but every kind several
by it self, and nourished with such things as they delight in: and first, for
the Red-worme, you shall put them into a bag of red cloth, and chopping a
handful of Fennel, mix it with half so much fine mould, and put it to the
worms, and they will not only live long therein, but also scour and seed.
Some put moss amongst them; others put Pa^sley, or sweet Marierome; neither is
it amiss: but the first is best, and will keep them full two months in
perfection: For the Maggot, you shall mix with them Sheep ^allow, or little
bits of a beasts liver. The best way to scour them, is to put them into a
bag of blanketting with sand, and hang them where they may have the air of
the fire for an hour or two. For Frogs and Gr^shoppers, you shall keep them
in wet moss and long grass, moistened every night with water. As for the
Bob, Cadys worm, the Canker, and such like, you shall keep them with the same
things that you find them upon: and for all sorts of live flies, you shall use
them as you take them; only the Waspe, the Hornet, and the Bumble-bee, you
shall first dry them a little in a warm Oven after the bread is drawn, and
then dippe all their heads into Sheep blood, and then dry them again, and
so keep them in a close box, and they will keep two or three months in
very good perfection.

Now, for the several fishes, and how they delight in every several bait, To
fit fish with the baits they delight in.
you shall know, that the Gudgin, Roch, and Dace, love the Red-worme,
Cod-worme, Maggot, clottered blood, or the young brood of Wasps; the Carpe
loves paste, the Mosse-worme, the Red-worme, the Menow, the Cadys worm, or
Grasshopper; the Chub, Cheuine, or Trout, love all sorts of dead flies, Cadys
worm, Bob, Frogs, Do^es, or Hornets; the Eele loves the Red-worme, or
Sheep guts; the Flounder or Suant loves the Red-worme, or brood of Waspes;
the Grayling, or the Barbel, love all that the Trout loves; the Breame loves
Butterflies, green flies, paste, or brood of Wasps; the Tench loves paste, the
Red-worme, Maggots, and dried Wasps; the Bleake, Ruff, and Perch, love the
Red-worme, the house-flie, fat Bacon, Bob, Maggot, or Canker; the Pyke loves
the small Roch, Dace, or Menow, Frogs, or Bulheads: Lastly, the Salmon loves
all those baits which the Trout loves; as paste or flies in Summer, and all
sorts of Worms, or the Cankers or water-Dockes in the Winter. And thus much
for the general satisfaction of all Readers, which desire knowledge in this
art of Angling, and which indeed is very proper and fit for our Husbandman.

CHAP. XVII.
The fishing of all sorts of Fish.
THe fishing or taking of fish is diverse, according to the Rivers and Waters
wherein they keep, as also in respect of the diversity of the fishes
themselves: for the fishing in the sea, and that in fresh water, is not all
one, but several, and diverse: the great fishes one way, the Eele another way,
the Pike another way, and the Carpe is taken another way. But whereas it might
fall out, that such variable manner of fishing might be very difficult and
long to describe, we will leave this knowledge to such as make account to sell
and buy fish, and will only declare, for the benefit of the householder, that
the chiefest and most principal ways to take fish, are either in the Maund,
or with the Casting-net, or with the Line, or with Nets, or with the Hook. The
Nets do heap together greatest store of fish, but they are chargeable to
maintain: the Casting-net is of the same condition: the Line and hook are the
most ingenious and witty, but least profitable, and of slendrest reward.

The fittest time to go a fishing in Autumn, The time to take fish.
is after Sunne-set, and then principally when it is betwixt night and day, for
then fishes are slumbring, and that so deeply, as that they may be taken at
their rest with light and flaming torches. In Winter, the fittest time to fish
in, is about noone: in the Spring time all the day long, but chiefly before
the Sun rise: which Spring time is the most fit of all other times for
fishing; in as much as then the water being warm, and the fish stirred up to
engender, they rise from the bottom of the depths to the uppermost part of the
waters, yea, oftentimes to the very edges thereof. The worst and most unfit
time of all other is the Summer, especially whiles the Dogge-daies last, the
heat whereof causes the fish to die, and constrains it to betake it self to
the bottom of the depths: so that if you would fish in Summer, it must be in
the night season. In fishing you are to have regard unto the wind: so that when
the North wind blows, you must turn your Nets toward the South wind, and the
South wind blowing toward the North wind. In like manner, when the Western
wind blows, your Nets must be turned toward the East, and contrarily: but
before all things, fishing must be gone about in a calm time, when there is
not any tempest abroad.

For to gather fish together into one place: To gather the fish together into
one place.
Take Penyryall, Sauorie, Organie, and Marierome, of every one the weight of
three French crowns, of the bark of the Frankincense and Myrrhe-tree, of each
one ounce, of sweet Cherries dried and infused in good wine, half a pound, of
a Hogs liver roasted, of Goats grease and Garlike, of each a pound: stamp
every one by it self, and after put thereunto some sine gravel; with this,
mixed together, you shall feed the fish for some hour or two before you cast in
your Net, which when at such time you have cast in, you shall therewith
compass the place about.

To catch all sorts of fish: To catch all sorts of fishes.
Take Sheep sewet, of burnt Sesamum, Garlike, Organie, Thyme, and dried
Marierome, of every one a sufficient competent quantity, stamp them with the
crummes of bread and wine, and give of this composition to the fish to eat: Or
else take sweet Cherries dried, and braying them, make pills thereof to give
unto fishes: Or make a meat with vnquencht Lime, old Cheese, and Rams sewet:
cast this into the water, and presently you shall see the fish flote and lie
still upon the water. Fishermen, to catch small fish with the Line, do bait
hooks with small earth-wormes, whereof the fish are very desirous and
greedy. Otherwise: take the Indian shell, Cummin, old Cheese, flower of Wheat,
knead them all together with Wine, make pills thereof as great as small Peason:
cast them into the River when the water shall be quiet and calm, all the fish
that shall taste of this confection, as though they were drunk and besotted,
will run to the brinke of the River, and so, as that you may take them up with
your hand: Or else make a confection with the round root of Birthwort bruised,
or Sowes bread, and vnquencht Lime: cast upon the water some portion of this
consection, the fishes will hasten unto it presently, and having tasted
thereof, will die suddenly.

To take small fishes: To take small fishes.
Take the flesh of a Snaile without a tail, and thereof make a bait, and put
not on any more than one little Snaile at a time: Or else take the flesh and
blood of a Calfe well powned, put it into a vessel, and so leave it by the
space of ^enne days; afterward use it to make baits of. Otherwise: take sweet
Cherries dried, and bray them, making pills thereof, which you shall cast unto
the fishes.

Take Sal ammoniake an ounce, To entrap and take Torteises with bait.
Onions, the weight of a French crown, of the fat of a calfe the weight of
six crowns: make pills thereof after the fashion of beans, and offering them
to Torteises, they will come to the smell, and so be taken.

For the Cuttle-fishes: To catch the Cuttle fish.
Take the lees of strong Wine, and mix them with oil, and casting it into a
place, where you know that the Cuttle has cast her black and shadowing
humor, she will come to the place where the oil is, and so you may take her.
Or else take Sal ammoniack two ounces, Goats butter an ounce: stamp them all
and make little soft loaves thereof, wherewith anoint some kind of corn, or
little clothes that are not fringed: for so it will come to pass, that the
Cuttle will ^eed round about them, and not stir away, so that you may take
them presently.

To take Loaches: To fish for and to take Loaches.
Take the bran of Wheat two pound, of whole Lintiles half a pound, mingle them
together, and bray them with a sufficient quantity of salt bri^e: after, put
thereto half a pound o^ Se^amum, of which you must cast about you some here
and some there, for as soon as you have cast it from you, all the small fish
will hasten unto it, and (which is more) they will flock together into one
place, though they be six hundred paces off. Or ^lse take Neats blood, Goats
blood, Sheep blood, and Swines blood, and the dung which is in the small guts
of an Hog, Thyme, Organie, Penyriall, Sauorie* Marierome, Garlic, and the lees
of wine, of each alike, of the greases of the same beasts so much as you shall
see to be enough: stamp every thing by it self, after mix them together,
and make pills thereof to cast into the place whither you would have the fish
to ^locke, and that an hour before you cast in your net. Otherwise, take the
blood of a black Goat, and Barley flower, of each alike, bray them both with
the lungs of the Goat cut very small, and make pill^ thereof to use after the
manner aforesaid. Otherwise, take Garlic half a pound, burnt Sesamum as
much, Penyryall, Organie, Thyme, Marierome, Sauorie, and wild (...), of each
four ounces, of Barley flower a pound, of the dough thereof as much, and of the
bark of Frankincense-tree two ounces; mingle all together with Bran, and give
it unto the fishes.

To catch Pearches: To fish for Pearches.
The Perch is not easily taken with Nets, neither yet at the Weyres, but
rather with a proper bait, and that in a puddlie and troubled water: wherefore
you must make a bait with the liver of a Goat, and bait your hook therewith.
Or else take yellow Butterflies, and Cheese of Goats milk, of each half an
ounce, of Opopanax the weight of two French crowns, of Swines blood hal^e an
ounce, and of Galbanum as much* then powne them all very well, and ^^^gle them
together, pouring upon them near red Wine, and make thereof such little loaves
as you use to make perfumes into, and afterward dry them in the shadow.

For to take Salmons, To take Salmons.
as well of the River as of the Sea: Take of the testicles, or stones of a
Cock, one ounce, of Pineapple kernels burned two ounces, bray them both
together till they come to the form of a powder. Otherwise: Take wild Ru^
seed, and the fat of a Cal^e, of each an ounce, of Sesamum two ounces, stamp
them all, and make little loa^es; which you shall use.

The Trouts, To take Trouts.
which are a kind of Salmon, are taken with the hand, having betaken themselves
into their holes: or with Nets, or at Weyres: and sometimes with the light of a
candle.

The Gudgeon The Gudgeon.
is taken with a hook, or the little Net, called a Truble.

The Carpe The Carpe.
is taken with the Net, hook, or engines laid at Weyres: but she oftentimes
deceives the Net, shoouing her head down into the mud or mire, wherein she
delights.

The end of the fourth Book.
THE FIFTH BOOK OF THE COVNTRIE HOUSE. Of Arable Grounds.
The measuring of Lands, of what sort or form soever they be.
CHAP. I.
Of the common Measures whereby things are measured.
NOtwithstanding, that the Art of measuring Grounds does more properly belong
unto the Geometrician, than unto the Husbandman; and even as chief Masons and
Masterbuilders, who ought to have the skill of Measuring, do not vouchsafe, at
any time, to measure the Works and Buildings which they have set up and
finished, but leave the same for such as make profession of Measuring: So
likewise it may seem, that this is no duty of the Husbandmans, to measure out
his grounds, but rather appertaining, and therefore to be expected of them
which practice such art and skill. Notwithstanding, being desirous that the
Master of this our Country Farm should not be ignorant of any thing which
may serve for the enriching of his house, and increase of his wealth, I have
thought it meet and reasonable, before I pass any further unto my purposed
discourse of the husbanding and tilling of Corne-ground, familiarly to unfold
certain rules of Measuring, which are very common with us here in France, and
wherewith the Farmer, in case of necessity, and for his commodity, may help
himself.

To begin therefore with the matter, all Grounds and Lands, whether they be
Meadows, Vineyards, Woods, Isles of Water, Courts, Gardens, Corne-ground,
places, fields, and others whatsoever, are measured in France by the foot,
fadome, and pole. The Measures in France called the Kings measures.
The foot, according to the Kings measure, contains throughout all France
twelve inches: the ynch twelue-lines, and ^uerie-line must be of equal length
to the thickness of a barley corn that is full and well fed. A ^i^rce or
third part of a foot, The Kings (...).
is called a Dour: and the fourth part is called a Quarter. The fadome and the
pole are measured by the foot, The (...).
but how many ^oot the one and the other should contain, The dour.
there is not any so sure and certain a rule which holds through all
France, The quarter.
as there is for the foot, by reason of the vari^tie of Measures, and those not
in diverse Countries of France only, The fadome.
as in Britain, Normandy, Gascoine, The pole.
Poictou, and others, but also even in places situate within some one Isle of
France, and standing hard together; as may easily be seen near unto Paris: in
such sort, as that the fadome of some Countries contains six foot and eight
inches; and the pole, twenty foot: elsewhere, the fadome contains seven foot
and four inches, and the pole two and twenty foot: In many places the fadome
contains six foot, and the pole eighteen foot: In others again the fadome
contains six foot five inches and half an ynch, or there about, and the
pole nineteen foot and one dour, which is four inches.

True it is, that as the rule is certain through all France, that a foot
contains twelve inches, so it is as sure and inu^olable, that a pole
contains three fadome. Wherefore, without standing much upon the fadome
(which in truth is a measure more fit for Masons and Carpenters, than for
measurers of ground) for the well measuring of all sorts of grounds, you must
content your self with two principal measures, the foot and the pole, not
forgetting or omitting your ynche^, quarters, and thirds, which are parts of a
foot. Which more is, in as much as feet, fadomes, and poles are but small
measures, and such as whereof might rise (as it were) an infinite number, or
(at the least) a very troublesome number, and such a one, as the reckoning
whereof could hardly be kept, especially when there is need of measuring a
Wood, Meadows, Places, Isles, arable ground, and other places of great
compass; besides the foot, fadome, and pole, there is used another measure,
which the Frenchmen call an Arpent, but of the people of Burgundy and
Cha^paigne, and many others, it is called Iournax, derived from the Latin
word I^gerum, which contains as much ground as two Oxen or Horse coupled or
yoaked together can till in one day. The Normans call it an Acre, taken from
the Roman word Actus. This measure arises of many poles being put one unto
another, or else multiplied together, as the poles do rise of many feet
multiplied.

It is very true, that even as the pole does not hold throughout all France
one measure of feet, so neither does the Arpent consist infallibly of one
number of poles: but look (almost) how many Countries there are, even so
many differences of sorts of Arpents there are likewise: And that it is so,
there are to be (...), amongst many other, four ^orts of this meas^re, called
the Arpent, as being most accustomed to be used. The first of them is called
the Kings Arpent, and it is used of men ordinarily about the measuring of
Woods, and it (...) of two and twenty foot to the pole, twelve inches to the
foot, and a hundred poles to the Arpent. The second is more common, consisting
of twenty foot for a pole, twelve inches for a foot, and a hundred poles for
an Arpent. The third is the least usual of all, it consists of nineteen
foot and a third, which are four inches in every pole, twelve inches to a
foot, and a hundred poles to an Arpent. The fourth is most common of them all,
consisting of eighteen foot for eueri^ pole, twelve inches for every foot,
and a hundred poles for every Arpen^. Because therefore of such great
diversities of measures of the Arpent, the Measure^ shall not of necessity be
put beside the right performing of his work; before he begin to measure, he
shall diligently and wisely enquire of the measure that is holden by the
custom of the Country, in the place where he is called for to measure.

Furthermore, you must know, that the arpent may be divided into many parts,
as the half arpent, a tierce, a fourth, a half fourth, a half tierce: all
which contain, every one according unto his proportion, so much as the whole
arpent contains.

The instrument and persons required as necessary to help to make measure.
THe Measurer must be provided of ten or twelve arrows, otherwise called
little broches, or pricks, because they are pricked down in the earth, to
guide the chain: they are made of wood, but harnessed at the nether end with a
sharp pointed end of iron, of the length of two foot, or thereabout, being of
such thickness, all the ten or twelve together, as that a boy of fifteen
years old may easily hold them in his fist. We have said, that he must have
some ten or twelve of these arrows, that is to say, ten of them, when the
Measurer does use his Geometrical staff in stead of one stick, or eleven,
when he does not use his staff.

The second instrument very necessarily required for the Measurer to measure
assuredly withal (that is to say, not to fail in his feet and poles, and in
the number of them) is the Richards chain, which is made of iron rather than
of coard, (because that coard being apt to stretch, it will not keep his exact
length constantly at all times) and also sufficient strong and thick, and
distinguished and divided by round buckles or mayles at the end of every foot,
to the end it may be folded up together the more easily into one: It must be of
the length of a pole, according unto the custom of measuring in France; or of
two or three poles, more or less, according unto the advice of the Measurer,
and custom of the coun^rey: and it must likewise have in the end of every
length thereof a ring, or round hoope, so wide and great, as that the middle
finger either of the Measurer or of his assistant may freely go through it,
without any manner of force or violence used. Besides, the said chain must
also (if a man be so disposed) be marked by the way, that is to say, into
tierces and fourthes, with some mayles differing from the mayles of the chain,
that by them the tierces and fourthes may be the better known. And as for the
Measurer, he must have three or four foot length of chain to reserve unto
himself about his Spade, or in some little bag of Leather, that so upon
occasion (if need be) he may lengthen the chain, or else help to make it
again, if in case it should break. In this figure or picture following you
may ^ee the shafts in a bundle by themselves, and the chain gathered up
together by it self.



The principal instrument for the Measurer well and assuredly to find out the
form of the earth which he must measure (whether it be square, or somewhat
long, or of any such other form; for to judge of and discern the length and
breadth thereof; for to reduce all sorts of earth, and of whatsoever form they
be, into a square; and to order and begin his measuring well) is the Squire,
which is an instrument made of iron, or molten metal, or of common wood, or
of Bra^ill, squared or round, divided justly and equally into eight portions,
having the form of direct lines, and those such fine and small ones, as
possibly may be* for the thinner and finer that they are, so much the surer
they will be. This Squire must have in the midst a round, in manner of a
ring, reasonably thick, bored in the length thereof cle^^^ through with eight
holes, without which the said instrument would be altogether unprofitable. By
those lights or holes the Measurer shall make his sight, by winking on the one
eye, to discern the length and breadth, and all other form of the grounds
which he must measure. There must also be on high, just in the midst of the
round of this Squire, a hole, ^or to receive the Measurers staff, whereof we
will speak by and by, that so it may bear up the said Squire, and raise it on
such a height as shall be needful for the Measurer to take the view and sight
of the ground (...) and conveniently.

It will be good also, though not much necessary, that there were a dyall set
upon this round, to discern the hours of the day, if need be, and to know in
what part the South stands.

The staff that bears up the Squire, The Geometrical staff.
is called the Geometrical staff, which must be of wood, very straight, six
foot long, or thereabout, and reasonably thick, so as it may well be carried
and held in your hand, having the end downward sharp and shod with a sharp
point of iron, made very hard and thick, or else of Copper, and having a
little hindge after the fashion of a vice above, and in the end thereof a
little hoope to receive and hold fast the Squire set thereupon, that so it may
not move, tremble, or shake with the wind, yea, though it be a great and
violent wind that blows, whiles the Geometrician is in performing his
business. The staff must be marked out all along with lengths of feet, half
feet, fourthes, and tierces of poles.

In this present figure you may see the Squire and the Staff, each of them by
themselves.



The Geometrician must likewise have in readiness two sorts of writing-Tables:
The one of Slate, reasonably thick, with a pen fastened to the same, at the
end of a little string; and it must be likewise of Slate, that so it may not
cut the said Tables too deep in, when he writes up his accounts therein with
it. The other little pair of Tables shall be of Box, or other such like
matter, like unto those which are brought out of Germany, having a Copper
pen, which the said Geomet^ician shall use for the setting down in writing
the lying, buttings, and contents of the said piece of ground which he has
measured.

He must also have two men: that is to say, one his assistant to go before
him, and to carry the end of the chain, and to thrust down into the earth
the ten or twelve shafts: and the party whose ground is measured, or some
one for him, that can lay and point out unto the Geometrician the bounds and
limits of the said piece of ground, whether it be arable, wood, meadow, or ani^
other such like place.

How and in what manner the Measurer of these grounds is to accomplish and
perform his work.
THis Measurer of grounds (being thus suited with all the foresaid instruments
serving for the measuring of ground, and having likewise the directions and
assistance of others, as has been said, to help him about his work) must
diligen^ly enquire of the manner, fashion, and custom of measuring in that
place, and of what length his chain must be, how many poles are contained in
an arpent in that country, and how many foot are to go to every pole,
seeing (as we have said before) almost every country has his several
measure: besides this, he being well instructed and taught in the boundings
and limits of the piece of ground which he would measure, he must lay aside,
or else (at the least) trusse up his cloak very close, and place himself at
one of the ends of the plot of ground, wood, or meadow, having his shafts, all
of them, under his girdle on the left side, and his Squire hanging by a little
crook at his girdle on the right ^ide: there pitch down his Geometrical
staff, making fit and fast his Squire unto the end thereof, and to assign,
for his more ease, the ten shafts which he had made fast unto the left side
at his girdle, unto that place whereas is fixed the little hindge: afterward
stouping with his head, to take his sight and view, by shutting the one eye,
overthwart and within the holes or lights of the said Squire, the form; and
first the length, by one side of the Squire; afterward the breadth, by the
other side of the said Squire (without stirring or moving of the Squire at all
from out of his place from above the staff) of the piece of ground that he
would measure. It is true, that he shall need neither staff nor Squire, if
the piece of ground be square, or of a small compass, because that without any
such Squire he shall be able to discern the form of the ground: and in such
cases he shall only use the help of his shafts, which he shall give unto
his assistant, and of the chain, the one end whereof he shall hold himself,
and give the other unto his assistant, which shall go before to stick down
the shaf^s at each end of the chain, both of them herein applying themselves
to the same purpose alike. The assistant shall go before, and first he shall
hold in his left hand the ten shafts altogether, leaving the eleventh with
the Master-measurer, to fasten down in the place where he shall begin his
measuring (if so be that the measurer do not choose rather, in stead thereof,
to use his staff:) the said assistant shall hold one of the ends of the chain
by the ring with the great finger of his right hand, and that without ani^ want
of room for his finger to go in, he shall fasten down in the earth one of
his shafts (which his left hand shall have reached him) with his right hand, at
the end of the chain, as it is stretched forth at length: the said
Master-measurer shall fullow him, and shall take up the shaft which his
assistant has set down into the earth: then the assistant shall proceed and
go on, always carrying the chain with him, and fastening the end of the
chain which he carries with one of his shafts thrust down into the earth,
and this shaft the Master-measurer always coming after, shall take up, and
both of them shall continue and hold on this course, the one to put down the
shafts, and the other to take them up, until such time as the chief measurer
have gathered to himself all the ten or twelve shafts, which will be so
many or so many poles. This done, both of them shall go unto two other ends
of the said piece of ground, and shall do in like manner as they did at the
first: where when as the measurer has measured the length of one side, he
shall measure the one breadth, leaving the length of the other side, and the
other breadth, having found out by his Squire, that the piece of ground is
square, if rather, for his own assurance, and contentment of the owner, he
think it not meet to measure the two lengths by themselves, and the two
widenesses by themselves. Whereupon it will come to pass, that if the piece of
ground or wood (for an example) conta^ne from the one end to the other, on all
sides, ten poles, multiplying the one side by the other, that is to say,
ten by ten, they shall have the total sum of the poles of the Square,
which will be a hundred poles, which is one a^pent: and so hereupon the
measurer shall conclude, that the place does contain an arpent. Again, if in
case that the place were of greater breadth and length than ten poles square,
they shall hold on their measuring, and pass from one end to the other,
accounting that which shall be more, still reducing all that they measure into
hundreds of poles, and so into arpents. See here the easy way for the
measuring of Land, Woods, and other places of small compass and square,
wherein there is no great need of any Squire: but and if the pe^ce of Land,
Wood, or other such place be of great compass and contents, and yet
notwithstanding lying straight on every side, as of five or six hundred
arpents, or more, it will stand the measurer upon to use the help of his
Squire: wherefore he shall pitch down his Geometrical staff at one of the
ends of the said piece, and shall set his Squire to the top of the end of his
staff, and shall view the other end of the ground through the holes or lights
of the said Squire, if his sight and largeness of the place will permit him:
which if it will not, then only so far at that time as his sight may be
con^^ied: unto which place directly, whither the direct line of the squire does
look, he shall send his assistant, or some other man, to pitch down a
diameter, that is to say, a stake or pole, or some other certain mark, so
far off, as that the said measurer may see it at that end of the piece where
he is taking his sight: or else many diameters in many places, always directly
beholding the first diameter, if in case the piece of ground should be of
longer distance, so as that one, two, or three diameters alone would not be
sufficient, as those which the said measurer should not be able easily to see
and discern. The diameters, one or many, being thus pight, they will serve to
help the measurer better and more easily to measure the piece, being thereby
as it were divided into many equal portions. If it be a piece of underwood
that one would measure, the measurer and two or three stoppers do cut down so
much of the said underwood as may make a way of such widenes, as that the
measurer and his assistant may easily pas^e. But if this be a wood of great
timber trees, and of a great compass and reach, the great trees shall s^rue
for diameters. Then the direct draught being taken, and the diameters pight*
and the other end of the piece of ground attained, the measurer shall give his
assistant ten shafts, and shall keep still the eleventh, or in place thereof
use his Geometrical staff (as we have said before) and shall hold one of the
ends of the chain with the great finger of his right hand, as his assistant
shall hold the other end in his right hand, and the ten shafts all together in
the left, to pitch down one at the end of every chains length, as we have
said before. In this figure you may perceive how this measurer and his
assistant do perform the thing.



How to reduce all sorts of grounds into a square for the better measuring of
it.
But as all grounds are not of one form and fashion; so is it not possible
that one manner of measuring should serve to find out the quantity of every
piece: and therefore to speak generally, all places and grounds are either
square or longer than they be broad, and then they are called somewhat longer
than broad: but stretching right out, or unequal both in length and breadth,
and then they be called somewhat long, and ending like a horn, or in the form
of a wedge, that is to say, alike long, but of an unequal breadth; or of an
equal triangle, or of an unequal triangle; or round, or half round, or of
the fashion of a bow, or consisting of many corners, or of many fashions mixed
together, or they are enclosed one within another: for the (...) measuring of
all which places, you must reduce them into a square, which is as Polycl^tus
his rule for the well measuring of all grounds and places: the measure of
square is very easy as we have said, that is to say, like number of poles on
every side, which consists of ten poles to a French arpent, which number
being multiplied with it self, which is ten by ten, make the whole sum of
poles, whereof an arpent consists, which are a hundred poles, and every
pole consisting of eighteen foot.

If then the earth be found by the measuring of the Geometrician, Ground^ that
are (...) yet of an ^quall length (...) equal (...).
to be more long than broad, and yet having each long side equal, and each
side of breadth likewise equal, which is called Balongue droit, for the
bringing of this form into a square, you must remember (or else having it set
down in writing table^ for the better remembrance) what number of poles are in
the length, and how many likewise in the breadth, and to multiply the length by
the breadth, that is, the poles of the leng^h, by the poles of the breadth: as
for example, if the measurer have found in ^he ^quall length of a ground five
and twenty poles, and in the equal breadth of the same ground four poles, he
shall multiply five and twenty by four, and shall ^ay four times five and
twenty are a hundred: this ground then by this multiplication is found to
contain a hundred poles, and so by consequent an arpent, at a hundred poles to
an arpent, and eighteen foot to a pole, and so in like manner as the length is
more or less. Likewise the breadth being less or greater, that the number of
the length and breadth be multiplied together, whether it be less or amount to
more than an arpent, he shall make his accounts and reckoning to fall
proportionably, according to the greater or less number of poles, as well of
the length as of the breadth: as for example, if the measurer have found in the
length of a ground seven and thirty poles and a half, and in breadth one pole,
he shall multiply thirty seven poles and a half by one, and shall say that
this ground contains thirty seven poles and a half, which is a quarter and
a half of an arpent, at a hundred poles to an arpent, and eighteen foot to
every pole: by the same means, if the ground be seventeen pole long, and two
pole and six foot broad, in multiplying seventeen pole by two pole and six
foot, he shall find a quarter and a half, two pole, three foot of an arpent:
after a hundred pole to an arpent, and eighteen foot to a pole.

If the ground be found by measuring to be unequal and unlike, A ground
unequal and (...) ^n all (...).
as well in the length of the one side to the other, as in the breadth of the
one end to the other; you must remember, or for your better remembrance set
down in writing tables, the unequal numbers of the two sides, as also those
of the two ends, and afterward to reduce the two unequal lengths, as also the
bredths, into an equality, in the end multiplying the equal length by the
breadth likewise made equal: as for example, if one of the broad ends of the
said ground do contain four poles, and the other two poles only, and the
one of the sides of length contain sixteen poles, and the other ten poles,
to bring and reduce the thing into a square, you must take of the two poles by
which one of the broad ends is broader than the other, the half, that is to
say, one pole, and put it to the two poles of the other end, and thus each end
will contain his three poles a piece equally. And of the six poles wherein the
one of the sides does exceed the other in length, to take also the half which
is three pole, and to put them to the ten, so each of the sides will be
thirteen pole a peec^: then afterward to take the number of one breadth (made
equal with the other, as we have said) which is three pole, for to
multiply one length (made equal likewise with the other as we have said)
which is thirteen pole, and to account that three times thirteen are thirty
nine: so there will be thirty nine pole, which make a quarter and a half, one
pole and a half, of an arpent, according to a hundred pole to an arpent, and
eighteen foot to every pole: so then you must follow this rule in every
thing that is Bal^ngue cornue, that is, fashioned after the manner of a horn,
that is, that the side and end which are of greatest contents, do help and
succor the other which are the lesser, in yielding of their own so much unto
them, as may make side equal with side, and end with end.

If the ground be fashioned like unto a Wedge, Ground (...) like (...) wedge.
that is to say, equally long on both sides, but having one end broader than
another; as for example, twenty pole long, and seven pole broad at the one
end, and but three at the other: then you must gather the two breadths
together, which will make ten pole: to take the half of them, will be five,
to multiply the length withal, in the doing whereof you must count five times
twenty, and the sum will rise in all to a hundred pole, which make one
arpent, after the rate of a hundred pole to an arpent, and eighteen foot to
every pole. This is your direct course to measure ground fashioned like unto a
wedge.

But if the ground should be triangled, having three sides equal, then it is
your best way to follow this course, A ground lying (...).
which is, first of all to learn out how many poles there are in every
side, and then carefully to multiply the number of the one side by the half
of the number on the same, or another side: and that which ari^^^h of such
multiplication, will be the whole contents of the poles of that field* as for
instance, suppose an equal triangled field, having ten pole on each side, I
will multiply the number of the one side by the half number of one of the
other sides, that is to say, ten by five, which is fifty pole, and contain
half an arpent, at a hundred poles an arpent, and ^ighteene foot to every
pole, and twelve inches every foot.

If the ground have the fashion of an Ox head, A ground consis^^ing of two
triangles.
that is to say, be cast into two triangles equally joined together, and that
every side (for example sake) contain twenty poles, I will multiply the
number of the one side by the number of the other side, that is to say, twenty
by twenty, and I will say that twenty times twenty poles are four hundred
poles, and that four hundred poles are four arpents: at a hundred poles to an
arpent, eighteen foot to a pole, and twenty inches to a foot.

If the ground should prove round like a circle, A ground that is circular or
round.
you must divide the same round into two diameters; which make four equal
quarters: then you must know the number of the poles of every quarter:
afterward, to multiply them will be the sum of the whole round compass of
the ground: for example, every quarter of the round does contain twenty
poles: we will multiply twenty by twenty, and so we shall find four
hundred poles, which make four arpents which this round shall contain: at a
hundred pole to an arpent, eighteen foot to a pole, and twelve inches to a
foot.

If the ground be of a mixed sort, A ground consis^ing of many forms and
^^^^ions mixed together.
having many forms and shapes, the best will be by the means of the squire
to reduce them all into squares, and then to find out the number of poles in
them, and to put the said numbers together. And, if in reducing and bringing of
them into four squared forms, you borrow something, you must restore the
number which you have borrowed in the total number which you have gathered,
and by this means you shall hau^ the perfect number of yo^^ ground.

And last of all, An inclos^d or entangled ground.
if so be that your ground be entangled within some other piece of ground, you
must measure all together, and afterward taking away the enclosed part, and
putting the one asunder from the other, you must measure your own: by it self.

Thus have we briefly set down that which is to be known of the H^^bandman,
concerning the skill of measuring of lands, and whatsoever ground* if h^ happen
upon any piece of measuring work which is of greater importance than this
which I have mentioned, he must have recourse unto the professed skillfull in
measuring.

CHAP. II.
What manner of tilling of arable grounds shall be entreated of in this Book.
AS it is ordinarily seen that the complexions of people dwelling in the
several Provinces of one great region and country do differ one from another
according to the air, or aspect of the Sun which is called the climat that
they dwell in: so in like manner one may see the nature and fertilnesse of
arable grounds to engender and bring forth diverse complexions and sorts of
ordering of the same more in one place than in another, according as the ground
shall be moist and glib, grauelly consisting of fullers clay, brickie, stony,
or free and well natured: which thing did necessarily compel our predecessors
inhabitants of this country to alter and change the manner of ^illing, as also
the fashion of the ploughs in France, and the con^ines of the same, as the high
and base country of Beaun, the country of Normandy, and the confines
thereof, Sangterre, Berrie, and Picardie: in like manner high and base Brie,
Champagne, Burgo^gne, Niuernois, Bourbonnois, Rotelois, Forest, Lyonois,
Bres^e, Sauoye, and again in the country of Auuergne, Languedoc, Solongne
(where there grows no corn but Ri^) Bordelais, Rothelais, Vaudomois,
Ba^adois, and generally throughout all the country of ^anguedoc, even unto
Gasco^gne, Biscay, and Bearne, and not to leave out Prouenc^ and Bretaigne,
which some call Gallo and Tonnant. To be short, beyond the country of Main,
Touraine, Poictou, Le Perch, and Conte d' Anjou, which are as it were the
lands of promise in our Countries of France.

And as it is thus with our Country of France, so it is likewise with our
neighbor countries, as both in great Britain and the Neatherlands, where,
according to the attration of the soyles, so there is found an alteration in
their tilling, the East part much differing from the West, and the North from
the South, nay even in one and the self same country is found much alteration
in tillage, as shall be said hereafter.

Of all these sorts of tilling of arable ground we have purposed to entreat
hereafter in short and easy manner, and that in regard only of the husbandry
of the true and natural France, which we understand to contain all
whatsoever is enclosed within the bounds and circuits of the rivers of Oyse,
Marne, and Seyne: and our purpose is notwithstanding this to make the
husbandry thereof as a patterno for all other fashions and sorts of tillage
used in all other countries, as well near as those which are furthest off.

CHAP. III.
Of the nature and conditions of the arable ground in France.
NOw as concerning the husbandry of France (which comprehends and contains
the confines called also French, and reaches unto the country of Sangterre,
and to be brief, which compasses all whatsoever Seyne does ouerflow, even to
the river Oyse both of the one side and of the other, coasting along the rivers
of Marne and Aube) it is certain that it is ve^ie strong and toilesome, as
also the earth is found to be well natured, easy to stir, black, deep, lying
high when the fallowes come to be ploughed up, having few stones, and by
consequent, bearing great store of fruit. Again, it bea^eth pure Wheat, that
noble grain, for the making of bread, and sustaining of mankind, if so be we
will but give that which is due unto Gonnesse, Louures, Poissy, Damp^artin, and
unto Sarcelles, and under Escouan, and Lusarche: in which Countries, a couple
of Horses, of the price of a hundred or six score crowns a piece, or about,
do run through their work and husbandry, without being either called or
cried upon: and they do but a certain task by the day, seeing they cannot
endure great heat, or rain, strong winds, or frosts, being as lofuly and
bravely kept as the Courser or light Horse is in the stables of Princes. It is
true, that all their ground in France is not altogether alike: for in some
Countries you shall find it much consis^ing of a Potters clay, and grauellie:
in other Countries marshie, moist, stony, flintie, barren, and uninhabited,
hilly, full of wilds, ouergrowne with rushes and broomes, which and if a man
would till for to bring forth corn, he must enrich and make the b^^ter by such
means as I have declared in the first Book.

And as it is with us in our France, so is it likewise with all other foreign
Countries, each one changing in their husbandry, as the earth alter^th in his
nature and quality: therefore that the husbandman may know the several
natures of arable grounds, he shall first know, that they alter in ^illage
according to the mixture or temper of the earth of which it is compounded.

To speak then generally of earths, Two sorts of ^arth.
they are twofold, that is, simple, or compound, or loose, and binding: your
simple or loose earths are those which are not mixed with any earths of a
contrary quality, as the fertile black clay, blew clay, the clay which is
like marle, and marle it self, the red sand, yellow sand, white sand, and sand
like unto dust: your compound and binding earths are when any of these clayes
and sands equally or unequally are mixed together, as the black clay and red
sand, the white clay and white sand, or the black clay and white sand, or
white clay and red sand, and so of the rest, howsoever they are mixed. Lastly,
there is a grauellie earth which is to be reckoned amongst these compound
earths, and is sometimes loose, sometimes binding, according unto the mixture,
and this is a hard grittie sand, mixed with pebble, flint, or shell-stone: and
it is said to be loo^e, when it is dry; and binding, when it is wet.

Now for the several natures of these Soyles. Several natures of Soyles.
you shall know, that the black clay is fertile and rich, and apt to bring
forth increase, being husbanded and ^illed in such sort, that the mould may
run and break, for otherwise the stiffenesse takes away the profit: it
desires no manure, for being to rich of it self, any addition would make it
too proud, and then the corn would either mildew, or by rankenesse so lie
beaten to the earth, that the increase would wither and loose the fullness. It
would be plowed thrice for Wheat, that is, fallowed at May day, Summer-stirred
at (...), and sown at Michaelmas. It would be plowed four times for Ba^ly,
that is fallowed and Summer-stirred, as aforesaid, then Winter-rigd at
Michaelmas, and sown March and April following: it would be plowed but once
for Pease or Beans, that is at plow-day, then suffered to lie for bait till
mid February, then sown without any more plowing, and but only harrowed: for
Oats or Rye it is no great friend, yet will bear both by careful husbandry,
Rye in the same sort that it does Wheat, and Oats, as it does Barley. Now for
the blew clay, the clay like marle, or the marle it self, they are not fully
so rich as the black mould, and therefore will endure to be manured at all
times when your leisure will serve, they must be plowed in the same manner,
at the same times, and for the same seeds as you plow the black clay, and are
also no friends to Rye or Oats: for the simple sands, they are by no means
very fruitful for corn, but only bring forth their increase by great labor
and travel; they seldom bear Wheat, especially the red or yellow sand,
except they lie near to the Sea coast, or else have some other mixture. The
corn in which they most joy is Rye, and they must be plowed four times for
it; that is fallowed in January, Summer-stirred in April; foiled in June, and
sown at Michaelmas. for Barley it must be plowed six times, as fallowed,
Summer-stirred, and foiled as aforesaid, then Winter-rigged at Michaelmas, cast
down in February, and sown in May; and to speak more generally, these
barren, hot, loose earths, would seldom lie still, but plowed as often as
leisure will give you leave; as for beans or pease they never bear any; but
for Tare, Fetches and Lupines they will bear them, with once plowing, which
is only when they are sown about April. These soyles must be wonderfully
well manured, for longer than they have much heart thereof, they will bear
no corn at all. Lastly, the grauelly ground of what mixture soever it be, is
somewhat better for Wheat than these sands, yet Rye is his chief seed, and it
must in all things be used like the sand ground, and will bear Wheat with
the same husbandry that it bears Rye. Now for the compound or binding earths,
they are fertile and barren, according to their mixture, as when the richest
clay is mixed with the richest sand, as namely, the black clay with the red
sand, it is then held to be a good ground; so likewise when the vvorst clay is
mixed with the vvorst sand, as the blew or gray clay with the sand which is
like dust, then it is held for a very barren ground, and so consequently of
all the rest: and as of these clayes and sands, so also of clayes themselves,
as when a black clay is mixed with a blew clay, or a marle with a gray clay:
and so of sands, as when the red is mixed with the white, the yellow with
black, or any of all with the gravel: wherein you shall note, that how much
the good soil is more or less than the bad, so much it is more or less
fertile. Now for the tillage of them, all sands mixed with clayes, or clayes
with clayes, will bear any grain, as Wheat, Rye, Maslin, Barley, Oats, or
Pease, being husbanded well, and thoroughly manured, only they must be plowed
in such sort as you plow your sands: but sands which are mixed, will bear
only Rye, or small pulse, and plowed like the rest beforesaid: to conclude,
all clayes naturally are cold and moist, and all sands hot and dry, and the
mixed soyles more or less according to the mixture thereof.

CHAP. IIII.
What space and largeness Arable grounds would have.
NOw if you desire that your Corne-grounds should be fair to sight, make a
goodly show, be easy to be tilled, and bear plentifully, part them into many
pieces cast four square, and let never a one of them exceed in the length of
forty poles, nor yet be less than thirty or five and twenty: and, if the
inconuenientnesse of the place will not suffer you to cast them into squares,
then make them somewhat more long, but yet not exceeding the foresaid forty
poles in length: for besides infinite other commodities and pleasures
accompanying short fields, and such as are not of large reach, this is one
very special profit, namely, that oxen and horses do labor there with
less travel and vvearisomnesse, in as much as they do not only cheer up
themselves, and take their breath being at the end of the furrow, but also for
that the plowman cleanses and freeth his plow of the earth wherewith it is
wont to be laden, as then also carrying them about to enter upon a new furrow:
cause your ground if possibly it may be, to lie level and even; for besides
the pleasure of seeing from the one end to the other, they will also be the
more easy to be plowed, dunged, and sown: let them be ditched round about, or
at the least on the sides, as well to draine away raine-vvater, or other if any
should stand there, as for to cut off the trade-waies of passengers. Plant not
within not about your Corne-grounds any trees, for fear of the shadow, knowing
assuredly that the more that corn is shadowed, the further off it is from
being comforted and rejoiced by the Sun, as also from having the dust (which
is wont to lie much upon it) blown off by the winds, and likewise from
being delivered from snow, fogges, and tempests, o^tentimes a heavy burden
upon the back thereof. And yet put case that for your pleasure you would
plant some trees thereabout, then let them be no other but Willowes, or such
like, that may bear no great head to make shadow: and therefore let never come
nie thereto either the poplar, or aspe, or aller, whose shadow is not only
dangerous and hu^tfull unto the corn ground, but which is more, with their
great, thick, and great store of roots, they draw unto them the best juice,
they suck up the fat of the earth, and so steal away the best from the seed
that is sown.

And no less than these the Ash is most poisonous unto Corne-grounds, Ash is
hurtful to Corn.
for how far soever his shadow extends, so far you shall see the ground
ever forbear to prosper, and yet it is not utterly unnecessary to have trees
grow about your Cornefields; for if you plant Fruit trees about them, as the
Apple, Pear, Ceruise, and such like, you shall find the profit many times
double the injuries that are reaped from them: neither is it forcibly
necessary that your fields should be cast into these small square grounds,
seeing you may have them as large as you please, according to the quantity of
your Farm, or the nature thereof, which may as well lie public and in
common amongst your neighbors, as private and several to your self, in
either of which you may make your lands of what length or breadth you please,
whether acres, half acres, or roods: and herein is specially to be noted,
that you must cast your lands according to the natures of your ground, L^nds
must be ca^^ acco^ding to the nature of the ^oyle.
and not the prospect of your eye, for if your ground be a gentle earth, either
mixed or unmixed, and lie dry and free all Winter from water, neither by any
means is subject from it own nature or casualtie to any superfluity of
moisture, this ground you may lay level, smooth, and plain, and make it
appear as an entire garden, or one land, but if it be within any danger of
water, or subject to a spewing and moist quality; then you shall lay your
lands high, raising up ridges in the midst, and ^urrowes of one side, and
according as the moisture is more or less, so you shall make the ridges high
or low, and the descent greater or less: but if your ground, besides the
moisture, o^ by means of the too much moisture, be subject to much binding,
then you shall make the lands a great deal less, laying every four or five
furrows round like a land, and making a hollownesse between them, so that the
earth may be light and dry: and this you must do either upon leuells, or upon
descending and hanging grounds; and to conclude, the larger your fields are,
and the drier they are kept, the better they will be, and the better your corn
will prosper upon them.

CHAP. V.
How often your Corne-ground must be ^ared or plowed over.
THat I may therefore briefly declare unto you the tilling of grounds for
grain and pulse, understand in general, that the earings of arable grounds
are diverse, according to the places and situations of the said grounds, as we
have already alleged. But howsoever the case stand in that point, The first
^^^ing of ground, after (...). layen follow.
, and in what plat or piece of ground soever you can name them to be, it
behooves that at the first earing which is given them after they have rested
and lain fallow, that you cleanse them well from stones all over with ^akes,
and that at the pains or travel of some young boys and girls that can do
little or nothing else* or otherwise by others: Untilled ground.
for the earth of it own nature lying untilled, begett^h nothing but stones,
and strong and unprofitable weeds, as those which are the relics of the dung
now thoroughly digested, and changed by a heat exalted unto the fi^th degree.
And we need not make any doubt of it, but that even good and kind ground, when
it should not bring forth any thing but mustard seed, couch-grasse, pimpernell,
mercury, thistles of all sorts, danewort, vvild-fetch, red poppie, vvild oats,
veruaine, blew bottles, ax-fetch, or such other like unprofitable weeds,
without forgetting of cockle and darnell, and that which is called rest-harrow,
or at the least some fumitorie and henbane; yet it will be doing of some thing
more: as namely, those which grow out of it of themselves, Weeds show what
manner of ground it is wherein they grow.
as stinking mathweed, kexes, rupture-wort (these be reclaimed grounds) and the
herb called Chamepytis, as I have sometimes seen in those countries which
properly and truly contain France. For the distinguishing of these herbs,
the thistles show the heat of the ground, as their aromaticall and odoriferous
roots may testify: the hemlocke, vvild smallage, and fumitorie grow of
putrefaction: the bind-weed, both great and small, do proceed partly of
dryness, partly of the alteration of the humor: nightshade the great and
small do spring up of the cold part of the earth, which they draw from the
humor thereof: mercury of both sorts, eyebright also of two or three
differing flowers, the small sorrel red underneath, and the three sorts of
plantaine do hold of cold or temperate ground: but the garden and water
cresses, rockets, wild mustard seed, as also the two sorts of vvater-parsley
have differing natures, and are more hot, according to the humo^r which chey
confess to participate, in respect of their property: To be short, these are
certain dalliances and sports of nature, Nature i^ n^uer idle.
, which (though she should never be husbanded in the earth) would
(notwithstanding) yet never abide idle, or without doing something. It is true,
that the couch-grasse, and that which is called rest-harrow, make show to be
more standing tenants, than veruaine, or male knot-grasse, for they will not
away, except the plow and culture (their tyrannous commanders) do come. To
conclude, these later herbs being cut and rooted out by often and deep
plowing, must afterward (especially the thistles) be thwacked and beaten small
before the first rain, that so there may nothing of them (yea, no more than of
an Adder) remain alive to breed or increase any thing again: for their nature
is, so soon as they receive a little moisture, to fasten and claspe themselves
so close to the slime of the earth, as that they will thereby again so enter
new possession, that within a short time after they will become strong enough
to strangle their mother. The first ^aring.
Let us therefore conclude, that the earings of the arable ground are to
cleanse it from stones and weeds, to manure it, to spread and cast abroad the
dung or marle, to plow it after the manner of the first earing, to ^urrow or
ditch it, to clod it with a roller or board to cover it: then after some time
when the rain has fallen upon it, to plow it for the second earing, which of
ancient men is called stirring of it, The second.
and this cannot be done without laying it in furrows: The third.
and the third earing, is to plow it for seed time, to sow, harrow, and pull up
vveedes, which by abundance of rain, and too much rankenesse of the earth,
do ouergrow and enter commons with the new ^hot corn. And lastly, to mow and
lay it bare and naked, to sheare or cut it down, to sheaue it and to gather it
in. And albeit I here stand much upon the cleansing of grounds from stones,
which is a very good husbandry, and for which by a general consent whole
lordships and towneships will join together, and make (as they term them in
diverse countries) common days for common works, yet you must understand that
all soyles are not to be cleansed from stones, but only the clayes and sands
which have no general mixture with stones, but as one would say, here a stone
and there a stone scattered severally, Stones of greats vs^ in mani^ grounds.
and not mixed universally; for where the earth and the stones are of one equal
mixture, not abounding more in the one than the other, there to take away the
stones were to impouerish the ground, and make it bare and vndesensible both
against the wind, heat, and cold, as thus, where stones are mixed equally
with light sands there they keep the sand firm about the roots of the
Corn, which, should they be taken away, the vvind would blow the sand away
from the corn, and leave it dry and bare, by which means it would never
sprout; or in those hilly countries where the reflection of the Sun is very
hot, and the earth light, if the stones being generally mixed should be taken
away, that violent heat would so scortch and burn the corn, that it would
seldom or never sprout, or never prosper: and again where the country is
most cold, and most subject to the bitterness of frosts, there this equal
mixture of stones, taking a heat from the Sun, gives such a warmth to the
corn that it prospers a great deal better, and sooner than otherwise it
would: for which cause, stones are many times held amongst Husbandmen to be an
excellent manure for arable land, so that I conclude, though in (...) earthes
they are most sit to be cleansed away, yet in light soil they may very well
be suffered, as is to be seen in the Southerly parts of France, and the
Westerly parts of great Britain.

CHAP. V.
The Plow man's instruments and tools.
THe careful and diligent plowman, long time before he be to begin to ear
his ground, shall take good heed, and see that all his tools and implements,
for to be used in plowing time, be ready and well appointed, that so he may
have them for his use when need shall be: as namely a wagon or two, according
to the greatness of the farm, and those of a reasonable good big size, and
handsome to handle, well furnished with wheels, which must be finely bound
and nailed, and of a good height, but more behind than before: one or two
carres, which may be made longer or shorter, according as the matter, which
shall be laid upon them, shall require: one light and swift cart, the body
laid with plankes, and sufficient strong to bear corn, wine, vvood,
stones, and other matters that are of great weight: a plow furnished with a
sharp culture, and other parts: tumbrills to carry his dung out into his
grounds: wheele-barrowes and dung-pots to lade and carry out dung in: strong
and stout forkes to load and lay upon heaps the corne-sheaues: pick-axes to
break small the thick clods: the roller to break the little clods: rakes,
pick-axes, and mattockes, or other instruments to pluck up weeds that are
strong and unprofitable: harrowes and rakes with iron or wooden teeth, to
cover the seed with earth: sickles to sheare or cut down harvest: flailes to
thresh the corn: fannes and sieues to make clean the good corn, and to
separate it from the chafe, dust, and other filth.

And because the plow is of all instruments belonging to the arable field the
principallest, Ploughes of di^erse sorts.
and varieth the oftest according to the variation of climats, I will here
give you a little touch of the several plows for every several soil; and
first to speak of the composition of plows, it consists upon the beam, the
skeath, the head, the hales the spindles, the rest, the shelboard, the
plow-foot, the culture, and the share; then the slipe to keep the plow from
wearing, and the arker-staffe to cleanse the plow when it shall be laden with
earth or other vild matter. The plow which is most proper for the stiff
black clay, would be long, large, and broad, with a deep head, and a square
shelboard, so as it may turn up a great furrow, the culture would be long and
little or nothing bending, and the share would have a very large wing; as for
the foot it would be long and broad, and so set as it may give way to a-great
furrow. The plow for the white, blew, or gray clay, would not be so large as
that for the black clay, only it would be somewhat broader in the britch; it
has most commonly but one hale, and that belonging to the left hand, yet it
may have two at your pleasure, the culture would be long, and bending, and the
share narrow, with a vving coming up to arm and defend the shelboard from
vvearing. The plow for the red sand,, would be less than any before spoken of,
more light and more nimble; the culture would be made circular, or much bending
like that for the white clay, yet much thinner, and the share would be made as
it were with a half vving, neither so large as that for the black clay, nor so
narrow as that for the white clay, but in a mean between both. The plow for
the white sand differs nothing from that of the red sand, only it often has one
addition more, that is, at the further end of the beam there is a pair of
round wheels which bearing the beam, upon a loose moving axle-tree, being
just the length of two furrows and no more, does so certainly guide the plow
to his true furrow that it can never loose land by swa^^ing, nor take too much
land by the greediness of the yrons: the culture and share for this plow are
like those for the red sand, only they are a little less, the culture being
not fully so long, nor so much bent, nor the share so broad, but a little
sharper pointed, and this plow also serves for the gravel howsoever mixed,
whether with peeble, flint or otherwise. The plow for black clay mixed with red
sand, and the white clay mixed with white sand, would be made of a middle size
betwixt that for the black clay, and that for the red sand, being not so huge
as the first, nor so slender as the later, but of a mean and competent
greatness; and so also the culture and share must be made answerable, neither
so big and straight as the greatest, nor so sharp and long as the smallest.
Lastly, the black clay mixed with white sand, and the white clay mixed with red
sand, would have a plow in all points like that for the red sand simple, only
the culture would be more sharp, long, and bending, and the share so narrow,
sharp, and small, that it should be like a round pike, only big at the
setting on.

Thus you see the diversity of plowes, and how they serve for every several
soil: now it is meet to know the implements belonging to their draught, which
if it be Oxen, then there is but the plow cl^uise, the teames, the yoakes, and
beeles; but if it be Horse, then they are twofold, as single or double;
single, as when they draw in length one horse after another, and then there is
needful but the plow cleuise, and swingle-tree, treates, collers, harness,
and cart bridles; or double, when they draw two and two together in the bear
geares, and then there is needful the plow, cleuise, and teame, the toastred,
the swingle-trees, the treates, the harness, the collars, the round withs, or
bearing geares, bellie-bands, backe-bands, and bridles. Also, there be of
harrowes two kinds, one with vvoodden teeth, the other with iron teeth: the
vvoodden are for all simple clayes, or such as easily break, and the iron for
sands, mixed grounds, or any binding earth, and for new broken swarthes, or such
earths as are subject to weeds, or quick growth: for sleighting tools, the
barke-harrowes will serve loose grounds, and the roller those which bind.

CHAP. VII.
To cleanse arable ground of stones, weeds, and stubble, the first works to
be done unto Wheat ground.
But to speak more particularly of the dressing and earing of arable grounds
that are to be sown with corn, that is to say, with Rye corn, Maslin, some
kind of Barley, Turkey corn, and such others, whereof bread is made, and
especially that which the Frenchmen call, for the excellency thereof, Wheat
corn, and the Latins Frumentum and Tri^^cum: they must have the stones
gathered off in Winter, upon ground that has layne fallow: which thing, for to
spare cost and charges, may be done by little Iackboyes and girls, which with
their hands stouping down, and filling Maunds and little Baskets, may carry
them into the midst of the high ways, and into the furrows and rupts of
Carts, or else unto the end of every land, there casting them in some
unprofitable place. And if this work be done in the height of the Spring, or
in the Summer season, it will not be amiss, because it will be much better,
and easier treading upon the lands, and the ardors of the field being then new,
the stones will be a great deal the better perceived: or if this labor be
done at the fall of the leaf, it will not be amiss, because it is both the
time of the last ardor, and when the field should be best cleansed, as also the
fittest time to mend and repair the high ways against Winter. The work is
so needful, as that if the field be not cleansed from stones, though otherwise
it should be duly and orderly plowed, though otherwise it were fat and
fruitful of his own nature, yet would it bear less than any other piece of
ground: and on the contrary, how lean soever it be, if yet it be clean
vvithall and freed from stones, it will not let to bring forth in good and
plentiful sort. Sometimes before the gathering of the stones off, some use to
weed it, and to pull up by the root the briers, thorns, bushes, and great
herbs growing thereupon: but such labor may seem most requisite in an
ouergrowne ground before the first breaking up of the same. The stubble is to
be taken away and rid from off the ground where wheat, or other corn, or oats
or other grain have grown, so soon as the corn it self is shorn and cut
down.

And these weeds and quickes which grow upon the arable lands, To destroy weeds.
would be torn up by the roots with a sharp harrow, or as some husbandmen
use, plucked up by the roots with a pair of vvoodden nippers made for the
purpose, and this would be done in the Summer time after every great shower of
rain, for so they are utterly destroyed, whereas the cutting them up by the
ground does but abate them for a while, and makes them after spring a great
deal the faster: now for to destroy those smaller roots of weeds, which lie
hidden in the ground, and are vnperceiuable till they do mischief, you shall
strike into your plow-rest many sharp dragges, or crooked pieces of iron, most
directly underneath and looking into the earth; and then in plowing of your
grounds, where you spy a weed before your plow, there clap down your rest
upon it, and it will forthwith tear it up by the roots, and in one arder or
two you shall make your ground as clear of weeds as is possible: for I must
needs discommend that manne^ of vveeding (how generally soever it be received)
which is used after the corn is spindled, for though it takes away the weed
from the eye, yet it so bruiseth and breaks down the corn, that the
discommoditie doubleth and trebleth the profit, neither can the weed slay more
corn than the feet of the vveeder: wherefore I would wish, when extremity
vrges a man to weed at these ill seasons, that he by no means step out of the
furrow, or strive to cut up more weeds than he can reach without hurting the
corn thereby.

CHAP. VIII.
That the second or next duty to be performed to the ground is to enrich it by
manuring it: that so of a lean ground, it may become fruitful.
But all grounds which are appointed for seed or corn ground, whether they be
such as are new broken up, or such as have oftentimes already borne corn,
must be enriched and repaired by manure in the beginning of Winter about the
eighteeenth of November, or the beginning of December, with Sheep dung that
is three years old, or else with Cow and Horse-dung mingled together, What
manner of dung must be used.
for the helping of it to a temperate heat* or with other manure such as the
soil affoords, or the Farmers yard can breed, and yet although I speak thus
of November and December, being a time much used with us in France, where the
ways are fair, the journey little, and the labor easy, yet you shall know
that you may lead your manure either in the Spring, or in Summer at all such
vacant seasons when you cannot follow more necessary labor, at when by wet
or other vveather you cannot lead your hay or corn, then you may lead your
manure: for albeit husbandmen hold, that the later you lead your manure, the
better, yet it is not good to drive so long, for fear of prevention, but to
take any fit time or leisure that is offered you through the whole year. The
dung is to be laid on in hills, little lumpes, or heaps, and that along as you
mean to cast up your furrows in plowing, and after to spread it in his
season, whether it be rotten dung, or marle. And it shall chiefly be done in
Winter, that so the rain and snow dropping and falling down upon it, it may
be ou^rcome and caused to re^^nt. The unskillful and bad husbandman spreads
it all hot, but he lacks not a fair forest of weeds, as reward of his
hasty pains: for dung being thus at the first sown and spread, though it be
overcome afterward; notwithstanding, see what weeds it has received from the
beasts houses, as being there scattered, it yields for his first fruits back
again upon the land, and therewithal impaireth much the first crop of corn
that shall follow after, howsoever others following may prove more natural and
plentiful by it, and further, hinders both the ground and hinds in their
working. And this is the cause why the inhabitants of Solong^e and Beaux, the
b^st husbandmen, cause their Rosemarie to be rotted in Summer, and made manure
of in Autumn; and yet many times not hasting, but deferring the use for a
longer time. Furthermore, they continue and hold it from father to son as a
received verity, That nothing is more dear and precious than dung, Nothing
more dear than dung.
taken in his season, for the enriching of ground.

Some take dung as it were hot and half rotten at the end of their field; but
that does much harm: because such dung not being overcome of the snow, rain,
and other helps of the heavens, but remaining crude or raw, does likewise
ramaine unprofitable, especially the first year, doing nothing it self, and
keeping the better fruit from profiting and coming on as it would; though the
second year it may help well, and hinder nothing.

It is true, that if you would enrich a poor field, The diversity of manure.
that it is better done by the dung newly gathered out of the beasts houses,
than with such as is old: and it would be spread in the new of the Moon, a
little before the seed be sown, provided yet, that it be then plowed and
turned under the earth. They seem unto me not to do worst, St^bble serving in
stead of dung
who having gathered their corn in August or September, and cut it somewhat
high, do burn the stubble and other weeds which are in the fields, whereby
they make a manner of dunging of it by the help of rain falling thereupon.
This stands in stead of the first sort of enriching of their ground,
especially in barren and sandy grounds, and such as stand upon a cold moistish
clay, or such as have a strong new broken up ground. True it is, that they do
not this yearly, because of their need to cover their houses, and of having
litter for their beasts. And yet those may seem unto me to be less deceived,
who having left their stubble long and high, in the shearing and cutting of it
down, do presently thereupon bestow an earing upon such ground, and so
vnderturne the said stubble and weeds, there to let them rot with the Winter
rain.

There is nothing so good as the first manuring and dunging of the ground, The
first ^^^^ring of the ground is the (...).
which if it be neglected, it will not recover it for two years space again:
so that for ^uch space he shall gather nothing but Rye in stead of Wheat, and
Fetches for Oats, and wild Fet^hes for kind and natural ones. It is true,
that the first is not sufficient of it self for to dung and enrich the earth
sufficiently, and to make fruitful those that are barren and lean: but there
must be other means used for to effect such a work: and amongst them all,
that seems unto me the principal, which is the letting of the field to lie a
year or two unoccupied, not ceasing the while to husband it both Winter and
Summer: as also the first time when you would have it bear, to sow it with
Lupines, or rather with Pease, provided that the ground be not ouer-cold, for
then it would profit those Pulse but a little. And if all these means should
fall out to be insufficient, it will be good to spread Quicklime upon the
plowed ground in the end of February: for besides that it enricheth a ground
greatly, it cleanses it also, and kills all bad and dangerous weeds:
whereupon it comes to pass, that the harvest after it is more plentiful,
than after any other dung that a man can invent to use. Furthermore, if the
ground be light, it will be good to cause some water to ouerflow the corn for
the space of ten days or thereabout, which will likewise stand in stead of a
manuring or dunging.

The dung or marle is to be spread in the increase of the Moon, To spread dung.
about the eighteenth of November, after such time as the rested ground has
passed his time of recreation: but if it be in such grounds as wherein the
chiefest kinds of corn are to be sown, then they must be dunged presently
after the end of Autumn, that so the ground may have leisure to receive the
rain therewithal* which will serve to help the seeds the better to rot,
thereby providing an aid for the weakness of the earth. In like sort, if this
should be for Rye, or for Messing, the ground would be dunged in the heart of
Winter, or a little before, notwithstanding that some do stay for the month
of March, that it may presently after receive the showers of April, which may
do much good toward the later end of September, at which time they sow in
fine dust, and windy drowthes, looking for the first rain, and the
pu^rifaction to be wrought by the same. But howsoever the case stands, seeing
it is better to manure the ground, than not to manure it; How it is naught to
dung a ground too much.
so it is better to dung it often, than much at once: for as a field starueth, if
it be not dunged at all, so it burns if it be ouer-dunged: in consideration
whereof, the ground must be well weighed; for a good ground has no such need
to be dunged as a lean ground. The moist field would be much more dunged: for
seeing it is frosen continually by reason of his moisture, it comes to pass
that the dung by his heat does resolve and thaw the same again. The dry ground
requires less, because it is hot enough of it self by reason of his
dryness: and if you should bestow great store of dung upon it, it might be a
cause to make it burnt. Again, your exceeding rich and stiff clayes desire
little or no manure at all, because it is so rich and fat of it self, that
having any more addition, it presently mildeweth the corn, and makes the
kernel thereof as black as soot: and therefore the good Husbandman says,
That the manure which is best for these rich soyles, is good plowing in due
time, and ripening the mould.

There must likewise consideration be had of the goodness of the dung: for
good dung would lie fast and close together for a season, To put dung close
together.
and rest it self a year: if it be elder, The diversity of dung.
it is so much the worse. The Pigeons dung is the best of all: and next thereto
is man's dung, especially if it be mixed with the other filth and sweepings of
the house: for of it own nature it is very hot. Next unto this is Asses dung,
which is the best of all beasts dung, because this beast does chew and eat his
meat with great leisure, and digesteth it best, and thereupon also makes a
dung most prepared and fitted to be put presently into the earth. Next unto
this is the dung of Sheep: then that of Goats: and alike of all others, as
Horses, Mares, Oxen, and Kine. The worst of all is Swines dung, by reason of
his great heat, for therewith it presently burns the earth. For want of dung,
the stalks of Lupines cut down, have the force and efficacy of very good
dung: or else to sow Lupines on Corne-ground which is lean, and after that
they be come up, to put them into the earth again, turning it over them.

There are many Farms of which one can keep neither bird nor beast to make
dung of: and yet the painful Farmer, in this scarcity of manure, may make
some of the leaves of Trees and Thorns, and dyrt, or parings of the earth
gathered out of the streets: he may also take Fern, and mingle them with the
filth and mire of the utter court: or make a deep pit, and gather into it
ashes, stubble* and stumps of hay or straw, the dyrt hanging about spouts, and
all other manner of filth that may be scraped and raked together in paring or
sweeping the house, or else howsoever. And in the midst of this ditch you must
set a piece of wood of Oak to keep away Adders and Snakes, that they come not
to breed or abide there. If you have no other but arable grounds, they will not
need, that you should divide your dung into diverse sorts: but and if you have
Vineyards, Meadows, and Corne-ground, you must lay every sort of dung by it
self, as that which is of Goats and birds must be stirred every summer, as if
you would dig it with Pick-axes or Spades, to the end it may not the sooner,
and be better for the ground.

The cleansing of Ponds, Ditches, or standing Lakes, is a compass or manure
not inferior to any before spoken of: and Marle may have pre-eminence before
all, in as much as the best before named does not last above four years at
the most; Soil of Ponds or Ditches.
and some but two; and some but one: yet Marle will keep the ground rich
twenty years, and better. All sorts of ashes, either of Wood or Coal, is a
good manure, chiefly for ground that is apt to chap or riue: So is also Lyme,
or Chalk, especially for cold soyles; yet your Lyme would be scattered very
thin upon the same, and your Chalk laid in greater abundance. Also Sea-sand
is a very good kind of manure, and both fasteneth a loose mould, and also
makes it a great deal more fertile.

CHAP. IX.
That the ground must be plowed over according to his three earings before that
it be sown.
IN tilling and husbanding the earth as it should be, there are three things
chiefly required: first, a Husbandman, furnished with a good understanding and
ripe judgment: secondly, Cattle fitted for the work: and thirdly, a Plough
well appointed and made. But of all other things, it is very requisite, that
the Husbandman do know the nature and condition of the earth which he
undertakes to till, thereof to reap fruit and commodity, that so accordingly
he may stir it, and give it as many earings as the nature thereof does
require. For in fields which are of a good ground underneath, he must set his
culter and plough so deep therein, as that the better and fatter earth which
is underneath, may be turned above: whereas to take the same course in a ground
that is barren and lean underneath, were altogether unprofitable. In like
manner, there are many fields, which the more that they are eared and plowed,
they become so much the more leaner and barrenner: and such are those which
have a ^light mould, which the oftener they are plowed in the time of heat, so
much the more they are pierced of the Sun, and so become the weaker and less
able to (...) Corn.

It is true indeed, that there are not many sorts of grounds, but by often
earing ^hey become more fruitful, than and if they were seldomer eared: but
howsoever, Wheat or Mesling especially, do desire to have three earings before
they be ^owne: one, which is called the first earing; and it must be when as
the dung is newly spread (otherwise the dung would loose his force, being
wasted and consu^ed by the heat of the Sun:) and this first earing is for to
stir the earth, and (...) make it soft for after-plowing, not turning up much
earth with the plough, nor piercing deep into the earth this first time, but
cutting it in such sort, as that the ^urrowes may be so near together one unto
the other, as that a man shall hardly ^erceiue the path or passage of the
plough: for by this means all the roots of ^he herbs will be broken, and
die. The second earing is in the Spring, at such ^ime as the earth begins to
open of it self: and then you may cast your (...) good and high, and great
withal, that so the seed may be the better received into ^he ground.

But you must understand, that according to the situation of the grounds that
are good for Corn or Pulse, as also according to the Country, mould, and
heartinesse ^hereof, it is used to vary and alter the plowing and tilling of
the ground, for the ^urther benefit of the inhabitants: for at Brie, where they
have a slipperie and moist ^round, fit to make pots of for necessary
business, they plow upon a causey, and as it were upon an Asses back: and in
every five furrows they hold it meet to cast one high ridge, that is very
large, and made also like unto a ca^sey, that it may both receive the rain
water, and that which springs out of the earth, which is always moist, and
that because of two Rivers lying upon the one side and on the other, and do
moisten and water the grounds there continually underneath.

And for the same purpose (which is also practiced in small Beaux, as in
Longboyau, Val de Gallie, Val-boyau, Niuernois, and Bourbonnois) they make at
the end of their ground certain rises of sufficient height: where, betwixt the
said rise and arable ground, there is a ditch or pit made within it, after the
fashion of a long fatt, to receive the waters which run along after great
rain: for otherwise they would rot and smother the corn. This troubles such
as travel those countries, exceedingly: and this is the cause of the name,
whereby they are called the Grasshoppers of Brie: Insomuch, as that they cannot
tell how to do so well, as in a rainie day to go and pull up Darnell,
Dane-wort, and other ouer-spreading weeds (which else they could hardly
overcome) being a kind of earing of the ground, called of ancient Writers the
freeing of Corne-ground from weeds: having further, by such abundance of
rain, this scath done unto their Come, as that it is laid bare now and then,
yea, and that though it be never so well harrowed, and the earth of it self
strong and mighty.

There is no need of any such rises or ditches in the parts of France, truly
and properly so called, neither in the Isle thereof, nor in the flat and free
Country of Blairie, as Long-boyau and Labea^ce (the very Barn and
Storehouse of France) the Countries of Oye, Sangterre, or else of Berry and
free Poictou. And all grauellie Countries may be well excused and freed from
all manner of such inconvenience, as appears by many places of Picardie and
Solongne, even unto Percheron: so that they make their furrows close and near
one to another, as is wont to be done in low grounds and valleys.

The ground must also be plowed in a fit and convenient time, to the end that
it may become fruitful: Wherefore the careful Husbandman shall never plow his
ground whiles it is wet; for running through it with the plough at that time,
it will do nothing but run upon heaps, especially in tough and clammie
grounds, as also in those which be hard, or growing and putting forth their
fruit, in as much as this makes them so sad and close, that it is impossible
to make them fine and small mould again. Likewise, it is an absurd thing ever
to go about to put the plough into a dyrtie and myrie ground, because it is
nothing fit to stir or deal any manner of way withal, before it become
dry, and so unfit, as that though you could do what you would unto it with
the plough, yet there is no casting of any seed into it.

And if it should fall out, that there were any Tree or Vin^-plant in the
ground, you must pass it over, in lifting up the plough from off the shootes
which come from the roots, at all times when you perceive your self to be
upon them: or (...) you shall cut them off with a hatchet, rather than bruise
and break them with the culter, for fear of breaking the culter it self, and
putting the Oxen or Horse to (...) and pains.

CHAP. X.
That the ^attell used to plow withal, do differ according to the manner and
custom of the Countries.
IN rough and tough grounds, Plowing with Horse.
as also in free and kindly grounds (as has been said) where there are
required as needful three Horses to a plough of fifty foot (but not so
coupled and spanged, as they be in Countries where they use to plow with Mares,
Oxen, Asses, or Buffles) you must, after the first caring, break the clods
with the rowler, and lay it flat, square, and plain, with a planke. In lean,
grauellie, and weaker grounds, you shall not stand in need to be at such cost
either with horse or man; for it is not requisite that you should draw so deep
a draught in the earth: and again, the husbandmen of such Countries have
sooner finished and made an end than others, and yet do labor with more
leisure, because of the air and climate of their Country. Yet this is but a
particular fashion in France: Horses and Oxen of France.
therefore to speak more generally, both according to that and other foreign
soyles, you shall understand, that there be two principal causes to make a man
plow with Horses, although he may have Oxen at his pleasure: The one is, when
he lives in a very wet and dyrtie soil, where the ground of it self
yields forth such a continual moisture, that the finallest trampling or
treading thereupon brings it to a very mire; in this case it is best to plow
with Horse, because they draw ever directly one after the other, and tread ever
in the furrow, without annoying the land, and go also much more light and
nimbly than other cattle; whereas Oxen going double, and treading upon the
land, would foil it, and make it so myrie, that it would be good for no
purpose: The other, when a man lives far from his necessary accommodations,
as from his fuel, his fencing, his timber, and other such like necessaries,
which he must forcibly use every year; in this case he must ever keep his
teame of Horses, because they are fittest for travel and long iournies, doing
them ever with the greatest speed and least loss: whereas the Ox, being a
heavy beast, would soon surfeit, and are indeed so unapt for the same, that a
man can hardly do them greater injury. Now for the number of Horses to be
used in the plow, it must be according to the greatness of the labor, and the
strength of the cattle: for in the heavy and stiff clayes, six are ever few
enough, either to fallow with, or to plow the Pease-earth with; and f^ure for
any other ardor: in the lighter sands four is sufficient at all times, and
three upon any necessity. As for the mixed soyles, if they be binding, they
will crave as much strength as the clayes: but if they be loose, the same that
serves the light sands will serve them also. And herein is to be noted, that
the stoned Horse is ever better for the draught than either the Mare or
Gelding, yet all good and meet for service. Again, they work with the Ass
and the Ox, Plowing with Oxen.
as in A^uergne with the young Mule, and in Roman and Champaigne in Italy
with the Buffle: whereas, of a truth, the labor of Oxen is not ready, nor so
quick of dispatch in the time of necessity; and for to remedy and help this
mischief, you must begin your work with the Oxen sooner, and have a greater
number of them than of Horse. The provision of Oxen is of less charges for
diet, buying and selling again: whereunto you may add, that you may eat the
Ox, or sell him again, after you have had his labor a certain time. True it
is, that he that has wrought all the morning, must rest the afternoon; and
the Oxen going earlier to plough, return earlier from labor than the Horse.
The greatest commodity coming by them, is, that they better endure the
unseasonableness of times, and in sturdie and stiff ground they draw a deeper
draught, and acquit themselves in the work with more commendation: again,
they ^raue nothing so much shooing or harneis in the Countries where iron and
harneis is dear, neither are they subject unto so many maladies, save that
they must be kep^ from being starued with cold, and from the rain, as also
care taken that they be well covered.

This I speak as of our French Oxen, which are not much inured to labor: but
if you please to look unto the English Ox, English Ox.
you shall see, that he is the worthiest creature of all other for the plow,
both in respect of his constancy in labor, and of hi^ long endurance therein;
as also for his leisurable and certain drawing, without (...) or twitches,
keeping ever one pace, without going faster or slower: whereas the horse by his
courage and fierceness does, when he is pricked forward, draw so rashly and
suddenly, that a good hand can hardly, now and then, keep an even and direct
f^^row. These Oxen are fittest for those soyles which are tough and firm,
without (...) spewing moisture in them, because (as was before said) they draw
double: ye^ (...) some places, and in moist grounds, you shall see them draw
single, like unto horses, with open collars, and large hames. Touching the
number meet for a Plow, the horse and they are all one, for six Oxen will serve
well either to fallow or break up Pease earth, and four will perform any
other ardor: yet if you will let them have any Tytt or mean Jade to go
before them, and lead the way (which will, as it were, ea^e the yoakes from
their necks) it will be a great deal the better, and they will take their
labors with much more pleasure: and howsoever our custom is in France, yet
they will endure a full days labor as well as a horse, provided that they be
driven temperately and gently: for nothing breeds surfeit so soon in Oxen, as
ouer-has^ie driving, or heating them without discretion.

I find not any labor lesle chargeable than that of Asses, To plow with Asses.
such as are to be had in Tabie, Calabrie, Sicile, and in the country of
Iaffle, being all of them countries where they grow great and fair: for they
endure more labor, and are not subject to so many diseases, neither are they so
costly to feed. True it is, that they do not so much, neither yet altogether so
well: wherefore they are better to be used in lean grounds; except the young
Mule of Auuergne, which exceeds all other beasts: but he is troublesome, hard
to be brought to draw, and so brainsick, as that there is not the young Mule
which has not his madding fit, and vexes his master now and then: where^pon
it grows that some use to say, namely, A good young Mule, but a cursed beast.
A good Mules, but a cursed beast.


The plowing with Buffles, as is to be seen in Roman, and elsewhere, is good
in grounds that are fat, and standing upon a Potters clay: and are not
chargeable in harneis, because that having so short a neck, they stand not in
need of any thing but a ring, to hold and keep them by the snowt: but in
Summer they are dangerous, and fall oftentimes into a frenzy, especially when
they see any red clothes; and yet notwithstanding they hold out longer at
labor, and are more ready and diligent tha^ the Ox. Finally, this poor
beast serves to give milk, besides the work and labo^ performed by them: as
also their hide is of much more use than that of the Cow or Ox: for in some
places Husbandmen do use Mares, Asses, she Mules, and Kin^, to draw and go
to plow, after the same manner that the males do.

I do not intend to trouble my self in this place with the fashion of the
Plough, The diversity of Ploughes.
neither yet with the diverse sorts thereof, that are found in diverse and sundry
(...): so as if you should ask me of the difference betwixt the Ox-plough and
the Horse-plough, I intend not to shape you any further answer than this,
namely, that according to the loaf, so must the knife be: even so, according
to the force and stre^gh of the ground, so you must have your instruments and
tools for to cu^ and fill the same. Neither will I trouble my self with
examining the fashions of our ploughs with (...) described of Hesiod, to see
whether they be like, or no: no more than I in^end to meddle with the fashion
and making of Columella his Hedging-bill, or Wedge, which (...) says in his
time to have been named after the French name.

CHAP. XI.
Of clodding and earing it the second and third time, and of sowing of it
afterward.
FVrthermore it is meet, after the first earing of Corne-ground, To clod the
gr^und.
very diligently to break and take away clods, and to make the ground plain
and even, for the better sowing and bestowing of the seed in good proportion
and sort upon the ground: which our common Husbandman v^eth to do in the time
called of him the dusting time: Notwithstanding that the inhabitants of Beauce
do not so strictly stand upon the same: for by reason of the fatness of their
grounds, they take the time howsoever it shapeth, having no good assurance of
the time, whether it will continue fair, or turn rainie. It is the order and
common fashion to break the clods with the Rowler (which would do well to be
of Marble in a tough and stiff ground) or else you may break them with a
harrow, well toothed with sharp-pointed teeth of iron, and of a good length.
But howsoever, you must so labor it, and so often go over it, as that it may be
broken all into dust, if it be possible, that so there may not remain one clod
unbroken after that it is sown.

Yet for the more certain clodding of arable grounds, you shall know, that it
must be done according to the nature of the soil, and ever after a good shower
of rain, the first which falls, after the seed is sown. If the ground be a
loose soft mould, and very apt to break, then the backside of your harrowes
being run over the lands, will be sufficient: but if the earth be more hard
and binding, then you shall take the rowler of Wood, for that of Marble is a
great deal too heavy, and indeed only fit for Grasse-grounds, and not
Corne-grounds, as also the teeth of the harrow are too sharp, and tear up the
earth too much: and where the vvoodden rowler will not serve, there you shall
take clodding-beetles, made of purpose broad and flat, and with them break the
clods so in pieces, that the rain may soften them; and then with your
back-harrowes run over them again: and this is called sleighting, as well as
clodding.

Wherefore, after that the clods are well broken, and all made plain, for the
second earing, The second earing.
you shall cut up your grounds again about mid June, if they be fat and moist;
or about the month of September, if they be lean and dry: for otherwise your
lean ground would be quite dried up and burnt with the Sun, neither would
there remain therein any virtue or juice. Above all things you must observe
and keep such order in plowing, as that the ground may not be too dry nor too
moist: for great store of moisture makes them dirt and mire, and too much
dryness does disadvantage the husbandman amain, either because the plough
cannot enter the ground, or if it enter, yet it cannot break it small enough,
but turns up thick and broad clods of earth, in such sort, as that afterward
it will be hard to plow up the field again: for certainly, there cannot be
that done which should and is requisite, when the earth is too hard. Wherefore
the ground that has been plowed in drought, must have a rainie season found
out to be plowed in afterward again, that so the same being watered and
moistened, may be the more easily tilled.

Yet of the most approuedst husbandmen (for France is not rich in that
profession) it is held, that the earth can never be plowed too dry, so long as
the plow is able to run through the same, and one ardor so gotten, is worth
three in the moister weather: besides, the greater that the clods are which
arise by plowing thus in dry weather, (...) greater store of mould you shall
have, which is a good advantage to the grain, neither will it be any thing
more difficult to plow, if you stay a good season, and have the earth thoroughly
wet before the next plowing, for these great clods do never arise but in the
clay grounds, which are apt to break with any moisture.

Shortly after the second earing, you shall give it his third earing, The third
earing.
which must be more light, and such as breaks not in so deep as the two
former. This earing being finished, you must make the ground even and smooth
with a harrow presently after, which shall be about the midst of October:
then you shall sow and bestow your seed upon the ground in good proportion, but
not at any other time than in the increase of the Moon, and never in the
decrease: and then likewise it will be the better, if you take the opportunity
of a little rain, following the Proverb, which says, You must sow Wheat in
mire, and Barley in dust: and the reason is, because tha^ Wheat being hard, and
coming near to the nature of Wood, does bud and (...) better and sooner, when
it is laid in steep and mollified in dyrt: or else for fear of Pismires,
which if the Wheat should be sown in a dry ground, would become lords of it
by and by, and carry it away. Notwithstanding, if you see that the rain be
somewhat long in coming (seeing the times are not in man's power) you shall not
defer to sow, especially in dry grounds: for the corn which is sown in dry
ground, and well harrowed and covered, does enjoy and keep the same without
corrupting as well as if it were in the Garner: and if there follow any rain,
the seed will be up in a day. I presuppose in the mean time, that the
Husbandman has let rest and lie idle his grounds for some two years, wherein
he is intending to sow his Wheat, to the end they may bring him a better crop.
Furthermore, seed^time is expired and past about the eighteenth day of
November: for then the earth, by the coldness of the air, becomes close shut,
and (as it were) rugged, staring, and aghast, so that it will not be able so
well to receive the seed, and to cause it to thrive. It is true that in cold
places seed must be sown earlier, but in hot places later: whereupon it
comes to pass, that in Italy they sow about the beginning of November; but
with us in France, where it is temperate, in October; in cold places, and
Coast-countries, in the kallends of September, or rather sooner, to the end
that the roots of the come may be grown strong before that the Winter-raine
do molest it, or the Ye and Frosts do hurt it. Notwithstanding at what time
soever you sow your seed, you must ma^e diverse conueiances overthwart the
grounds, and conduits to carry away the water out of the Corn. Yet this
Seed-time is spoken but as of Wheat only, or Rye, which are called
Winter-cornes: for Pease, Beans, and Pulse, would be sown in February, and
the beginning of March; and Oats and Barley, at the end of March, and beginning
of April. Now sometime the husbandman shall have occasion to rejoice in hope
of good success, and sometime to fear in doubt of the evil success, of his
seed, by reason of the variablenes of the time. He shall have good hope of his
Seed, if he see the time inclined to sweet, mild, and not violent showers; and
unto temperate, not e^cessiue and often showers: for the mild showers resemble
the dew; the excessive ones do moisten and cool too much: If in like manner
the snow do fall in abo^ndance, and become hard by some frost following
thereupon: for such snow lets and stays the earth from spending it self
by exhalation, and vvasting of his fatness, which otherwise by vapors would
be consumed: and if also the said snow in making do wash and water by little
and little the earth with his pure and sweet liquor, and (as it were) scumme
of rain; for that serves to make the earth fat, provided that presently upon
the melting of the snow there fall no showers of rain accompanied with hail:
if lastly the frosts come in their proper and due time; for if they be too
(...) and forward, they burn the young sprouts; and if too late, they hurt
them very much.

CHAP. XII.
Of the choice and quantity of seed to be sown.
FOr Wheat to make seed of, The choosing of seed Wheat.
the industrious Husbandman shall choose such as is full, thick, heavy, firm,
and so hard and strong, as that it cannot but with pain be broken betwixt the
teeth, of a red color, bright, clean, not above a year old, which makes
sauourie and well-tasted bread, threshed out of choice and culled ears, which
after fanning and winnowing lies uppermost (as that which is the thickest and
most massy) which was grown in a fat ground, but cont^arily seated to that
wherein such Wheat is to be sown, as from hill to plain, and from moist to
dry, and yet so contrary, as that the seed of a bad place be rather sown in
a good place, than the seed of a good place sown in a bad: for seed, be it
never so good, does become worse and degenerate easily, when it is sown in a
bad plot.

And for as much as I speak only of Wheat in this place, being the grain of
most use in France, you shall understand, that there be diverse kinds thereof,
as shall be showed hereafter; which since their names are not familiar in other
Countries, I will here repeat those which are most in use amongst our
neighbors, especially in England: of which, the first is called whole-straw
Wheat, Sor^s of Wheat.
because the straw is whole and entire, not having any hollownesse within it,
and this is of all Wheat the largest and goodliest, and yields the greatest
store of flower, yet not of the most pure and most white color: it prospers
only on the rich stiff clay-grounds, and must necessarily have three earings
before it be sown. Next unto it, is the great Pollard Wheat, which has no
aues upon the ears: it is a large Wheat also, and prospers likewise upon
stiff clay-grounds, yet will ask but one earing, because it loves to be sown
upon Pease-ground, from whence Pease was reaped the same year. The next is
small Pollard, which loves an indifferent earth, as that which is grauelly, or
of barren mixture, and it must have ever full three earings. Then Ograue Wheat,
which loves any well-mixt soil, and will grow either after three earings, or
but one, so it besowne where Pease is reaped. Then ^laxen Wheat, which will joy
in any soil, except the stiff clay, or burning sand, provided that it have
fully three earings, and be well manured. And lastly, Chylter Wheat, which is
like unto flaxen Wheat.

It will be good before you sow your seed, Seed degen^rate.
to lay it in steep in water some certain hours, and afterward to spread and
lay it abroad somewhere in the shadow to dry, that so it may be ready to
roll or run at such time as it is to be cast into the earth: by this means
you shall choose the fairest corns that shall stay behind in the bo^tome of the
water, to sow them, which will grow within three or four days: but as for
those which swim aloft above the water, they shall be taken away, because
they are not worth any thing to sow: for the best use for such, is either to
seed Hens, or else to grind, that so you may get out even that s^all
quantity of meal and flower that is within them. Some before the sowing of
their corn, do sprinkle it over a little with water, wherein have been
infused Houseleeke, or the stamped seeds and roots of wild Cucumbers, to the
end that the corn may not be eaten of Moules, field-Mice, or other such like
vermin. Yet howsoever this may be a practice in France, it is not received
generally amongst Husbandmen, to steep the corn in water, before they sow
it, because so much moisture cools and drowneth the kernel of it too much:
Nay, they are so far from the practice thereof, that a well-reputed
Husbandman will not suffer his corn to be so much as washed before it be sown.

The quantity of corn which must be sown, How much corn will serve in sowing.
shall be measured and rated according to the piece of ground: for an arpent of
fat ground will for the most part take four bushels of Wheat, a reasonable fat
ground will take five, and a lean will take more. It is true, that there must
respect be had unto the Country and place where it is sown: for in cold
Countries and places that are waterie, being also always subject to Snowes, it
is needful to sow a great deal more than in hot Countries, or in temperate
and dry places, in as much as the cold and Snow do corrupt the great^st part
of the seed. Besides, the time is well to be observed, and the disposition of
the air: for in Autumn you must sow less thick: and in Winter, or the
times approaching and coming near to Winter, a great deal more: again, in
rainie weather you must sow thicker than in dry weather. Yet in England and
other Countries which are much colder than France, two bushels of Wheat or
Pease will fully sow an acre: and four bushels of Barley, or Oats: and three
bushels of Beans: which proportion no man need to alter upon any occasion
whatsoever.

CHAP. XIII.
Of harrowing and weeding of Corn.
PResently after that the seed is bestowed in the ground, you must, for your
last work, harrow it along and cross overthwart, and after that ^ake it from
furrow to furrow, but overthwart only. This would be done with Harrowes,
having iron teeth rather than wooden ones, because they make the corn settle
deeper into the earth, which they do break and make fmall a great deal
better, and so by that means do cover the corn with earth, as it requires,
at the least the thickness of four fingers, that so it may be the faster
rooted, and the safer from birds: and thus it must be let alone the whole
Winter upon the Spring. True it is, that during Winter you must not neglect to
make draynes and draughts, thereby to carry away the water that falls in too
great abundance by rain.

Now this manner of harrowing is but for such entire grounds as lie together
level, plain, and vndistinguished by lands: for were they cast up with
ridges, as the lands of many Countries are, then could they by no means be
harrowed overthwart. Therefore wheresoever your ground lies, in lands or in
common, mixed amongst your neighbors, there you shall ever harrow your lands
directly up and down the full length of the lands, beginning at the furrows
first, and so ascending up to the ridges. As for the Harrowes, as before I
said, the wooden Harrow is best for the loose moulds, and the iron Harrowes
for the tough and binding moulds. As for the Oxe-harrow, Oxe-h^rrow.
which is as big as two Horse-harrowes, and has ever iron teeth, it is best
for the roughest earths, especially new broken up swarths, the Horse-harrowes
going before, and the Oxe-harrow following after.

When the Spring time is come, and the Wheat has taken good root, you must
weed your ground of such store of weeds, as Winter rain, and the rankness of
the earth it self, have caused to abound and ouer-grow the corn, newly put
up, as Fe^ches, tame and wild, Poppie, Cockle, and such like: and after once
having weeded it, it will be good to do it the second time, as when the ear
begins to shoot* for i^ so doing, the corn will prove fair and clean. But
in the mean time, you must so weed it at the first, as that the roots be not
hurt, but that they may remain covered and laden with the earth, that so they
may stand faster in the earth, and grow the more upward. At the second time of
weeding you must not bare it much: for and if the Wheat should not shoot up
still more and more, it would rot upon the earth, and bring forth nothing.
Again, at the second weeding you shall stir and make even the ground a
little, that so the corn may not be too close and fast covered (...) the ^oot,
which would cause it to die also, and rot away, bringing forth nothing. This
work and duty is not of small weight and moment, in as much as oftentimes the
corn is choked by weeds, and bowed to the earth by their too much
loftiness, taking their opportunity of some beating wind or rain. Moreover,
you must not be abashed, if the greater part of the ears prove empty, without
having any thing at all in them, and the other not to come to perfection and
ripeness. Again, when the good corn is accompanied with Fetches, Darnell,
and other weeds, the bread is not only made more unpleasant, less sauourie,
wholesome, and discolored, but also it comes not to the one half of good
corn, which is not mingled with these filthy weeds: insomuch, as that three
load of such corn, after the winnowing of it, do not yield two of pure and
clean corn. And which is worse, the field where such seeds are scattered,
do not bring forth half so much as those which are charged with nothing but
well cleansed and winnowed corn.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of mowing, or shearing.
THe last labor and toil, The last labor.
for the which all the other in the whole year going before, was taken, is
mowing and cutting down of the corn: which must be attended, after that it
once becomes ripe; which will appear, by the turning of the color into a
light yellow throughout, in all parts alike: and before that the grain be
altogether hardened and turned red, that so it may grow thicker in the
weathering and barn, rather than standing in the fields. For it is most
certain, that if it be cut down in good and due season, it will grow bigger,
and increase afterward: whereas otherwise, if you stay the mowing or shearing
of it down, till it be thoroughly dry, the greatest part of the corn will
fall to the ground in shearing of it, and will become a pray for the birds and
other beasts. If there happen any violent storm, or whirlewind, it will lay
it flat with the earth. You must, of all other times, make choice of the wane
of the Moon, or betwixt Moon and Moon, to cut down your corn therein, The
time to cut down Corn.
if that you would have your corn to keep well: and the best hour, is the
break of the day, when it is full of deaw. The manner of shearing, is either
to cut it in the midst of the straw, to the end you may have stubble Stubble.
to cover your country houses, as also to heat the Oven to bake bread, in such
countries as are unprovided of wood, as in Beauce: or else to cut it within a
foot of the ground, for the greater provision of straw, Straw.
which will serve afterward to make Mats Mats.
for Beds, or Litter for Horses and other Cattle, and (which is yet the
greatest profit of all) to employ about the making of Mats, for the use and
behoof of the householder in his chambers. That which remains, shall either
be cut down with Sickles, or Hedging-bills, made fast to the end of a great
staff, to make a fire withal for the Winter time: or else it shall be burned
in the fields themselves, to make dung, by the means of rain falling
thereupon, in grounds especially that are sandy, or standing of a stiff
Potters clay, or which have a strong mould.

And although this be the French manner of shearing of Wheat or Rye (for of
these grains there are no difference) yet in other countries they use to
sheare after the Sun is risen, and at such time as the corn is most dry,
holding (as doubtless it is most probable) that the binding of the corn
together in sheaues, whilst the wet deaw is upon it, does either rot or make
it mildew quickly. As for the stubble, it is much better to mow it down with
Sythes, than cut it up with Sickles, Sythes and Sickles.
both because you may go nearer to the ground, and also save much labor, in
doing your work sooner and better.

The corn being cut, shall be gathered together and made into sheaues, and
after led and carried into the barn by the Farmer: which must be seated in a
sufficient high place, that so it may receive the wind somewhat readily: and
yet not that I would have the wind, when it comes, to be able to go against
the houses, or gardens: for besides the annoyance which the small chafe would
work in the eyes of the people, and that before they should perceive it, it
would furthermore hurt and much annoy the gardens, because that by the same
sticking to the leaves of the herbs and trees, as also to their fruits in
Autumn, it would dry them, and make them apt and easy to be burnt by the
heat of the Sun.

CHAP. XV.
Of threshing Corn.
FOr the last labor of the Husbandman, there remains nothing more, but to
thresh out the Corn, To thresh corn.
for to sow it again, or for to store up and lay aside in the Garner, and this
not sooner than till three months passed after the Harvest: for although the
Corn should be gathered of full ripeness, yet still it goes forward to more
perfection as it lies in the Barn. The Gascoines notwithstanding fearing,
that Corn left long in the sheaues should not only take a great heat, but
grow full of Butterflies, Mothes, and small Wo^mes which are wont to spoil it,
cause the sheaues to be dried three whole days in the Sun, and that in the
field where they were mowen, and afterward thresh it in the same place,
carrying lastly the Corn so threshed into Garners: so that by that means they
stand not in need of Barnes to carry their sheaues into, and there to keep
them.

This is also a custom used both in Ireland, Spain, and the Islands near
unto Spain; but I cannot commend the husbandry: for it is most certain, that
except Corn may take a kindly sweat in the Mow, it is never wholesome, nor
will yield flower in that abundance, which otherwise it would do. Besides,
Corn is ever more safely kept in the ear than in the Garner, Corn better
kept in the ear than in the Garner,
and take much less pu^rifaction. Whence it comes, that your great
Corn-masters and hoarders of Corn, when they want room to lay their Corn in,
will thresh up their oldest store, and then keep it in the chafe till they
have occasion to use it, being of this mind, that whilst it lies therein, it
will ever keep sweet; and it is a most certain rule: for nothing is a greater
preserver of Corn than the own chafe, except it be the care it self; in
which, Nature having at first placed it, of necessity it must ever be safest
therein. Wherefore, I would have all good husbands to bring their Corn home
into the Barn first, and there to let it rest three weeks or a month at
least, in which time it will have taken the full sweat, and then to thresh it,
Bad to thresh sweating corn
as occasion shall serve. And herein is also to be noted, that if you shall
thresh it during the time of sweating, it will be so danke and soft, that it
will by no means grind or make good flower, except it be dried, which also is
not held good nor profitable, and especially where it is dried with any other
heat than that which the Sun yields, as Kylne, Oven, Stoue, or such like.

Before the threshing of it, The floor to thresh cor^e upon.
you must be careful to prepare the floor, and to sprinkle it over with Ox
blood, mingled with oil of Olives not salted, and afterward to make it plain
and smooth with a Pauing-beetle or Rowler, to the end it may not have any
clefts or creuises in it, wherein the corn threshed out may be lost, or
wherein the Pismires might breed and hide themselves. The best way to thresh
it, is with flailes, and after to cleanse it from the chafe, husks, and other
filth, with the fan, and last of all, to sift it. In any case leave not
Wheat long in the sheafe, because it takes heat, and thereupon becomes full
of Butterflies, Mothes, and small Wor^s, which eat it up. In the mean time you
must not cast away the chafe, which is good mea^, not only for horses and
other beasts, mingled with prouander, but also for to ripen (...), and to keep
them as we have said before. In like sort, the Spaniard and (...) make it serve
to keep Snow in all Summer: for they make deep pits in the gro^^d, wherein
they put their Snow, and cover it with chafe.

CHAP. XVI.
In what manner the Garners are to be made to put Corn in.
LEt the Garner wherein you shall keep your Wheat, Wheat Garners
take his light from the East, and a little ayred from the North and West, but
principally from the North-east, which keeps the Corn always dry, and
fresh, and cool; but not from the South, nor from any such like coast or
quarters. It shall have many open holes, by which the whole vapor of the
Corn may pass forth, and the cool gentle air come in: And it must not be
floored or planked above, to the end that the winds may easily enter in through
the open places and tiles of the roof, that so it may be more fresh and cool
at all times. It must be placed far from all moisture, and other evil smells
and unpleasant air, and also from all the houses wherein cattle are kept,
whether horse, oxen, or other such like: the boorded floor thereof shall be
ordered as the earth-floore, that is to say, sprinkled with Neats blood mingled
with oile-Oliue unsalted, and after smoothed and made plain with a ^owler or
pauing-beetle, as in which there is not to be left hole or breach, be it never
so little, without stopping of it with lime and sand. The said floor where the
corn is to be laid, shall be watered with vinegar: the walls must be made
trim and dressed over with mortar tempered in water, wherein has been
steeped the roots and leaves of wild Cucumber: or with Lime tempered with
Sheep urine, which shall be of much use against all kind of shrewd beasts
that use to eat the corn. And thus much for the French experience. But for the
custom of other Countries, it shall not be amiss to make your Garners of
Oaken boards close joined together, or else lined in the joints with Lime and
hair, in such wise, that no corn may run through the same. Others use to
keep their corn in great Hutches, or chests of wood, with close couers. But
better than any of these it is to make your Garners of Plaster as large as you
shall think good, for it keeps it most cool and sound, and is the least
troubled with Weeuils, Mites, Mice, or such like vermin. Yet to speak truly,
and according to the opinion of the best Husbandmen, all these Garners are more
proper for Barley, Oats, Rye, or all sorts of Pulse, than for Wheat, because it
is a tender grain, and of it self naturally apt to heat and putrify, when it
is kept close together in great and thick heaps: and therefore the wiser
Farmers do use to spread their Wheat thin (as not above a foot thick at
most) upon the Garne-house floor: which floor, if it be of plaster, it is
best; boards is the next; and the mudde floor is the worst of all: and being
to spread, you shall not fail to turn it over once a week at the least, for
fear of heating, or growing mustie.

In the Garner thus fitted, shall your corn be laid, being first made very
clean, for the cleaner it is, the less subject will it be to Weeuils and
other (...): It is true that being in the garner, for the defending of it from
this vermin, it is good to remove it often, and to have about the heaps some
wild Organie, or the dried leaves of Pomegranat-trees, or Wormwood, or dry
Southernwood: or which is better, in the midst often load of dry Wheat to
mingle one of Millet made very clean: for by the coolness of the Millet, the
Wheat will be kept from the vermin and taking of all other manner of heat,
and when occasion requires, this Millet will be easily sifted from the Wheat,
by the means of a sieue: and furthermore, that it may somewhat increase, you
must cast upon the heaps of corn Sal-nitrum, and the scumme thereof, both of
them finely powdered, and mixed with very fine earth. And if it should come to
pass, that the corn should not prove to last and stand sound for long time,
and that therefore it is ground into meal; then for the keeping of the said
meal, you must make masses or dry lumpes of Cummin and salt powned, and lay
them in the midst of the meal. Or if it appear that Palmer-wormes are bred
in the corn, or any other such like vermin, by the ouerheating of it, you
must dust it by and by with a sieue, and after spread it abroad, and leave it
in the Sun all the while of the great heat, even until evening, and after
that it is become hot thus by the Sun, and has been made very clean,
carry it up again into the highest garner that you have, and thus the
unnatural heat thereof will cease, and all the (...) be killed, and the Wheat
so cool as that it will be out of the danger of the former overthrow.
Furthermore, as concerning the fanning of Corn, the husbandman must beware
least he be beguiled by the measurers, or yet by the measures; seeing it is a
trick they have either in pouring on the corn to press it down with their
hand, or else to strike the measure with their knee to cause the corn to run
the closer together, that so they may have the better measure: such crafty
shifts as this, are the (...) that the second measuring is not answerable unto
the first.

And although I speak here only of fanning, of which there are two kinds,
the one, a fan with loose clothes like sails, which being turned swiftly
about, gathers a vvind that will disperse the corn from the chafe; the
other made of Wickers, of a great compass, being the one half plain without
an edge, the other half having an edge almost a foot deep, which being
turned to the body of the man, and casting the corn to and fro in the same,
it disperseth and drives the chafe from the corn; yet the wynowing of corn
before the vvind, Wynowing of Corn.
either between your corne-barne-doores, or in any other narrow place where
the wind being straightened is made to blow with more violence, is as good, and
dresseth your corn as clean as any other way whatsoever, and with a great
deal less cost and labor, for that way you shall dispatch more corn in an
hour than any other way in three, neither will there remain in it so many
seeds as by doing otherwise.

The sowing and ordering of other sorts of Grain.
CHAP. XVII.
Of Rye.
Rye (called in Latin Secale, and of the Ancient Writers Farrago) craves not
such an industrious and careful ordering, nor yet so fat a ground, and so well
enriched, as does the wheat, for it so increases in all grounds in such
abundance, that of one bare corn there will corn an hundred, be it never so
badly plowed and dunged. Witnesses hereof are the people of Auuergne, Lymosin,
Perigord, and Forest, but chiefly those of Beauce, Solong^ois, which is
abounding in this kind of corn; notwithstanding that the ground thereof for
the most part be lean, grauelly, and very slenderly husbanded and tilled by
the inhabitants, as those which employ themselves a great deal more busily in
keeping of Sheep, than in growing of Corn: and hereby we may learn and take
out a new lesson, namely, that negligence is good for something, and now and
then brings his commodity home with it. It is but a very small and starued
grain in respect of Wheat, and the bread which is made thereof is unpleasant,
fattie, (...), heavy, like paste, black, and more profitable in the time of
dearth to slay and kill the sharpness of hunger, in the base and rusticall
people, than to feed wholesomely, and make good nourishment of: again, such as
be wealthy, and men living at ease, make no reckoning of it. It is true that
many do mingle it with wheat, to the end that the bread made thereof may
continue a longer time moist and tender: yea, and which is more, the physicians
of the Court do give directions for the making of bread of this kind of Corn
for Kings and Princes to feed upon in the beginning of their meals (especially
in Summer) to procure them a loose belly: but they that are careful of their
health, especially such as do not exercise and toil their bodies, and
students in general, the Monks and such like, must avoid to eat the bread
made of the meal of this Corn alone, howsoever the plow-Swaine have this
opinion of it, namely, that it makes the body strong; and for certain it is
found by manifest and daily experience that the women of Lions, Auuergne, and
Forest, by the use of this bread do become very fair, and to have more
solid bodies, and more abounding in good and laudable juice or humors, than
others commonly have. Some likewise are of judgment, that the water of
Rie-bread is more pleasant, and far better than that of Wheat-bread be it
never so white. Cooks, used to work in pastrie, do make such crusts as
they would have to endure long, of Rie-flower. This bread is made to feed
dogs, and to fat swine: all other kinds of cattle, especially hens and
horse, do abhor and loath it altogether: This Corn is very subject to rust,
because it (...) water in the husk or bag wherein it grows, the remedy
whereof consists in such means used, as we have already set down: The
straw thereof serves for much use in binding of Vines, because it is flexible
and pliant, having been first sleept in water, as likewise the meal thereof,
to make cataplasmes of, for the suppurating and ripening of impostumes: the
decoction of the Corn kills worms, if there be some Coriander-seed put
thereto: in like manner horse-leache do give it to horses which are pained in
their bellies.

And thus much for the opinion and custom of the French, whose soil is so
frequent with Wheat, that they little respect the use of other grains. But to
resort to the better-knowing husbands, and to whose opinions Seres and diverse
other later Writers agree, you shall understand that Rye Rye.
is a most excellent grain, pleasant, and sauourie in taste, and very
wholesome to be eaten, in as much as it keeps the body open, and breeds
not that costiuenes^e which other grains do: and although the bread which it
makes, being made of the meal as it comes from the mill vnsifted and
uncleansed, be black, and unlovely to look on, yet it is very wholesome, and
more sauourie, and better to eat than any bread made of any other grain,
except Wheat; nay if it be sifted and cleansed through a fine raunge, scarce,
or boulter, it makes bread as white, as comely, and much more pleasant to eat
than any course or leuened Wheat whatsoever. This Rye naturally desires a
warm and dry ground, as especially the red sand, or any clay that is much
mingled therewith: it will grow in any clay, and the richer the better, and the
corn the larger, provided, that the mould be loose and gentle: it asks as
many earings as Wheat does, and must ever be sown in one and the selfsame
time; yet if the ground be any thing good of it self, it will grow well
enough after one earing, provided that it be sown on such ground as Pease were
reaped from the same year: for Pease (by reason of their running on the
ground, and smothering of the weed) is as good as a slight manuring of the
land: Rye is very quick of growth, and will sprout in three nights at the
furthest; it has no enemy so much as wet, or extreme rain, so that you must
sow it in as dry a time as is possible: for it is a common saying amongst
Husbandmen, That Rye will be drowned in the hopper, that is, if a shower of
rain should but fall in the hopper or seed-basket whilst you were sowing it,
that shower would drown it, and the Rye would hardly grow after: therefore
your greatest care must be a fair season, and a dry mould; for the contrary
kills it.

Maslin.
MAslin (called of the Latins Metellum) is not one kind of Corn, but a
mixture of Wheat and Rye, or of White corn (which the Latins call Far
adoreum, even as we shall further declare by and by) and of Rye, in such sort
as that these two kinds of corn mingled, are sown, gathered in, and threshed
together: the maslin delights in a mixed kind of earth and tillage, but for
the most consisting of that which is fit for Wheat. The bread made of maslin,
is one of the best sorts of bread, and easy to digest. It seldom or never
requires any more than one earing, which is at such time as it is sown only,
neither is it ever sown upon the fallowes, but upon the Pease-earth, being
ever well and carefully harrowed: if you find the sail whereon you sow it to
be weak or out of heart, the best means to give it strength is to fold it
with sheep immediately before you sow it, so that as soon as you take your
fold from the land, you may put your plow into the land, by which means the
seed and the manure as it were meeting together, the manure keeps the seed so
warm, and gives it such comfort, that forthwith it takes root, and brings
sorth the increase most abundantly. Now for the cropping or gathering of this
Maslin, To crop or gather Maslin.
or blend; corn, you shall ever do it so soon as you see the Rye begins to
open or turn his ear downward toward the earth, albeit the Wheat seem a
little greenish at the root, and be nothing near ripe, the corn being soft
and milkie; for the Wheat will ripen, and grow hard in the sheafe, which no
other corn will do: and the Rye being suffered but to grow a day beyond his
full time, will shed his grain upon the earth, and you shall loose more than
one half of your profit: again, you shall not lead your blend-corne so soon
as you do your clean Wheat, or your clean, Rye, but making it into good
big safe stouckes which will shed the rain from the ears, and containing
some sixteen or twenty sheaues in a stoucke, you shall suffer is so to stand
in the field to ripen, as well for the hardening of the Wheat, as for withering
of the green weeds which growing amongst the Corn will be shorn up
therewith, and bound in the sheaues altogether.

Secourgion.
SEcourgion is a kind of Corn that is very lean, vvrinckled, and starued,
somewhat like unto Barley, and it is not used to be sown in France, except in
the time of famine and dearth, and then also but in some countries as are
barren and very lean, and that to stay the urgent necessity of hunger rather
than to feed and nourish. It has his name from the Latin words Succursus
gentium: The greatest part of Perigord and Lymosin do use this sort of Corn:
it may seem to be a degenerate kind of Corn, and may be called bad or wild
corn. It must be sown in the thickest and fattest ground that may be chosen:
howsoever some say otherwise, as that it delights in a light ground, in as
much as it sprouteth out of the earth, the seventh day after that it is sown,
the thicker end running into roots, and the smaller putting forth the green
grassie blade which flourishes and grows out of the earth. The fittest time
for the sowing of it, is about the month of March in cold places, or about the
eight or tenth of January, if it be a mild Winter, and not sharp and
pinching. This is that kind of grain of three months growth, whereof
Theophrastus speaks in his Book of Plants, howsoever Columella do not
acknowledge any kind of grain of that age. Theophrastus in like manner makes
mention of a kind of grain of threescore days or two months growth, and of
another of forty days growth. I hear say that in the West Indies about
Florida there grow sorts of corn, some of two, some of three months, and some
of forty days: we see it very ordinary in France to have corn in three
months, namely, in the countries of Beauce, Touraine, Lyonnoise, Sauoy,
Auuergne, Forest, Prouence, Chartrain, and others, in which the corn being
sown in March is ripe and ready to be cut down in the third month. The
occasion of sowing it so late is either the waters or excessive cold, or snow,
or some such other hard vveather, which kept and hirdered it from being sown
any sooner. Such grains and sorts of corn as are of three or two months, or
of forty days, and amongst them especially the Secourgeon, do yield a very
white and light flower, because it has but very little bran, and the grain
having drawn very small store of substance for his nourishment, but such as
is of the lightest part of the earth (and therefore small store of Bran) by
reason of the small space of time that it stayed in the earth: The bread made
of this Corn is very white, but withal very light, and of small substance,
more fit for Countrie-people and servants in Families than for Masters and
vvealthie persons: Again, in countries where it is of account, they use to
mix Wheat with it, to make houshold-bread.

Blanch.
Blanch is a kind of Wheat which the Latins call Far clusinum, and old
Writers Far adoreum, as a Corn or Grain worthy to be highly thought and made
of for his excellency and goodness sake: it is very hard and thick, and
requires a strong and tough ground, though it be not all of the best
husbanded. It grows also very well in places and Countries that are very
cold, as not fearing any cold be it never so outrageous: Neither does it
mislike and refuse dry and parched grounds, and such as lie open to the
excessive heat of Summer; the Corn cannot be driven from his husk, except it
be fried or parched: again, for to grind and make bread of it, they use to
fry or parch it, but when they use to sow it, they let it alone with the
husk, and in it they keep it for seed. It is very massy and weighty, but
not altogether so much as Wheat, but yet more clean and pure than Wheat, and
also yields more flower and branne than any one sort of Wheat besides. This
kind of Wheat is very rare in France, but very common in Italy, where it is
called Sacidate.

Fine Wheat, or Winter-wheat.
THere is a kind of small Corn that is very white, which the Latins call
Silig^, whereof is made White-bread, called therefore of the Latins
Siliginitis. The French cannot as yet sit it with a name. It must be sown in
very open places, and such as are hot and thoroughly warmed by the Sun;
although it do not utterly refuse an earth that is thick, moist, slymie, and
of the nature of Walkers-earth, seeing that good husbandmen do likewise report
of it, that there needs no such great care to be taken about the making of
this grain to grow, and vvithall, that if a man use to sow Wheat in a moist
and muddie ground, that after the third sowing it will degenerate into this
kind of Wheat. It is that kind of Wheat which amongst the English is called
Flaxen-wheat, being as white or vvhiter than the finest Flax: it is of all
sorts of Wheat the hardest, and will endure a more barren and hard ground than
any other Wheat will, as the grauellie, the flintie, stony, and rough hills
against which by the reflection of the Sun only (whose beams it loves
exceedingly) it will grow very abundantly, neither will it prosper upon and
rich soil, but being as it were overcome with the strength thereof, it will
wither, or not grow at all, or else mil-dew, turn black, and become
altogether vselesse.

Amel-corne.
THere is yet another kind of Corn, which the Grecians and Latins call
Olyra, of a middle size betwixt Wheat and Barlie, unlike altogether unto
Winter-vvheat whereof we last spoke, but of a sort and faculty like unto
spelt, whereof we will speak next in order. Of this grain Dioscorides
makes mention, and Matthiolus calls it in French Seigle-blanche: the tilling
and ordering of it is like unto that of spelt. There is very white bread made
thereof: there is but small store thereof in France.

Spelt-corne.
SPelt-corne is that which the Latins call Zea, and hereof the ancient
^^mans did make great account, and gave it to name Semen, by the way of
excellency, as the Italians in such places as where the said Spelt grows in
great abundance, do call it Biada. The Grain is less, and blacker than
Wheat. It is found sometime single, sometime double in an ear set with a long
beard. It must be sown in a very strong and hard ground, for otherwise it
will not thrive, neither is there any sort of Wheat which so troubles and
weakeneth a ground as this, but the bread that is made thereof is excellent:
and of it likewise the Italians use to make a singular kind of Furmentie.

Course Wheat-flowre: or fine Wheat-meale.
COurse Wheat-flowre is that which of the Latins is called Similage, and is
made of Wheat that is excellent good, having the greatest Bran only sifted
from it, but being ground of the best Mill th^^ may be gotten, howsoever the
French name Semole which seems to be derived from these Latin ones Sine
mola, may (...) to argue the contrary. We have not any of the Corn in this
Country whereof the Semole is made: but in Prouence it is sown in great
quantity: as also in Champanie, and in the Country of Naples, and from thence
there is great store of this (...) meal brought, which Physiti^ns do
prescribe to their sick patients to make Panade or pap-meat of, with the
broth of a Capon, notwithstanding that (...) and the greatest part of
Physicions do affirm, that the fine meal called of the French Semole, is of
a gros^e and slimie juice, and not digested without difficulty, and thereupon
injurious to such as have need of a fine and attenuating nourishment. It is
certain that it is of great nourishment, as is also the bread that is made
thereof. In steed of Semole we use Maslin; and as concerning the Wheat
whereof the course flower Semole is made, it craves such ground and manner of
husbanding as Maslin does.

Furmentie.
FVrmentie is that which the Latins call Alica or Chondrus, and it is a kind
of Wheat, whereof (after that it has been steeped for some time in water, and
afterward brayed and husked, and then in the end dried again in the Sun and
ground somewhat grossly) is made a kind of gross meal, re^embling (...) very
much, whereof sometimes is wont to be made pap-meat, sometimes it is mixed in
meat-broth, and sometimes panade vvithall: all which meats, to say the truth,
do nourish a great deal more than they profit the health of the body, in as
much as they engender a thick, clammie, and gros^e juice, very hurtful for
them that are subject unto obstructions, or unto the stone and gravel.

Turkie-Wheat.
TVrkie-wheat (so called, or rather Indian wheat, because it came first from
the West Indies into Turkey, and from thence into France, not that it is sowed
there any otherwise than for pleasure, or for to cause some admiration at the
strange things which Frenchmen themselves do admire and make much account of)
(...) be sown very carefully after this manner: the field must be diligently
tilled according to all the sorts of earings which are wont to be bestowed
upon any (...) ground, afterward toward the end of March, at such time as the
Sun begins to afford his hot and comfortable beams in franker and freer
sort, the said wheat must be steeped in water two whole days, and when this is
done, to keep it till the earth receive some pretty showers: which
happening, then presently to open the earth with some sharp stake, and that
all along as straight as a line, but with equal and sufficient distances: and
to cast into every one of these holes four or five grains of this wheat,
and by and by to close in the earth again with your foot, and so in this sort
to fill and set a whole field with this Corn. If the earth be fat, and the
seed full and well ^ed, it will not fail to sprout within seven days, and to
be ready to mow within forty days, two months, three months, or at the
furthest four months, sooner or later according to the goodness of the
ground, and power of the Sun, that is to say, earlier in a hot place and good
ground that lies open upon the Sun, but more late in a cold ground, and a
lean place. It has the like temperature that our wheat has, but somewhat
more hot, as may easily be gathered by the sweetness of the bread that is made
thereof: the meal thereof is vvhiter than that which is made of our wheat, but
the bread made thereof is more gross, thick, or close, and of a more ^lymie
substance, in such sort as that the nourishment made thereof is likewise more
gross, and apter to engender obstructions: vvher^^ore if the dearth of wheat
and famine do force and compel you to sow of this Turkish-wheat, to make bread
thereof, it will do better if you mingle it with the flower of our wheat,
than and if you should use it by it self all alone. The meal of this wheat
in as much as it is thick and clammie, will be good to make cataplasmes of, to
ripen impostumes withal: for being apt to stop the pores of the skin by his
clamminesse, it cannot choose but work such effect.

Sarasins-wheat.
SArasins-wheat is a grain very ordinary and common throughout all France,
and more abounding without comparison than the foresaid Turkie-wheat: it must
be sown in all manner of grounds, because it refuses not to grow in any,
whether it be grauelly, or of any other qualities whatsoever, and that
especially in April in hot places, or somewhat later in those that are cold,
and it is so forward and hasty, at that it will ripen twice, and yield you two
crops in a year, in one and the same ground, being in a hot ground, as is to
be seen in Italy. It may be mowne at the end of three months after it is
sown: in this country it is most used in the fatting of hogs, pigeons, and
other fowls, and in the time of dearth and famine to make bread, which will be
a great deal better, if with this corn be mingled the corn of our country
wheat. It may be made into gross meal, even as the grain called furmentie,
but better without comparison than that of millet to be employed in
meat-broths, in panades and pap-meats, as also to make (...) with cheese and
butter. This is a meat that is pleasant enough, and not much loading or
charging the stomach, notwithstanding that it be windy, for therein it is not
so excessive as the pease or beans.

Goats wheat, and Typh wheat.
THere are yet remaining two other sorts of Wheat, which the Latins call
Trag^^ Cerealis, and Typha Cerealis, whereof Dioscorides and Galen do make
mention. Typh wheat is very like to our Rye, and does make a very black
bread, and very unpleasant also when it is old, though it be otherwise very
pleasant when it is new baked, after the manner of Rye. The Goats wheat is not
very much unlike unto the grain called Furmentie, save only that his meal
yields more bran without comparison, and so makes a fitter bread to loosen
the belly than to feed or nourish it. These wheats are not so much as to be
seen in France, and therefore I mean not to make any longer discourse thereof.

Of all manner of March-Corne.
CHAP. XVIII.
Barley.
AFter that we have thus largely spoken of Wheat and other Corn, (...).
it remains that we should consequently speak of all manner of pulse: the
ordering and husbanding whereof, to speak in general, is like unto that of
the other grain going before, as namely, in the gathering of stones from off
them, in manuring and giving them their first, second, and third ea^ing, as
also in clodding, sowing, harrowing, and mowing: but differing notwithstanding
in some things, as namely, in their nature; and therefore it will be best to
make a particular description thereof; especially of Barley, which howsoever it
is of slight use in France, because of the great profit of the vine, and the
plenty of Wheat in which the kingdom abounds, yet in other Countries it is
of best respect, especially in England, where the greatest sort does grow, and
where they make Beer thereof so good and excellent, that not any French Wine
is more pleasant, or more wholesome. Therefore to speak first of Barley,
^^cording to the opinion of the French husbandman, which is not to be held
most authentical.

Barley must be sown in a lean, dry, and small ground, or else in a ground
that is very fat throughout, because it does bring down and diminish the
fatness of a ground mightily: and for that cause it is either cast into the
ground that is very far, the force and goodness whereof it shall not be able
to hurt: or into a lea^e ground, wherein a man should not sow any thing else
so well. It must be sown in a ground that has had two earings, in some
countries in the month of October, but in this country after the fifteenth
day of April, according to the common proverb (at S. Georges day you must sow
your Barley, and lay your Oats away) if the ground be fat, but and if it be in
a lean ground, it must be sown sooner, not ^laying for any rain, in as much
as that according to the proverb, Wheat must be sown in (...), and Barley in
dust: for Barley cannot endure any great store of moisture, being of it self
dry, open, and cold: again, Barley being sown in moist places, and much
watered with raine-water, does easily canker, and turn into darnell and oats:
the same manner of ordering is given to the barley called mundified barley, and
that because the chafe thereof falls presently, and cleaves not unto the
corn, as it does in common barley. When you perceive it somewhat ripe, you
must mow it sooner than any other corn: for it has a brittle stalk or straw
which is very apt to break, when it is very dry, and the corn being but
weakly enclosed within his husk, does easily and of it self fall unto the
earth: and hence also it becomes more easy to thresh and shake out, than any
other grain. After the corn is mowne, it will be good to let the earth lie
idle a year, or else to manure it thoroughly, and so to take away all the evil
quality that is remaining and left behind. (...)-bread.
In a dear year it is usual to make bread of barley, as we shall declare
hereafter, and that better for the poor people than for the rich, and yet in
one point to be praised, in as much as it is good and wholesome for them that
have the gout: the assured truth whereof, is found out rather by experience
than reason. Notwithstanding in as much as Barley (as Galen (...)) whether it
be in bread or in pap-meat, in p^isan^s, in mundified barley, or otherwise
employed, does cool, and yield a thin kind of nourishment, and somewhat
cleanses the body, in that respect it may be profitable for them that have
the (...), as those that are full of humors, and subject to distillations
falling down upon the mints.

There is made of Barlie a certain kind of drink, Mundified Barley.
which is commonly called aptisane, and a meat that is good for sick persons,
called mundified barley, which the good wife of the Farm may make in this
sort; Take barley well cleansed and husked, boil it till it burst, and till it
become like unto a pap-meat, after beat it in a mortar, and when you have so
done, strain it through a very fine strayner, put unto it sugar, or the juice
of sweet almonds, or of poppie-seed, melons, or lettuses, according as occasion
shall be offered. Or else, Take of the best and newest barley, put it in a
mortar, and cast upon it warm water, as it were to wet it, but not to make
it swim, afterward beat it gently with a vvoodden pestell, in such sort as that
the husk that covers it may be forced off, then chafe it betwixt your hands,
that so you may free it quite from husks; then afterward dry it in the Sun:
when you have this done, take a handful of the said barley, and put it in a
pot, which it may fill to the half, and filling up the other half with
water, let it boil by little and little until such time as it be burst, and
become like pap-meat, let it run through a linen cloth, and so strain out the
juice.

Thus much for the French opinion of Barley: How Barley ought to be sown.
but to come to the true knowledge thereof, from the opinions of those that are
better experienced in the same, you shall understand that Barley ought to be
sown upon the best, richest, and best husbanded ground you have, and although
it will grow in any soil whatsoever that is well husbanded, not being too
extreme cold and moist, yet the better the earth is into which you sow it, the
better and the larger the corn is when it grows, and much more serviceable
for any use you shall please to employ it. That Barley which grows on the
stiff clayes is the best, being large, white, and full like a Buntings beak.
That which grows on the mixed soil, is the second best: and that which grows
on the sands, is the vvorst. Barley asks the greatest tillage of all grains,
because it must ever lie in a loose and gentle earth, and therefore when it
has least it ought to have full four earings before it be sown, as in the
fertile rich clayes, it must first be fallowed at the later end of April (for
to stay till May the ground may be too dry) and this arder of fallowing must
cast down the ground, that is to say, the furrows must be all turned down
from the ridge, and the ridge left open, so as the earth must receive
seasoning: At mid-May you shall manure it, and in June you shall give it the
second earing, which is called Sommer-stirring, and in this ardor you shall set
up the land, that is, you shall plow all the furrows upward toward the ridge of
the land, closing up that which was before opened, and lapping in the manure
into the earth in such wise that not any thereof be uncovered; then at August
you shall give it the third ardor or earing, which is called foyling, and that
is to cast the land down again, as you did when you fallowed it, and this
ardor is of all other one of the best, especially for the destroying of weeds
and thistles; then in October you shall give it the fourth ardor or earing,
which is called Winter-ridging, and in that ardor you shall ever set up the
land again, as you did at the Sommer-stirring; and then in March and April
following, you shall sow it. Now touching the manner of sowing of these stiff
clayes, you shall first make you seedes-man cast his seed over the land, in
such sufficient manner as you shall think meet: then taking the plow, and
beginning in the furrow, you shall cast the land downward over the seed, till
you have plowed all the land, and left only the ridge open, then holding the
plow croswise overthwart the ridge, you shall close the ridge, and draw the
mould into it, then you shall make your seedes-man cast another cast or two of
the seed upon the ridge only, and then harrow it with wooden toothed
harrowes, and this manner of sowing is called sowing under furrow. Now whereas
I have showed you in the plowing of your land, that you must first cast down
your land, then ridge it up, then foil it down, and lastly, set it up for the
whole Winter following: you shall understand that it is the best and most
orderliest husbanding of land, breeds the greatest plenty of mould, and
covers the manure closest, and makes it soonest rot in the earth; yet
notwithstanding for as much as Barley is a tender grain, and may by to means
endure any cold or wet, if you find that your lands do lie too flat, so that
the Water cannot descend from them, but either choaketh them, or keeps them
too wet, then you shall set up your land, and not cast it down in any ardor
till you have brought it to that convenient height that the water may have
free passage from the same; and so on the contrary part, when your lands lie
too high, you shall cast the furrows downward, until you have brought them
to that lowness which shall be convenient; and when you have so done, then
you shall cast them down, and set them up again in such order as has been
before mentioned. There is also another manner or sowing of barley upon these
fertile and rich grounds, which is called sowing upon the Iunames, Iunames.
that is, to sow barley on the same ground from whence but the harvest before
you reapt your Barley, and it must be done in this sort; as soon as you have
reaped your barley, which is commonly in August, you shall forthwith (if the
ground do require it) manure as much as you intend to sow Barley again upon,
and as soon as you have manured it, immediately (if the ground be not too hard)
you shall plow it, either setting it up, or casting it down, as the land shall
require; or if it be too hard, then you shall stay for a shower of rain, yet
the drier it is plowed, the better it is both for the land and the come: the
land being thus plowed, you shall let it lie till November, and then you shall
plow it again, but in this earing you shall be all means set it up, and not
cast down the land, and so ^et it lie till seed-time, and then sow it under
furrow as was before showed. This barley which grows thus upon the Iunames
is the fairest, vvhitest, and goodliest Corn of all other, and is the only
principal Corn you can reserve for seed of all other; and therefore you must
have a great regard to the election of the barley you thus sow upon the
junames: for the sowing of Barley upon any mixed earths, or hasell-grounds,
which are clayes and sands, or clayes and grauells mixed together, you shall
husband the grounds in all points as you do the clay-grounds, only you shall
differ in the times, for these mixed earths must be fallowed in January,
Sommer-stirred in May, foiled in August, and Winter-rigged in October: as for
the sowing of them, you shall not sow them under furrow, but aloft, because
they are of binding natures; so that after the sowing should any sudden rain
fall, and then a dryness follow it, it would so bake the earth together, that
the Corn would not possible be able to sprout through it; and therefore (as I
before said) you shall sow it aloft, that is to say, you shall first plow it,
beginning at the ridge, and setting the furrows upward, then cast on your
seed, and lastly harrow it. Now for sowing Barley upon sand-grounds, you shall
husband it like unto the mixed earths, only you shall give it an ea^ing more,
that is to say, a double foyling, and you shall forbear to sow it till it be
about Whitsontide, for the heat of the sand is so great, that it will make the
Corn very swift in growth, and ripen very suddenly. Barley, in what soil
soever it is sown, must be exceeding well slighted, clotted, stoned, and
vveeded, for it is so very tender in the growth, that the smallest clot or
stone will keep it back, and the least weed will choke it. Barley Barley.
is of most precious estimation with all those which know the true use
thereof, especially for the making of malt, of which is made Ale or Beer,
drinks so wholesome and excellent for man's body, that no nation which does
enjoy it, has any blessing to prefer before it: as touching the order of
making of malt, Malt.
it is in this sort, first after your barley has been clean vvinowed and
dressed, you shall put it into a cesterne or fat made for the purpose, and there
sleep it in water the space of three nights, then draine the water from it
clean, and so let it lie in the fat one night more, then take it forth of the
fat, and lay it upon a floor made either of boards, plaster, or earth: the
earth floor is vvarmest, and best for Winter, the plaster floor is coldest
and best for Summer, and the boarded floor is between both: as soon as you
have laid it on the floo^^, you shall make it into a great big coutch or heap
a yard thick or better; which coutch you shall make either long, round, or
square at your pleasure, and according to the quantity of your corn, it shall
thus lie in the coutch till you see it begin to sprout and put forth little
white jags or strings which is called the coming of the mal^, and them you
shall reane and turn it, bringing that which was the outside into the midst.
and that which was in the midst unto the our-side, that so it may come all
alike, for that which is in the midst, and lies warmest, will ever come the
first. Now so soon as you see it is all comed, you shall forthwith spread open
your coutch upon the floor, laying it not above a handful deep at the most,
that so the corn may cool, and not sprout or come any further, not forgetting
but every day the space of three weeks, or within three days of three
weeks at the least, to turn the malt upon the floor twice or thrice a day,
least forbearing so to do, the corn heat, and by that means aker-spire,
which is, to sprout at both ends, and so loose the heart of the grain, and
make the malt good for nothing. When you have thus given it full (^at and
floor) three weeks, then you shall lay it on a vvell-bedded k^lne upon a good
hair cloth, and there with a gentle fire dry it: the best fuel to make this
^ire on, is straw, either Wheat, Rye, or Barley. Braken or Fern is good also,
go^sse is too sharp, and vvood is the vvorst of all, for it leaves (through
the sharpenes^e of the smoke) an ill taste or savor upon the malt, yet here
in France there be kilnes made of Brick, with such furnaces that carry away
the smoke, that you may burn what fuel you please without annoyance,
neither are they so dangerous for the casualtie of fire, as the ^ther plain
kilnes in England and other places are. After your malt is well dried, you
shall with your hands rub it well upon the kilne, to get off the come or
sproutings which before the drying did stick unto it; for it is a general
rule, that the cleaner your malt is from come, and the snugger and smoother it
looks like Barley (provided it be well malted) the better it is, and evermore
the more marketable: for the come is of this nature, to drink up the liquor in
which your malt is mashed, when you make Bear or Ale, and so by that means
to scant you much of your proportion. When your malt has been well rubbed,
and is reasosonable clean, then you shall shouell both the malt and the corn
together, and so put them together into a close garner made for the purpose,
where you shall let it lie at least a month or six weeks before you use it
to ripen in the come, for that makes ever the best yielding malt: then when you
please to use it, you shall either winow it, or try it through a skreene made
of wiers for the purpose, and then grind it, and brew it as occasion shall
serve. Now touching the choice of the best malt, you shall ever take that which
is made of best and cleanest corn without weed-seeds, ^are, or like
filthiness; yet if it have here and there an oat it is the better, and not the
worse: it shall to your eye appear bright, white, full, and clean without
come, in smell it shall be pleasant and sweet, and not sharp of the smoke, in
handling it shall be brittle and apt to break, and the kernel shall be white
and meallie, and in taste it shall be strong, and exceeding sweet, and the
grains which you shall champe in your mouth, if you take them forth, and
press them between your fingers, they shall yield you a white juice like
milk, but thick and luscious: but if in the biting or breaking they be hard
and unapt to bruise, then it is a sign that there is in it much barley
vnmalted, and so the malt of a great deal the less profit. Barley as it is
thus most excellent for the making of drink, so it is good also for bread, but
not of the French manner, which makes bread thereof simple of it self, for
indeed that bread of all other is least nourishing, and most unsavory: but to
mix it with any other grain, as with wheat, rye, pease, or beans, with any one
or with all of them, it makes very good and most wholesome bread: it is used
in England most for hind-seruants, adding to a bushel of it, and a bushel of
pease, one pecke of wheat, and another of rye, and then laying it in strong
l^uen, and scalding the meal well, to take away the strong smell of the pease,
and sure this is a very strong and well-relished bread, and most wholesome for
any man that shall labor hard, as is found by experience in England and other
places. This barley being boiled in water till it break, and so given to eat
whilst it is sweet, is the best food that can be for the feeding or fatting of
swine of all sorts, whether they be brawnes, or porkets, or bacon-hogges: it
also farteth a horse very suddenly, but such fat will not endure labor: the
light corn, or hinder ends of barley, are excellent for the seeding of all
sorts of poultrie, as capons, hens, turkies, geeese, or what else strayeth
about the Farmers yard or house: a leven made of clean barley-meale, and milk
is the best food that can be for the cramming of all sorts of poultrie; many
other virtues are in Barley, but none of greater use than these already
rehearsed.

Oats Oats.
notwithstanding that they grow amongst Wheat and Barley without being sown,
as an evil and unprofitable thing, notwithstanding for the profit coming of
them for the feeding of great cattle, as also of men in the time of
necessity, they deserve a proper and conuement kind of husbanding. They love
to be sown in lean places, which are dry, well aired, and have been
alreared twice eared, and that in February, or March, but not later: they
crave watering, and then they grow both fairer, and fuller set. They must be
gathered presently after that Rye and Barley are in.

Although Oats be not used to make bread of, except it be in the time of great
dearth, notwithstanding some do beat them in a mortar, and do make a meal
thereof called Oat-meale, Oat-meale.
which is boiled either alone, or else with flesh, to use in manner of a
panade. Physicians are of judgment that Oat-meale so made does feed very
well, and is good against the gravel Gravel.
and difficulty of urine: for the truth whereof, I refer you to the
Britains and Ange^ines, which use it for the same effects. When it is boiled
all alone, for the making of it the more pleasant, there is wont to be put
unto it cowes-milke, goats-milke, or the juice of sweet almonds with sugar. The
Flemmings use to make pap-meat thereof, which they love exceeding well. Water
distilled of Oats.
The Muscouites distill the water of oats, and use it for want of wine, and
such water heateth and makes drunk no less than Wine.

Thus much of the French opinion of Oats, who are indeed but half knowing, or
not so much, in the excellency of the grain; but to come to their knowledge
who have the full proof and trial thereof, you shall understand that it is a
grain of no less worth and estimation than any of the other, and
questionless may much less be banished a Commonwealth than of the other, in
as much as where none of the other will grow, there this will; you shall then
know, that Oats will grow in any soil whatsoever, as either in fertile or
barren, hot or cold, dry or moist, nor does it ask much labor: for in
fertile soiles it will grow with one earing, as namely at seed-time, which is
ever about the end of March, or beginning of April: it will grow also after
any other grain, as after wheat, rye, barley, or pulse, but it is best sowing
it after barley or pulse, because to sow it after Wheat or Rye would pill the
ground too much, and make it barren too soon: In barren grounds it will grow
with two arders, or three at the most, as one at Midsommer, another at
Michaelmas, and the third at seed-time, or else at Michaelmas, and at seed-time
only: it must be sown under furrow, like barley in loose moulds, and after
two or three arders: but above furrow, in fast earths; and where it has but
one arder only, it must be well harrowed, according to the strength of the
mould, that is to say, with wooden-teeth in loose moulds, and with iron teeth
in fast moulds: they must be cropped as soon as they turn color, and appear a
little yellow, for else they will shed their grain, as being the loosest
corn of all other.

These Oats are of diverse most excellent uses both for men and also for
cattle, as first for Oatmeale which is made in this sort; as soon as your
Oats have been thresht and vvynowed, you shall lay them on your kilne, and
with a soft fire dry them very well, and then carry them to the milne,
either the Windmill, the Water-mill, or the Horse-mill, and there let the
Miller cut them, and hull them, but by no means crush them to fine meal, but
only drive the clean kernel from the courser hull; then with a fan or a
gentle vvind vvinnow the empty hulls from the Corn, and if so be that you
find they be not all clean hulled, then pass them through the mill again,
and then vvynow them again, and thus do till the nulls be clean taken off;
which hulls are a very good prouander for horses: as for the Groats, which
is usually called common or course Oat-meale, they are excellent to make
porridge of all kinds, and for puddings of all sorts, or for any other pap-meat
or panada whatsoever: it is also an excellent food at Sea, being boiled in
Water, or otherwise used after the manner of gravel. This oat-meale being
ground into ^ine meal like other corn, makes diverse kinds of very good
bread, chiefly where other corn is not to be had. If you mix the fine meal
of Oats with Wheat meal, it makes very dainty Oat-cakes, either thick or
thin, and is of great estimation where they are known. These Oats being
maulted, as you malt Barley, make a very good malt, and that malt both
very good Ale and Beer, only a little more sharp than that which is made of
Barley. Lastly, those Oats are of all other foods the best that may be for the
feeding of horse, or fatting of cattle: they are also good to seed all sorts
of Pulleine, especially Geese, Swannes, and all manner of water-fowle, which
take much pleasure therein.

Millet.
MIllet (as those know very well which dwell in the Country Bearne, Bigorre,
and Armignac) after that it has been steeped some certain time in water,
would be sown, either morning or evening, in the cool thereof, in light and
small molded ground: and it grows not only in grauelly ground, but also in
sand, when the country it wet and moist: but in any case it would not be sown
in dry grounds, and such as consist of Fullers earth, or are marly, neither
must it be sown before the Spring, for it requires heat: wherefore it may
conveniently be sown in the end of the month of March, or else somewhat
later, that so it may enjoy the benefit of the dew a long time. It puts not
the husbandman to any great charges, for a little seed will sow a great deal
of ground. So soon as it is sown, it must be pressed down with a hurdle of
Wickers well laden, to keep it from the heat of the Sun, in the springing up
thereof: for otherwise the seed would grow up and dry away, through the
veh^mencie and heat of the Sunne-beames. Notwithstanding, it would be often and
very well weeded, for the ^ooting up of all manner of ill weeds, especially
the black Millet. So soon as it may be spied peeping forth of the earth, and
before that by the operation of the Sun the corn do show, it must be plucked
up by the hand, and be laid in the Sun afterward to dry; and lastly, shut up
in some place where it may be kept: and being thus ordered, it lasts longer
than any other manner of corn. Millet does good unto the fields wherein it is
gathered, in this respect; namely, that worms will not hurt the corn that
shall be sown there presently after any whit at all, seeing they will leave
the grain that is sown, and cleave to the straw of the Millet.

In the time of dearth they use to make bread of Millet, but unpleasant enough,
especially when it is settled: and the inhabitants of Gasco^gne and Campaigne
do use a pappe-meat made of Millet with milk, and that not of the pleasantest
taste: as well the bread as the pappe-meat, made of Millet, is of small
nourishment: besides that, they make obstructions; and that, because Millet is
cold in the first degree, and dry in the third. Millet fried with salt, and
flowers of Camomill, and put into a bag, does serve against the pains of the
colic and wringings of the belly. To keep Purgatiues, as Rubarb, Agarick,
yea and flesh also, from rottenness and corruption, it is good to bury them
in Millet.

Sesame.
SEsame would be sown in a black ground that is somewhat rotten and moist. It
grows also in sandy and fat grauellie grounds, or in mingled grounds, and it
is very fruitful, even no les^e than Millet or Pannicke. It is true, that the
good householder needs not trouble his brain much with the sowing of it,
seeing it is apt to make the ground altogether barren, and yet is good for
nothing except the oil that is pressed out of it, and the cakes which
liquorish women use to make of the meal. Oil and cakes of Sesame.
It must not be sown but in the midst of Summer, whiles the times continue
dry, and that there is no rain looked for of a long time; for the rain does
hurt it after it is sown, clean contrary to other plants, which (all of
them) rejoice in rain after they are sown. The oil which is pressed out of
the seed of Sesame, does never freeze, and is the lightest of all other Oils,
and yet being mixed with Wine or Aqua-vitae, sinketh to the bottom. There is no
account to be made of this grain for nourishment, because it is given to
overcome the stomach, and is hardly digested, as is all oily matter.

Lentils.
LEntils must be sown at two times, in Autumn, and most commonly, especially
in France and cold Countries, in the Spring time, whiles the Moon increases,
unto the twelfth thereof, and either in a small or little mould, or in a fat
and fertile ground: for when they be in flower, they destroy and spoil
themselves through too much moisture, or by putting too far out of the earth.
And to the end they may grow the more speedily and the greater, they must be
mixed with dry dung before they be sown, and four or five days after that
they have been so laid to rest in this dung, to sow them. They will keep
long, and continue, if they be mingled with ashes: or if they be put in pots
wherein oil and preserues have been kept: or and if they be sprinkled with
vinegar mixed with Beniouin.

Lentils (howsoever ancient Philosophers had them in estimation) are of hard
digestion, hurtful to the stomach, filling the guts full of wind, darkening
the sight, and causing fearful dreams: and withal, are nothing good, if
they be not boiled with flesh, or fried with oil.

Fasels.
FAsels grow in stubbly grounds, or rather a great deal better in fat grounds,
which are tilled and sown every year: and they are to be sown betwixt the
tenth of October, and the first of November; or else in March, as other pul^e,
after that the ground has been eared about the eleventh of November. They
must be sown after that they have been steept in water, for to make them grow
the mose easily, and that at large when they are sown, and always as they
ripen to gather them. They make far grounds where they be sown: they are
accustomed to bear much fruit: they keep a long time: they swell and grow
greater in boiling, and are of a good pleasant taste unto all m^ns mouths. It
is true, that they are windy, and hard to digest: but yet notwithstanding,
they are apt to provoke unto venerie, if after they be boiled, they be powdered
over with Pepper, Galanga, and Sugar: and yet more specially, if they be boiled
in fat milk until they burst. If you mind to take away their windiness, eat
them with Mustard or Caraway seed. If you have been bitten of a Horse, take
Fasels, chew them, and apply them so chewed unto the green wound. Young
gentlewomen, that strive to be beautiful, may distill a water of Fasels that
is singular good for the same end and purpose.

Lupines.
LVpines crave no great husbandry, are good cheap, and do more good to the
ground than any other seed: for when as Vineyards and arable grounds are
become lean, they stand in stead of very good manure unto them. Likewise, for
want of dung they may be sown in grounds that stand in need to be dunged, if
after they have put forth their flowers the second time, they be plowed under
the ground: they grow well in a lean ground, and such as is tired and worn
out with sowing: and they may be sown in any ground, especially in stubbly
grounds, such as are not tilled: for in what sort soever they be sown, they
will abide the roughness of the ground, and negligence of the husbandman:
neither do they crave any weeding, as well in respect of their root, which is
single, as also for that if it were hurt, they would die presently, and because
also that it should be but labor lost: for they are so far off from being
infected and wronged with weeds, that they even kill them, and cause them to
die. And this is the cause why many sow them in the midst of Vineyards, to
the end they may draw unto them all the bitterness of the Vineyard, as being
the quality most familiar unto them, and with which they best agree.
Notwithstanding they may not be sown deep: for when they flower, they are
made no account of. Of all other kinds of Pulse they only stand not in need to
be laid up in Garners, but rather upon some floor, where the smoke may com^
unto them: for if moisture take them, they will grow full of worms, which eat
up that which should make them sprout, and that which is remaining, can do no
good: they must be gathered after rain, for if it should be dry weather, they
would fall out of their cods, and be lost.

Lupines are good to feed Oxen in Winter, Wherefore Lupines are good.
but they must be steept in salted and river water, and afterward boiled: they
serve also for to feed men, to make bread thereof, when it is a time of dearth
of other corn. Some do note this special property in them, which is, that
they turn about every day with the Sun: insomuch, as that by them workmen
are taught the time of the day, though it be not clear and Sunshine.

Lupines stamped and laid upon the navel, Worms in little children.
do^ kill worms in little children: the decoction thereof does provoke the
terms of women, and takes away the obstructions of the sight, by reason
whereof, many do wish them to be taken of young maidens and women which have
pale colors. Their meal is singular good in ca^aplasmes to resolve the
swelling of the Kings evil, and other hard tumors, as well boiled in honey
and vinegar, as in honey and water: and likewise for the Scia^ica.

Beans.
Beans must be sown in a fat soil, or else a ground that is well manured,
and eared with two earings: and although it be in stubbly grounds, and seated
in low bottomes, vvhither all the fat and substance of the higher parts does
descend; notwithstanding the earth must be ^li^ed and cut small, and the clods
broken before they be sown: for albeit that amongst all the other sorts of
pulse there be not any that do so little waste and the strength and juice of
the earth; notwithstanding they desire to be well and deep covered within
the earth: they must be diligently vveeded, at such time as they peep out of
the earth, for so the fruit will be much more, and their coddes far the
tenderer. They may be sown at two times of the year, in Autumn where it is
a strong ground, and the beans be great; and in the Spring, especially in this
Country, in a vveake and light ground, the beans being but small, and of the
common size: those which are sown in Autumn are more worth than the other,
so that the hindes let not to say, That they had rather eat the husks or
stalks of beans sown in due time, than the beans themselves of three
months old, because they yield more fruit, and have a greater and better
stored grain. But at what time soever you sow them, you must have special
regard to sow them all about the fifteenth day after the change of the Moon,
because that in so doing, they will be the be^ter laden, and because they will
not be so much assailed of little vermin, as and if the Moon were new. The
day before they be sown, you must steep them in the lees of Olives, or in
water of Nitre, to the end that they may bear the more fruit, be more easy to
boil, and not to be subject to be eaten of Weeuils or Larkes. They must
likewise reap and pull them up in the new of the Moon, before day, and after
leave them in the air to dry, and thresh them out before the full Moon, and
afterward carry them into the Garner, for being thus ordered, vermin will not
breed in them. Again, they prove more profitable, being planted, than sown,
in a good ground, that is well dressed, tilled, fatted, and manured: which
said ground, if it be sown the year following with Wheat, will yield a more
copious and plentiful harvest, in as much as Beans do fatten a ground more
than any other kind of Pulse. If you would keep them long, you must sprinkle
them with salt water: but if you mean to boil them, you must be sure to keep
the salt from them, because salt water does harden them: they must not be left
in the cold air, for the cold also does make them the harder to boil. To
keep them from being even of worms, they must be anointed or rubd over with
oile-oliue, one after another, until such time as they be well liquored with
this oil. The flowers of Beans, notwithstanding that they be of a pleasant
and delightsome smell, do hurt a weak brain, The cause why there are many
fools, when Beans flower.
and such a one as is easily carried away and overcome. And hereupon it comes
to pass, that there are a great number of fools, when Beans are in flower.

Thus much for the French experience of Beans, which does indeed more concern
the Garden-Beane, than those which are continually in use amongst Husbandmen.
Therefore to come to the profit and true knowledge of the husbanding of Beans,
you shall understand, that they are only to be sown in a rich stiff ground
that is very fertile, as namely the black or blew clay, for in other earths
they ^oy but a little: and they will grow with one ea^ing only, which would be
done at the beginning of January upon such earth as has borne Barley before,
or else upon greeneswarth, which has not been plowed long before: it must be
plowed deep, and have a great furrow turned up: then you shall let it lie, till
it have taken frost and rain: then upon the next fair season, being about or
soon after S. Valentines day, you shall sow it and harrow it. As for the
weeding of Beans, it is to no purpose; for they are of themselves so swift of
growth, that they will out-grow all weeds. And if they have any Pease mixed
amongst them (which should ever be, for it is the surest seed) they will
smother up and destroy all sorts of weeds. They are, because of their upright
growing, better to be mowne with sythes, than cut to reapt with hooks: they
ask little withering; for so soon as the cod turns black, the stalk dryes.
The use of them is principally for prouander for Horses, or to mix with
Barley, Wheat, or Rye, to make bread for hind-seruants, or for hunting or
running Horses: but then commonly they are used simply of themselves, or else
mixed with Wheat only: for the mixture of Barley or Rye is not good for Horses
of that nature, except for some cause physical, as to keep them soluble in
their bodies, and so forth. The Garden-Beane is good for men to eat, being
boiled and mixed with butter, vinegar, and pepper; or for want of butter, with
oyle-Oliue. The cods also are a very good food, being boiled whilst they are
green and tender. Lastly, the water which is distilled from the flowers of
Beans, is good to take away the morphew or spots in men or women's faces.

Small Peason.
SMall Pease are no less profitable for the fatting of ground that is lean,
than Lupines. It is true that if you look to have good store of them, and
well-codded, you must sow them in fat and warm grounds, and in a temperate
and moist time, as in February or March, and sometime in September, in the
increase of the Moon: and yet it is hard for them to endure and hold out the
Winters cold, for they always desire the full fruition of the Sun, and do
grow a great deal the fairer, when they do enjoy it accordingly, and when
also they are borne up to that end on sticks, rather than let fall flat to the
ground, to creep upon it: they must be sown thin, because their stalks do
spread themselves further than any one other kind of pulse. They are very
subject to be eaten within of Worms: and yet those which are so eaten of
Worms, are better to sow than the other which are whole and sound: For this
cause, if you will prevent the Worms that they may not hurt and hinder your
corn, sow Peason first in the place. It is true, that for the better growth
and prospering of them, the thick and gross seed is most convenient to be
sown, especially if it be laid in water to steep therein a night, because
thereby they grow the more easily, and lose some part of their saltness, in
being steept, by which means they recover their natural verdure again. They
must be gathered in the decrease of the Moon, presently upon their being ripe,
for else they dry up, and fall out of their swads. The earth wherein they are
sown, stands in need but of one earing.

Cich Peason.
CIch Peason do likewise grow in fat and moist places: they must be sown in a
rainie time: they do greatly load and burden the earth, and for that cause
are neglected of the wiser sort of husbandmen. Notwithstanding, if you will
sow them, you must steep them in warm water a day before, that so they may
grow and put forth of the earth the sooner and greater. Some to have them grow
the fairer, do steep them and their cods in nitrous water. To keep them that
passengers and other folk may not gather them to eat when they are ripe, you
must water them five mornings together before the Sun rise with water wherein
have been steeped the seeds of wild Cucumber and Wormwood, and the dew
within five days after will have taken away all the bitterness thereof. Such
practices are likewise good for to be used about small Peason and Beans. The
use of them is good for such as are slow to perform the act of carnal
copulation, and especially to carry away gravel, and to break the stone, as
also for such as have weak lungs and low and weak voices. They are also good
against melancholy, and do cut off troublesome thoughts and cogitations, and
put in place thereof iollie conceits and merry moodes: and then they being
laid forth in the Moone-shine when it is in the increase, and before the Sun
rise, they must be sprinkled with oyle-Oliue, afterward steeped in warm water,
to soften them, and lastly, boiled for to be eaten. The way to use them, is
rather to suppe up their broth, made with the roots of Parsley, than to ear
the Peason.

Small Cich Peason.
SMall Cich Pease, called of the Latins Cicercula, must be sown in fat
places, and in a moist time, as in January or February: they do less harm
to a field than any other pulse: but for the most part they never come to
profit: for when they are in flower, they cannot abide drowth, nor any strong
Southern winds, at such time as they leave flowring.

Great wild Tare, and bitter Fetch.
THe great wild Tare and bitter Fetch do desire lean places, and such as ar^
not moist: for sometimes by putting forth too freely, and growing too much,
they overthrow themselves. They may be sown in Autumn, or in the end of
January, and all the month of February, but not in March, because if it
should be sown in this month, it would hurt the Cattle, especially Oxen,
troubling them in their brains.

Fetches.
THere are two seed-times for Fetches: the first, when they are sown for to
feed cattle, and it is about the fifteenth day of September: the second, in
February, or March, and this is for to make bread of for to eat, being mixed
with other corn: both of them may be sown in untilled grounds, but it is
better when they are sown in grounds that have had their three earings. This
seed loves not the dew, and therefore it must be sown two or three hours
after Sunne-rise, when all the moisture thereof is spent and consumed, either
by the wind, or by the Sun: and it must not alone be sown, but it must also
be covered the very same day, because that if the night should come upon it,
and wet it but a little before it were covered, it would quickly become corrupt
and putrified. The ground wherein it is sown, needs not any more than one
earing, and when it is sown, it needs no weeding. In any case it must not
be sown before the fifteenth day of the Moon, for otherwise the Snailes will
annoy it. In like manner it must not be sown near unto any Vine or Orchard,
or any place where there are trees growing, because it draws unto it the
juice of such plants as be near it: and yet the Fetch does not make the ground
lean, but rather fat: and that it is so, appears; because that so soon as
the Fetch is taken away out of the fields, there may Peason, Millet, or any
other sort of Pulse be sown.

Panick.
HE that would sow Panick, must make choice of a light, grauellie, sandy, or
stony ground, and such a one as is situate amongst hills, and on the tops of
hills, and yet whereas there is no little resort of water, for that it being
hot by nature, grows and puts forth more easily than Millet. It must be
sown in Summer: and it grows so speedily, as that it may be mowen within
forty days after that it is sown. The inhabitants of Gascoigne make bread
thereof, but it is very unpleasant, because it is very short and apt to
c^umble away, even like ashes or sand. The Perigordians fry it with butter, or
oil: others eat it with milk, or meat-broth.

Fenugreeke, Cummin, and Mustard Seed.
FOr the sowing of Fenugreeke, you must make choice of such ground as you would
for the Fetch, which you must not cut the second time, seeing the first, if it
be done thick and small, and not deep, will serve: for if the grain should
be covered above four fingers, it would not be able to sprout and spring up,
and therefore the plough and harrow both must go but lightly over it. The
meal of Fenugreeke, with Brimstone and Nitre, does take away the freckles of
the face. If you mingle it with a fourth part of the seeds of Cresses in
vinegar, it will prove a singular remedy for the falling of the hair called
Tinea. If you boil it in honied water, putting thereto some Swines grease, it
will resolve the swelling of the testicles, hands, feet, and under the ears,
and is profitable against the wrenches of ioints. The decoction thereof drunk
oftentimes, does infinite good to such as have been troubled with an old
cough, and likewise for the ulcers of the breast: for the distillations and
rhewmes falling upon the eyes, you must wet clothes in the decoction of this
seed, and apply them unto the brows. And as for Cummin and Mustard Seed, we
have spoken of them in the second Book.

Medick fodder, or Snaile-clauer.
THere is not either any Pulse or other feeding which is more agreeable or
more precious for the feeding of beasts, than Snaile-clauer, called in French
Saint foin, for that it may seem to spring out of the earth, and as it were
of a more special favor from God, not only for the nourishing and fatting of
herds of cattle, but also to serve for Physic, for beasts that are sick,
and in that respect it is called of the Latins Medica. Some call it Burgundy
hay, because the Burgundians (...) been always very careful for the sowing
and tilling of this herb. The inhabitants of Picardie call it Foinasse, and
many have given it the name of great Trefoile. Howsoever the name go, the
benefit of this gras^e is so great, as that every casefull husbandman ought
continually to reserve the better part of his grounds, to be sown therewith.
Make choice therefore of the sowing and growing of great store of this gras^e,
of an even ground that is very clean and fat, easy to be plowed, and which
has had three earings before it was sown, as also which has been well
dunged, well harrowed, and dug and delued rather in the decrease of the
Moon, than plowed with the plough, beginning the work in June, afterward in
August, October, December, and February, to the end that the weeds that are
in the ground may be sufficiently killed, as well by the heat of Summer, at
the cold of Winter. After that you have made the ground well pleasing, and fit
by such industry, begin to sow it in the end of April, during the new of
the Moon, and toward the latter end of the day; for being watered by the dew
of the night, it will spring more speedily and easily out of the earth, than
and if it were sown in the heat of the day, because it would be burst
continually, and would come but to small effect and profit. You must not be
niggardly in sowing of it: for by how much the more seed you sow, by so much
the more thick will the grass grow; neither will there grow any other grass
there; and so there will also the more profit grow and rise thereupon to the
good house-holder. So soon as it is sown, you must harrow it every manner of
way, as long-waies, broad-waies, and ouer-thwart, with harrowe^ or rakes of
wood set thick with teeth, but not of iron, because it is an utter enemy to
iron: afterward you must water it gently for the first time; for and if you
should water it forcibly, and with abundant store of water, you should drive
the seed all to one side of the field, and yet you must not water it after
September unto the end of April. It will be good to cut it down with a (...)
five or six times the first year, and so proportionably the years following;
for it endures ten years, yea thirty as Pliny says, without standing in
need of being sown again. The fit time to cut it down is May, June, July,
and August, and the new of the Moon: in the mean time you shall not let it
lie upon heaps any longer than a day in the meadows, for if it should stay
there any long time, it would raise such a hear, as that it would smother and
kill whatsoever were under it, to the keeping of it for ever growing again:
wherefore it will be good to carry it elsewhere, and to dry it as soon as
possibly may be, stirring it every day, from day to day. Again, you must not
let the cattle feed near unto this grass, in as much as not their tooth
only, but their very breathing on it also is very noisome unto it, and that
so greatly, as that it afterward becomes either barren, or else dies
presently: it must not be given green for cattle to eat, least it make them
sick by reason of the moisture and heat that is therein: it must stay till it
be dry before you give it them to eat, and then also but in small quantity;
for that this grass begets in them such store of blo^d, as that of the much
eating thereof, they would be strangled therewith. The good husbandman must be
careful to gather and reserve seed of this snaile clauer, to sow the same
when it shall be requisite: it must not be gathered the first year that it
bears, by reason of his weakness; but in all the other following, and that
in the months of June and July, so soon as the husks wherein the seed is
contained shall appear dry, and the seeds themselves be turned yellow.

Mixed prouander.
Mixed prouander must be sown in fat and well manured places, and such as have
been twice eared: it will be very good if it be sown with pilde barley,
sometimes it consists of barley, oats, fetches, and fenugreeke, which are
let grow hand over head, and are cut afterward either green or ripe, to make
fodder of for cattle in Winter.

Rice.
IF you will sow rice you may do it: but it is like to prove rather a work of
curiosity than of profit; for rice is a commodity properly belonging and
growing amongst the Indians, from whence also it is brought hither unto us in
France. Therefore for the sowing of rice either white or red, choose out some
place that is very moist, and in case you have no such amongst your arable
ground, then choose out some field that is lean, foul, and nothing well
cleansed, or some other which is light and weak, but yet even, and through
which you may convey some little brook, or gutter of water. Ear the ground
thrice, where you mean to sow your rice, and when you have thus plowed it over
thrice, sow your rice therein, which you must first steep for one whole day in
water: so soon as you have sown it, draw your littlebrooke along through it,
and there suffer it to continue five whole months the depth of two singers:
and when as you perceive the blade to begin to shoot forth his ear (knowing
that it also flowreth and seedeth at the same instant) then double the
quantity of water to keep the fruit from blasting or spoiling otherwise. If
you order it thus, you shall not only reap great quantity of rice, but you
may also sow it three years together one after another, without giving any rest
at all to the ground, and yet the last year will be no less fruitful than
the former: yea, which is more, you shall make the field more fat, frolic, in
better plight, and cleaner from weeds, and cleaner from noisome beasts than it
was before: yea, and furth^r than this, you may sow therein for three years
more, one kind of grain or other, whither wheat, or meslin, whereof you shall
not repent you in the time of harvest, you shall find it to fair and
profitable. There is one inconvenience in rice, which is, that it causes an
ill air by reason of the abundance of water which it craves for the space of
five whole months: but to recompense the same withal, it proves very
profitable for food and sustenance; for thereof is made pottage, and thereof
also is bread made, either with rye or mille^, or all three together, It is
true, that it is much given to make obstructions, and it restrains fluxes as
mightily: and this is the cause why such as have great looseness in their
bodies do use it oftentimes, especially, if it be parched and boild in cowes
milk, wherein many little (...) of the river have bin quenched: if you boil
it in milk, adding thereto sugar and (...), it will provoke unto venerie. Many
do think that it makes fat; but seeing that (according to the Physicians) it
is not digested in the stomach but very hardly, it must needs nourish but a
little, and then how can it possibly make one fat? indeed it may be said rather
to puff up than to make fat.

Hemp.
Hemp must be sown in fat and well dunged grounds, and watered with some
little brook, or else in fl^t and moist countries, where much labor and
ploughing has been bestowed: for the fatter the ground is, the thicker will
the bark or pilling be. It must be sown in March, and gathered when the seed
is ripe, and afterward dried either in the Sun, Wind, or Smoke, and then
laid in water for to be watered, that so the pilling may the more easily
depurt from the stalks, afterward to be used in making of ropes and cloth, a
labor and travail well beseeming and fit for women.

This is the opinion of the French, but not the general opinion of the better
experienced: for, the rich ground which is spoken of here to sow hemp in, must
not be taken for the rich stiff black clay, or for any clay at all: for
although they will bear hemp; yet they put forth so much bunne, and so little
pilling, that indeed the hemp that grows therein is good for nothing:
therefore the best ground to sow hemp on, is the richest of all mixed earths,
whose mould is driest, loosest, blackest, and quickliest ripe, with little
earing, as namely with two ardors at the most, which would be in October the
first, and the last in March, which is the best and most convenient time for
sowing. Hemp must be exceedingly well harrowed and clotted, and the mould
must be made as small as dust; for the seed is very tender at the first
sprouting: but being once gotten above the earth, it ou^groweth all other weeds
whatsoever; and out of its own nature, it does choke and destroy them: whence
it comes, that hemp never needs any weeding: it must be diligently and
carefully kept and tended (after the first (...) appear above the earth) from
birds, for the seed is so sweet and so much desired of all small birds, that
without great and diligent care they will not leave you any in the earth. Now
for the best time of gathering your hemp, it is acording to the common custom
of house-wiues, about Saint Margarets day, being toward the latter end of
July: But more particularly, you shall understand that it is best pulling your
hemp for the pill as soon as it does begin to turn yellowish, and the leaves
to hang downward looking unto the earth: but if for seed, then not before the
seed look black, and be ready to shed: hemp must ever be pulled up by the
roots, and first spr^ad thin upon the earth, then afterward bound up in
bundles, which they do call bayts, then it must be c^rryed to the water to
ripen, of which water the running stream is the best, and the standing pond is
the worst: yet it must be done with great heed; for hemp is very poisonous,
and it does not only infect the waters, but it does also poison much fish:
Hemp must lie three days and three nights covered in the water; then it must
be clean washed out of the water, and afterward brought home and dried either
in the Sun or upon the kilne. There be some house-wiues, which (either for
sloth, or for want of a convenient place to water in) do ripen their hemp
upon the ground, by suffering it to lie at the least fifteen nights upon the
some, taking the dewes which do fall Morning and Evening, and other rain by
which it ripeneth; provided that it be turned every day once: but this manner
of ripening is not good; for besides that it is unkindly, and does oftentimes
cause the hemp to be rotten, it also makes the hemp to be very black and
foul; so that it does never make white cloth. After the ripening and drying of
your hemp, you shall brake it in brakes which are made of wood for the same
purpose, and this labor would ever as near as you can be done in the
Sunshine: after the braking of hemp, you shall swingle it, then beat it,
then heckle it: and if you intend to have very fine cloth of it, you shall
after the first heckling, beat it again, and then heckle it through a finer
heckle, then spinne it, after warpe it, and lastly weaue it. Thus much for the
hemp which is used for to make cloth withal: but for such as shall be
preserved for cordage, or the roper, you shall only after the ripening pill
it, and then either sell or employ it.

Hemp seed is very good to make hens lay many eggs, The seed of hemp. To
make hens lay eggs.
and that in the depth of Winter, and greatest coldness of the same. Many do
burn the thickest roots of the male hemp, and of the same so burnt and made
into powder, do make gunne-powder. The juice or decoction of the green herb
being strongly strained, and powered in some place where there are earthwormes,
does cause them to come forth by and by: likewise being dropped into the ears,
it causes the worms or other beasts which shall be gotten in thither to come
out presently, and this we have learned of fishermen, which by this wile do
take worms to serve them for their hooks. Hemp seed must neither be eaten
nor drunk, because it sends up many fumes unto the brain, which will cause
the same to ache* and therefore women do greatly transgress the rules of
Physic, which give this bruised seed in drink, to such as are troubled with
the falling sickness or headache. This is a thing to be wondered at in hemp,
that seeing there are two sorts of it, the male and the female, yet the female
bears not the seed, but the male.

Line.
LIne must not be sown in any ground, but where there rises great profit;
and this follows and is caused by reason of the seed which impaireth all
sorts of grounds very much, and for that cause it must be sown in a very
fat ground, and such a one also as it reasonably moist. In any case the ground
where line-seed is sown, must be curiously handled and cleansed, and with
manifold earings plowed and turned over so often and so long, as that it become
like dust: and furthermore the good hus-wife must be careful when the line is
grown, to free it from being (...) with the weed using to wind about it, and
which of some is called (...), and that not once but often: to the end that in
gathering the seed, in beating it with beetles, heckling and spinning of it,
such filth may not remain among the tow. It must be gathered when it is ripe,
and when the color of it grows yellow, and after laid up in some dry place,
that so it may be defended from the rain and dew, which are utter enemies
unto it: when it is dry, it must be thresht as soon as may be (to the end
that the mice eat it not) with wooden mallets, to get the seed out of it, and
presently after that it shall be carried to the water about the change of the
Moon, that it may lie therein three or four days in July or August, till it
become soft and tender, to the end that the pilling or bark thereof may the
more easily be separated from the stalks for the making of cloth. When it is
drawn out of the water, it must be laid on a heap, all round, but two or
three fadomes broad, loading it above with boords and stones, and after that
spread in the Sun, to the end it may dry the better. The finest line, which
is without seed (notwithstanding it be the least and lower of growth than the
rest) is the best, being soft and fine after the manner as it were of silk:
whereas that which is long and thick, is also more rough, and boisterous in
spinning. To make white thread.
You shall make very fine and white sowing thread of your sine flax in this
sort: Let it be watered in running water five or six days in July or August in
the change of the Moon: so soon as it is drawn out of the water, spread it
in the Sun, that it may dry, never casting it into any heaps, for that
which is laid upon heaps after the coming of it out of the water, that it may
take a heat, and being pressed down to that end, does become black, and
turns into a dark and obscure color.

This line after it has received braking and the first hackling, you shall
take the strickes, and platting them into a plat of three, make a good big
roll thereof, and put it into a smooth and round trough made for the purpose:
in the same manner as you beat hemp, so you shall beat this flax till it
handle as soft as any silk, then vnplat the strickes again, and heckle it
through the second heckle, the which must be much finer than the first: which
done, plat up the strickes again, and then beat it the second time, and then
vnplat as before, and heckle it the third time through the finest heckle that
can be gotten, then spinne this ^ow, and it will make you yarne either for
Lawne, Holland, or Combricke, or for the finest sisters thread that can be
sowed with: as for the hurds which do fall from the heckle, you shall have a
great and diligent care to keep them light and loose; for by reason of the
much beating, they will be exceeding soft, and apt to clotter together, and
abide in lumpes, and in the drawing of the thread, it will handle very woollie:
yet be well assured, that from the first hurds, you shall make a most
exceeding fine mydling, from the second a very fine lynnen, and from the third
a pure good holland. Many other labors are bestowed upon fla^ce: but in this
already rehearsed, consists the whole art of the huswife; yet herein by the
way is to be noted, that ever before you beat your flax, you shall bestow
great drying of it, letting it stand each several time at the least four and
twenty hours within the air of the fire before you beat it, for drying
causes it to break.

Out of the seed of line, Oil of lin-seed.
you may press an oil which will never (...) so cold: it is used of
Physicians, Painters, and many other sorts of workmen. It is singular good to
soften hard things, for the pain of the hemorrhoides, chape and tumors of the
fundament called Condylomata, being washed in rose water, it ^^reth burnings:
it is marvelous good in plurisies, if so be that it be (...) is old heateth and
procures vomit.

Nauets and Turnips.
NAuets and Turnips delight in a light and fine would, and not in a (...) sad
ground; and yet turnips grow better in moist ground^ (...) on the tops and
sides of hills, in dry and petty grounds, such as those are which are sandy
and grauelly. Howsoever it is, the ground where they are sown, must have been
oftentimes turned and cast, harrowed, and dunged; for by these means they will
not only grow well, but the ground (after that they be gathered being thus
prepared) will bring forth fairer corn. Turnips are sown twice in the year,
in February, and in August, in a well manured ground, and you may not suffer
them, after that they have gotten some little growth, to put up any further out
of the earth, for and if they should still grow more and more above the earth,
their root would become hard, and full of small and little holes. See more of
nauets and turnips in our second book.

CHAP. XIX.
Aduertisements concerning corn and pulse.
WIse and prudent husbandmen must not plow their grounds, cut their vines, or
prune or have any dealing about trees from the eighteenth day of November unto
the seven and twentieth of December.

Sow your corn as soon as you can, and stay not to sow it in the Winter:
Neither do you ever sow the corn which grew in a fat soil, whether it be
wheat or rye, or any other such, in a lean and barren field; but rather sow
that corn in a fat and fertile soil, which grew in a lean and barren ground:
and to be brief, sow in a well conditioned ground that which was grown in an
ill conditioned ground. In sowing your seed see that your hand auswere your
foot, and standing upon your feet, see that your right foot especially be moved
when your right hand does move. In sowing of wheat you must cast it with a full
hand, or by handfuls: but in sowing barely, rye, oats, and many other kinds of
grain, especially such as is shut up in husks, as millet, pannicke and rape
seed, must be sown and cast into the earth with only three fingers.

To prevent the frost that it may not hurt the corn that is sown, especially,
(...).
such as is sown in cold grounds, as those which are most subject unto frosts,
you must cast and spread lime upon the said grounds before they besowne: or
else, which is better, mingle a sixth or eight part of lime amongst the corn
which you mean to sow, and so sow them together.

To keep your seed from being eaten of birds, mice, or pis^yres, water it
before you sow it with the juice of ho^se-leeke: or according to Virgils
advice, with water wherein nitre has been infused.

To cause peason, beans and other pulse to be tender and easily boiled, you
must lay them a day before they be sown, in water wherein there has been
nitre dissolved; or else to mingle amongst them in fowing of them some dung and
nitre: and if notwithstanding after all these means used, they cannot yet be
well boiled, then put into the pot wherein they are boiling, a little mustard
seed, and in a short time they will relent and sees in pieces.

Beans being sown near trees, cause their roots to dry and wither: beans
will keep long if you water them with sea water* notwithstanding that they
will not boil any thing at all in salt or sea water.

Cich peas^ will become greater, if you infuse them in warm water before they
be sown: or if you steep them in their cods in water wherein nitre has bin
infused: if you would have them early, sow them when you sow barley.

Lentils Lentils*
will grow very fair, if they be infused in their cods in warm water with
nitre; or if they be rubd over with dry ox-dung before they be sown.

You must not sow millet thick, Mille^.
if so be you would have it good: for examples sake, a handful is enough to
sow half an arpent withal; for if you should (...) more you must but pull it
up when you come to the weeding of it.

Sow your lupines before all other kinds of corn. Lupines.
without staying or (...) rain: before they flower, you may put oxen in
amongst them, and (...) all the other sorts of herbs they will eat; but they
will not touch or come near unto the (...), because that they are bitter: you
may make them sweet, if you steep them three whole days in sea and river
water mingled together.

Sow all manner of pulse in the increase of the Moon, except peason, and
g^ther them as soon as they be ripe; for otherwise their cods will open and
the (...) fall out.

Gather seeds and all manner of grain in the change of the Moon, if you would
have them to keep, and do with them as we have said before. If you have need
to sell corn, sell it in the increase of the Moon, and not at any other time,
because at such time they grow and become bigger in the garner, then they are
woon^ to be at other times.

CHAP. XX.
Of the Bake-house.
IN vain should the husbandman toil himself in tilling his ground so
carefully according to the form and manner which we have before described, and
in like careful sort to gather in, heap together and keep his corn, if he
hoped not for some fruit and profit of his pains and labors. But what that
profit is which he receives of his corn, I (...) my self unto the sale,
which he may yearly make unto foreine and strange (...), as whereby there
redoundeth unto him an incredible sum of money. Witnesses in this point may
be the infinite number of rich husbandmen in France, and namely in Beauce,
Brie, and Picardie, who live in better estate and fuller of money, than many
great Seigneours and Gentlemen: and I refer my self likewise unto the diverse
sorts of bread which they make of their corn, for the feeding and sustaining
of themselves and their families, as also their cakes, cheese-cakes, custards,
flawnes, tartes, fritters, and a thousand other pretty knackes and dainty
conceits, which may be made and wrought of the meal which their corn
yields. And yet further I report me to the beer, (which stands in steed of
wine in the countries where the vine cannot bear fruit) made commonly with
wheat and barley. And lastly to the sale of bread which he may practice and
use every day, whithout any whit disaduantaging himself; as we see in the
husbandmen of Gonesse near to the City of Paris.

Now therefore seeing that matters stand in this sort, me thinks it should be
an unseemly thing, not only for the farmer, but also for the Lord of this our
farm, to use to send to the town or else whither to buy bread, custardes,
(...), cakes, tartes, beer, and other such necessary things, for the food and
(...) of his house, either yet to borrow of their neighbors strangers, as
bakers, paste-cookes, and brewers for the use, or to be beholden unto them for
any of (...), when they stand in need of them: For it is my intent and (...)
country house should be another Pandora, furnished and flowing with (...) all
manner of good things and commodities, in such sort, as that the neighbor
towns might have recourse and seek unto it in cases of their (...), but
without taking or receiving any thing at their hands but (...), as the price
and sale of the wares shall amount and come unto, which (...) sends and
furnishes them withal day by day. I (...) therefore (...) a baker, panter,
worker in pastrie, and a brewer when need shall be (...), that he should not be
ignorant of any thing which might help to keep, sustain, and enrich his
house.

Whereof Bread is made.
ANd to the intent that I may enter into my purposed matter of the Bake-house,
I do not here intend to cry or search out, who was the first inuenter of
Bread-making, or what meats were in use amongst them of ancient time, before
the making of Bread was found out, or whether it was the man or woman's labor
to play the Baker: these I leave to such as make their whole profession that
way, to discourse of; contenting my self to teach and instruct my Farmer what
grain or corn he may employ and use for the making of bread. For certain
there may be bread made of all sorts of corn, but not of all sorts of grain:
for Pulse (as we call them) that is to say, such grain as is enclosed in
coddes or husks, and which are not cut down with Sithe or Sickle, but
gathered by plucking them from the earth by the roots, as Pease, Beans, Rice,
Lentils, great Cich-pease, small Cich-pease, Lupines, Fasels, Fetches,
Fenugreeke and other such like, are not fit to make bread of, except in time of
famine, and when as other corn does ^aile altogether, or else fall to be
exceeding dear: according as we see in such times of hard distress, bread of
Oats, Barley, Beans, Rice, Millet, and Pannicke (for such I have seen in
Perigord) yea of Bran, Fishes dried in the Sun, Acornes, Chestnuts, and Fern
roots (for such have I seen in base Britain) or which is more, of Brickes,
Tiles and Slates, as is reported to have been made by the inhabitants of
Sancerra, who during the time that they were besieged, did make and eat bread
made of Slates.

Of Corn, and of such differences and sorts of the same as will make good
bread.
THe excellentest, wholsomest and best kind of grain for to make bread of, To
make choist of your corn.
is corn; of which as there are many differences and diverse sorts; according
to the regions, countries, grounds, and soiles where they grow, according to
the industry of the husbandman: so likewise there are diverse sorts of bread,
made differing as well in savor and taste, as in manner of nourishing.
Therefore that you may be able to make your choice wisely of all sorts of corn
of every country that is fit to make bread of, you must see that it be thick,
full, gross, massi^, firm, of color somewhat inclining to yellow, clean,
yielding great store of clean and white meal; which being s^eept and boiled
in water does quickly swell, which being newly threshed, comes presently from
the sheafe: for that which is old threshed, although it be drier than that
which is new threshed, as also more light, apt and ready for to make meal, and
to keep in ^^ale, notwithstanding the bread is not of so pleasant a taste,
seeing it has lost a great part of his well relishing juice, and has gotten
as it were another nature by the alteration of the air: for certainly even so
deal the Corne-Merchants who, well bethinking themselves at what time to sell
their corn, do not thresh it before the very same month, wherein they mean
to sell it; and as on the other side the Baker will not buy (if possi^ly he may
choose) any other corn to make good bread of, than that which being new
threshed, comes fresh from the shease.

The excellentest corn in all France, and which they use most in Paris, Good
corn.
are those sorts which com^ out of Beauce, France, Bri^, Picardie, Champaigne,
and Bassignie in Burgundy: howsoever also these in Berre^, Poictou,
Zanctonges, ^^goulmois, Limoges, Normandy, Li^agne, Languedoc and Auuergne, be
not altogether to be rejected. The corn of Beauce makes a fai^er show than
the corn of any other country, because it is growing in a fertile and a fat
soil, and such a one a^ i^ not dry, Corn of Beauce.
and it has in it a band which shows great when it is in bread, altho^^gh
there (...) less quantity of paste. The corn of France has a shor^^^ and
(...) that (...), Corn of France.
because it grows in a ground neither too fat no^ too lean, but indifferent;
so that the bread that is made thereof, is not of so great show as that of the
(...) of Beauce: but yet to make some manner of recompense, more white, and
such as ^^teth better than that of Beauce. The corn of Brie is of a less
grain than that of France and Beauce: as also a love of this corn is of less
quantity than that of (...) corn, and of less whiteness and pleasure in
eating, than that which is made of the corn of France, because that Brie is a
country of sweet cherries* and yet notwithstanding it is found, that the
country properly and truly called Brie does surpass and go beyond the two
other in massinesse of corn: and the cause making it so* to be, is the
shortness and thickenes of the skin thereof, which is evidently more apparent
in it than in the rest, which make it to weigh the more. The corn of Picardie
is of a less grain than any of the other three aforesaid, and so the bread of
this corn is not so good, great, white, or profitable: because that this corn
is more hard, stiff, stubborn, and uneasy to grind than the others, and
therefore such as out of which the flower cannot be well drawn, which causes
men commonly to call the corn of Picardie more vile and filthy than the rest,
seeing when it is ground, the bran thereof detaineth and keeps back of the
flower within it. Champaigne notwithstanding that it flow and abound with
corn, and make a very fair and great show, yet it is inferior unto the
other aforesaid countries; because the corn thereof yields less bread than
the others, because naturally it is given to be choking, and to run upon
wreathes betwixt the milstones, and more redious to grind than others: again
it is long, thin, and cloven in the midst, which makes that it carrie^h so
much wast bulk.

Generally wheat the smaller it is, and the thinner the husk is, the better
and whiter the meal is which comes from it, as is both seen in France and
in other countries: for in England the wheat which grows on the rich stiff
soyles, and is called whole straw wheat, being a great large corn with a
thick husk, is ever the coursest and blackest of all wheats, yet good to the
yield, and rich in meal, but the flaxen, and chilter wheat, which are much
smaller and thinner huskt, and grow upon barrenner grounds, as for the most
part upon the Iunams and such like, do ever yield the finest and whitest
meal, and therefore are most sought after, for the making of fine maunchets,
sweet biscuit, Iumballs, and such like (...) pasts.

To grind corn.
THe husbandman having made good choice of his corn, shall send it to the mill
whether it go with water or with wind, according as the country shall be (...)
fit and convenient for: or and if he have choice and may send it to either,
then (...) shall rather choose to send it to a watermill, carried about with a
very swift (...) for the more forcible turning about of the stone, and which
has his (...) of a very hard greet and all of one piece if it be possible,
such as are in B^ie and Champaigne, especially, at Ferte under Ioarre: for, the
milstones that are tender and soft, do easily break and quickly grow out of
frame, and withal do continually (...) some gravel in turning about, which
being mixed with the meal, takes away all the pleasantnes and good savor of
the bread, and becomes oftentimes troublesom^ unto the teeth. Many do
counsel and advise to beat the corn in a (...) before it be sent to the mill
to be ground, and in beating of it to sprinkle it over with (...), and after to
dry it in the Sun, and then in the end to send it to the mill. Some (...)
not send it to the mill except it be very dry, and when as it is not dry,
they set it in the Sun to dry; as holding this opinion that the drier it is
the more (...) it yields. Others besprinkle it with salt water, hoping by
such watering of it, (...) the meal will become more white, and that they
shall have greater quantite of (...). Of old time as may be gathered out of
Aristotle's problems, barley was woone to be p^rched before it was ground. In
France none of these ways of preparing their (...) to the mill are used, but
as the corn is, so they send it to the mill. It is true, that the miller is to
lay his stones in such sort, as that according to the owners will, (...) make a
greater or a smaller meal, as also according as the corn it self shall be
more gross, hard, small or soft. Yet the less the corn is bruised the finer
the meal will be, and the grosser your branne is, the better and vvhiter will
your paste be: whence it comes that the skilful Baker will ever choose the great
black Cullen stones to grind his fine Wheat upon, which no more but bruising,
and, as it were, crushing the corn makes the meal as pure and as white as
Snow. As for the dryness or danknesse of corn, it is certain that no grain,
except Wheat, can be too dry, but that the skillful Miller says should ever
stick to the Hopper: whence it comes that he will, when he finds his Wheat
too dry, dash or sprinkle some water upon it, which makes it grind a great
deal the better, and makes the meal much vvhiter.

Of Meal, Mil-dust, flower of Meal, Branne, fine Meal, Wheat, Starch, and
mundified Barley.
THe corn being ground is turned into Meal, in such sort as that meal is no
other thing but that which comes of the corn when it is ground: and so the
meal falls out to be such as the corn was, that is to say, very white, if
so be that the corn were pure and clean, thick and short, such as the corn
of France (properly so called) is, black and full of bran: if the corn were
starued, small, wrinckled, full of filth and dirt* long and flat, To keep Mea^e.
such is the meal of Rye. But the husbandman before the grinding of his corn
and turning of it into meal, must think with himself whether he will keep
it long or no: such as he will not keep, there is no need why he should care
of what corn he causes it to be ground, as whether it be old or new
threshed, neither yet how and in what manner: but such as he does entend to keep
for some time, as in a storehouse for to answer the times of necessity, he
must choose the driest corn that he can meet vvithall, because that if it be
not very dry, it might very quickly take heat in the meal; and so it is
meet that it should be old threshed and not new, and coming from the sheafe
(although the bread that is made of corn old threshed be not so good as that
which is made of new threshed corn, and that which comes fresh from the
sheafe) for the meal that comes of corn old threshed and reserved a long
time in the garner, keeps better than that which comes of new threshed
corn, because that the corn being driven and laid naked from his first and
utmost husk and coat, takes the air, as also his undermost covering
wherewith it is covered, and so grows drier and harder, not only in his
coat, but also in the meal and marrow enclosed therein. Whereupon it comes
to pass that this meal being left naked and void of any coat by the
grinding of the Mill, becomes more apt to keep in being the more dry. On
the contrary, the meal of new threshed corn, is not of so good continuance,
but spoileth sooner, because that the corn new threshed, retaining yet his
native moisture, makes the meal the more moist and heavy, and that it can
not be so dry: vvhereupon it falls out to be more inclinable and ready to
corrupt. For even as dryness does prevent and hinder putrefaction, so moisture
does hasten and help forward the same. And that it is so, we see by
experience, that the painful husbandmen for the good keeping of their corn,
do leave it in the sheafe mowed up in the Barn, there to Winter and sweat,
causing it after such sweat to be threshed, that so they may shift it out of
its place into another that is more dry, and laying up higher in a more open
air: where being laid and gathered together in heaps, after a long and not
high raised manner, he diligently bestirreth himself to cause it to be removed
from place to place, that so it may take the air by little and little, but
especially to air that which lies underneath, by laying it about: wherefore
it is not to be doubted but that the meal which is made of corn that has
been thus ordered in the Garner, is of much better continuance than that
which is of corn coming newly out of the sheafe. Besides, the husbandm^n
must give in charge (if so be he would have his meal to keep long) to the
Miller, to grind his corn somewhat gross: for if it be ground fine, it is
not possible for him to keep it so long in good state and condition.
Notvvithstanding, for the well keeping of all sorts of meal, whether it be of
corn new or old threshed, you must make choice of the highest room of all
your dwelling place, whether it be tower, town, or towne-house, and being
placed there as in a storehouse, it shall be let rest full fifteen days, to
relieve and ease it self of the travel which it has had in the grinding:
after which time of rest, for the better and longer keeping of it, it will be
needful to change it often from one place to another, and by this means it will
be kept a whole half year, and being often removed and changed from one place
to another, it will be increased a fifth or sixth part at the least, o^ which,
notwithstanding, there cannot be made so good bread, as of the meal that is
newly ground. And thus much for the farmers duty about baking, which
consists in choosing the corn, causing it to be ground, and laying up of the
meal in some garner, either to be kept, or to be presently used about the
making of bread. The ordering of the meal, and making of the bread belongs
unto the house-wife, according to the custom of the ancient Romans, amongst
whom, the women of special note and account did work and knead the meal, and
made bread with their own, hands, as Plutarch reports in his Problemes. The
house-wife then being possessed of so much meal in the garner, shall go about
to do her endeavor to make bread: but before she begin to make it, she
shall separate the finer part thereof from the grosser, with some temze,
searce, or bolter, to the end that of these several sorts of meal, she may
make several sorts of bread: the finest part of the meal is called the flower
of meal, and of the Latins Pollen, whereof the pasterers or cooks for pastrie
do make wafers, and such like dainty knackes: the grossest part is the brane,
called of the Latins Furfur, which comes of the coat or husk cleaving next
unto the narrow and kernel of the corn. Betwixt the flower of the meal and
the bran, there are yet other parts of the meal, more or less fine, or more
or less gross, according to the wideness or narrowness of the temze or
bolter through which they pass, and according to the difference and diversity
of these parts, there are made different and diverse sorts of bread, that is to
say, more or less white, according to the taking forth of two, three, or four
parts of the bran, by the help and means of the bolter: besides these parts
and several sorts, there is yet another sort of meal, which is called
mill-dust, Mill-dust.
and this rises up from the corn, as it is upon the mill, grinding under the
millstone, but hereof there is no use for bread, the millers use to sell it
only for the use of booke-binders and goldsmiths, to make their pastewithall:
there is yet another kind of meal, which the Italians call Semole, which is
fine meal, or course flower, called of the Latins Simila, or Similago, whereof
we have spoken before: We have it not in this country, it is brought unto us
from Italy and Naples, neither do men use to make bread with this, but either
thicken their meat-broths, or else make pap-meat. It is as fine as the flower
of meal, but not so white, notwithstanding, having a color half like the
straw color: It is of a very good juice and no^rishment. There is yet further
another sort of very white meal, that is very fine, which is commonly called
in French Amydon, and of the Greeks and Latins Amylon, as though it were made
without millstones. It has heretofore been made diverse ways, but in this
country they use to make it in this sort: They choose the faire^^ and purest
wheat that may be got, and cause it to be ground very finely: which done,
they cast the ground meal into a vessel whch the other fill up with water,
scumming off the bran that swimmeth aloft, and after passing all the water
through a cloth or strainer, and then they put new water into the vessel,
which they likewise strain in such manner as they did the former, leaving the
white meal in the (...) whither it is settled: and this they dry in the heat
of the Sun about the dog days; and when it is dried, it becomes hard, and
is afterward broken into gobb^^s, and so made into fine meal.

You may make meal likewise of other corn, than of wheat, as of barley,
(...)* mes^^, secourgeon, and many other sorts of grain, whereof we have said
before that bread is wont to be made in the time of dearth and famine, or
else in poor countries that have want of other, or at least of better corn.
Barley meal is very full of branne: and hence it comes that the bread made
thereof, Barley meal
does losen the belly. Notwithstanding, there was in old time made of Barley a
sort of meal which was called Polenta, Polenta.
that is to say, of Barley newly dried, then fried, and afterward ground: and
this was used to make pappe-meate of, or else to put in meat brothes to
thicken them. Some do the like with mundified Barley.

The Meal of Rye is likewise full of branne, The meal of Rice and Oats,
O^tmeale, Ricemeale.
but that of Oats is yet more full: notvvithstanding that, Oatmeale which is
made of Oats husked, is a vvelcome dish to the tables of great Lords. The
Meal of Rice is vvhiter than any of the rest. As for the Meal of Pulse, it is
oftener made by being braied in the mortar, than by grinding: howsoever, it may
more commodiously and a great deal better be made with the Mill.

Leaven.
Leaven, called in Latin Fermentum, because it puffs up, and swells in
continuance of time, is a lump of paste left of the last mass of dough,
covered and hidden in the meal which is kneaded, to take away the clamminesse
and cleaving property which is in the meal that is purposed to be made into
bread. This Leaven becomes sour by continuance of time, and thereby makes
the bread more delightsome, and of a more pleasant taste. Again, we see that
bread, by how much the more Leaven it has, by so much the more wholsome and
well relishing it is, over and above that which has less store of Leaven in
it. It is indifferently hot, and a little cold: hot by reason of the
putrefaction which it is cast into, and cold by the nature of the meal. This
Leaven is made diverse sorts of vvayes, according to the manners and fashions of
countries: we make it of Wheat paste to make Wheat bread, and of Rye paste to
make Rye bread: some put unto it Salt, some Vinegar, and many Verjuice made of
Crabbes. The workers in Pastrie do use the rising of Beer to make their Wigges
vvithal, as we shall have further occasion to speak of it in laying open the
way to make Beer. People of old and ancient times did make it diverse vvayes,
as Pliny reports. The Flemings do mightily boil their Wheat, and take off
the scumme that rises thereof in boiling, which they let grow thick, and use
the same in stead of Leaven: and that is the cause why their bread is a great
deal lighter than ours. Howsoever it is, the Leaven which men-bakers and
vvomen-bakers do use to make their bread vvithall, may be kept fifteen days
and not any more because after such time it corrupts and decays. But to be
sure* it is not good to keep it so long: for to keep it you must work it up
into a round paste, cover and hide it over in meal; and besides, in vvinter it
must be covered over withgood store of clothes in the kneading trough. When the
good wife of the house is purposed to bake her paste, she must two or three
days before, or, which is better, over night, kneade in her said Leauens
with hot water, or else with cold, according to the time and diversity of
the corn, whereof she means to make her bread, as we will speak further of
by and by. The workers in paste-meates do use but very little Leaven in
their crusts, or none at all, either because it would make so small a
quantity of paste as they use to make their crusts of, too sour, or else
because the Leaven would draw unto it all the Butter, or such other fat as
they should mingle amongst their paste, for as much as Leaven has the power to
draw moisture unto it, as we may easily prove by Apostumes, which when we
would have to ripen and swell up higher, we use to apply a paister of
Leaven to them. Furthermo^e, if it should happen that the Baker, or good wife
of the house should find her Leaven too sour, and that she cannot come by any
other, the remedy must be to knead her Leaven with hotter water than she would
if it were in its proper nature and kind, that so by the heat of the water
the Leaven may recover some strength, and somewhat renew its natural force,
having lost its natural heat, whereas on the contrary, when the Leaven is
in its kind and as it should be, there is not any thing but cold water to be
used about it.

The making of bread according to the diversity of corn whereof it is made.
THe house-wife must be ruled and advised in the making of her bread, by the
nature and condition of the meal whereof she makes it: wherefore if she
dwell in Beauce, Bread of corn growing in Beauce.
or dwelling out of Beauce, do make her bread of the corn growing in Beauce
(the meal of which corn for certainty, holds the chief and principal
place of account amongst all the sorts of meal of France) she shall be
careful in any case, to make her leuens at certain and well appointed hours:
In Summer she shall refresh her leven with cold water at noone day, and renew
it again at five a clock, and lastly at nine, without failing of keeping
these hours in very precise manner: This water thus used in Summer must be
drawn fresh out of the Well, or from the fountain and river, because that
Well water as it is more heavy than the other, so it makes the bread more
heavy: and on the contrary, spring water, or water from the river, as it is
lighter, so it makes lighter bread. In Winter she must renew her leven with
fresh water vvarmed or made hot: and with this water both Winter and Summer,
she shall wet her arms, and knead her paste thoroughly, turning it over and
over, hither and thither, on every side, for a long space and many times, that
so all the parts thereof may show that she has been there, and that all the
clamminesse and cleaving quality of the same may be thoroughly broken and dried
up, that so the bread may be the more short and finer in chawing, and not
eating like paste in the teeth, mouth, and stomach. After such handling of it,
she shall take the pains to turn her paste oftentimes, that so it become not
leven, for otherwise it would not eat so well. It is true that when the leven
is faulty, the meal of the corn of Beauce has such a band and list as that
she might easily cover and hide such fault, provided that the baker whether man
or woman, at the kneading thereof would but help it a little with some fresh
water.

If the farmers wife do dwell in France, Bread made of the corn of France.
or make bread of the corn growing sometime in France, she shall not use so
much leven thereunto as she did unto the meal made of the corn grown in
Beauce, both because the corn comes short in yielding like quantity of
paste, for like quantity of corn, as also because the meal has not so good
a band, neither yet is it altogether so clammie: and therefore you must use a
mean and reasonable measure in your leven, and withal let your water be less
hot, than in the kneading of Beauce meal; for if you knead it with water
that is more hot than needs, the paste will swell up the more a great deal,
and afterward will dry out of all reason.

To make bread of the corn that was grown in Brie, Bread made of the corn of
Brie.
you must use a quite other manner of order, because that country corn is
much more churlish than that of France or Beauce: the first flower that comes
out of husk or skin of the said corn, is better bound than the others, because
the corn is shorter, and so hangs in the bolter as does the oatmeale,
contrary to the nature of other corn, in as much as the said oatemeale is
sweeter than the other sorts of corn, which causes that the bolter lets
some small quantity of meal somewhat roundly ground to cross it
ouerthwartly, and that may be the second ^lower: and this was not, neither
should it be shorter than the corn of Picardie.

Picardie corn must be much corrected, Bread of Picardie.
as being hard to be well ordered, either in paste or in any other such manner
of vsages, as also for that it craves a very h^^ouen, and when it is in it, it
makes such a covering to the bread, as though there were no manner of leven in
it at all. It is hard to bake, and hard to take color, which may seem somewhat
strange; for seeing that it is so sour and dry, it should arg^e that the
bread should the sooner be baked in the oven: but the hardness and heaviness
of the meal is the cause that it is so hard to bake: as also there may be
joined thereto for another reason, the crust that grows upon the same
presently; for it is a means to hinder the heat of the oven, that it cannot
enter into the inward parts of the bread so easily as it should: and this is
the cause that makes the bread to be always as it were ^at.

The meal of the corn of Champaigne craves a newer made leven when it is to
be made into bread, Bread made of the corn which was grown in Campaigne.
because it has a smatch of the earth, which would make it to be become worse
in past, if it should not have added unto it such leven as were excellent good,
as also for that the corn coming out of the sheafe, does smell of the ground
whereon it grew, and this cannot be amended without great diligence used, and
care had in the making of the bread.

Besides these breads made of these several corns, you shall understand that
generally the breads which are most in use are first the manchet, which is the
finest of all other, and is made of the purest and best part of the meal
finely bolted or searst, and made light with barme only, and not with leven,
neither must it be made too light or spungie, but of a good solid temper,
^irme and fast wrought: the next to it is fine cheat bread, which is made of
the next meal to the finest, and brought only to differ through the
coursnesse of the boulter, which being a little wider than the first gives more
liberty to the meal to pass away and go nearer to the branne: this must be
made light both with leven and barme, yet very well wrought and made altogether
as firm as the manchet: the next to this is course cheat bread, the which is
made of the coursest meal as being boulted as clean from the branne as it can
possibly be got, and the boulter which is for this purpose must be a course
searse or a fine temze: this bread must be made light with leven only, neither
is it much material how spungie or open it appears; for this kind of bread is
ever to be puffed up and made to appear in as great quantity as possible it may
be: the last sort of bread is that which is made for pessants or hind
servants, and it is made of meal vnboulted, the branne and the meal being all
knodden together, and in this case your meal would be ground as fine as is
possible. There be some that after they have ground their meal gross, and
boulted out the manchets, they will then send that which is remaining to the
mill again, and have it newly ground over again as fine as it possible may
be, and of it they make this course hindes bread: and of a certainty it is a
well allowed husbandry; for thereby you shall reap a double commodity. This
bread some mix with leven, some do not: but certainly the leven is best, for
it gives unto the bread a pleasant and delightsome taste, whereas the other
wanting the same has a very rough, waterish and unwholesome taste, and it is
only profitable in this, that a man not taking any delight to eat it, it will
last a great deal the longer: this bread would be bakt in great loaves, and
that somewhat hard also.

Meslin thriueth not so well, Bread made of meslin.
as not yielding so much when it is made in bread: it is by nature fat, as also
the meal thereof being boulted: it is no easy thing to pull out ones hands
when they are in kneading of it: the good huswife that has not bin acquainted
to work in this kind of corn, does find herself much encumbered therewith, and
that in part, because the better part of the meal uses to stay behind with
the bran; and therefore for the profit of the house it were better to bolt the
meal of rye and mes^in, than to sift it, because the bolter with the working
of the arms, does cause the bran to let go the meal that is within it, which
is more than either the pocket or searce will do, because they make no moving
or stirring of the meal, but from one place to another.

The paste therefore being well kneaded, shifted, and prepared, as need
requires, it must be parted into round pieces, of reasonable greatness and
thicknes, to be set in the oven made reasonably hot, even in such sort as that
the bread may (according to the greatness, thickness, and quality of the
paste) be sufficiently baked: for a weighty and thick loaf of paste made of
the corn of Picardie, would have a longer and greater baking than a small
loaf, and that made of the corn of Beauce or France. If the oven be too hot,
the crust will be scorched, and within it will remain raw and vnbaked, the
heat not being able to enter and pierce to the inner parts, the crust that is
so hard dried upon it being a let thereunto.

In the mean time it must not be forgotten that when any man is (...) to make
salt bread, or to mix annise seed therewith, or any other such mixture, (...)
be must mingle and put the same thereto, whether it be salt or annise seed, or
any such thing, at such time as the past is in kneading.

There are likewise diverse sort^ of bread made of one and the same meal,
according as the bolter, pocket, temze or searce shall be, through which it
passes. Of the meal wholly together, and having nothing sifted out, is made
household bread. And when the greatest of the branne is taken away, then there
is usually made ther^of citizens bread. Again, when as the bran is clean
taken away, they use to make thereof small white lo^^es: and when as the
grossest part of the white flower is taken away, and nothing left but the very
fine, they use to make chapter bread, wafers, tarts, cakes, and other works of
pastrie. Some also do make bread as it were of pure bran, and therein likewise
sometimes to be found straws and chafe, and that for to feed dogs withal.

The fittest place for the baking of bread is the oven, because it admitt^th
the heat of the fire equally and indifferently on all sides: upon the harth or
gridyron, the one part of the loaf baketh, and the other remains raw: and
under the ash^^ it is not so well baked.

The fire that is for to heat the oven, must be faggot wood, or bille^, or
shiuer^ of thick wood that has no stinking or unsavory smell: or for want of
wood, straw or stubble, as is used in Beauce, or of thick reeds, according as
the country will most conveniently afford.

The bread must be baken in the oven, in a good sort and mean, and with a
reasonable heat: for ouer-great a heat would scorch the crust that is above,
and so (...) it self of inward entrance, to the causing of the said inward
part to remain raw and paste-like: a lesser heat than is meet and convenient
would let it remain all raw: after it is baken enough it shall be drawn
forth out of the oven, and laid to rest and abide in a place that is neither
stinking nor unsavory, nor yet infected with any evil air; for the hot
bread does easily draw and suck in any vehemous or corrupt quality of the
air. In moist places bread does soon become hoarie and sustie: and in too
dry a place it becomes moldy and rank. The good husband that is right
careful of his profit to the end that his bread may last the longer, and that
they may eat the less of it, does set it in some celler or place which is
under the ground, or in some other place which is moist: and his rye bread in
some place near unto the fire harth.

The bread made of other sorts of corn as also of certain pulse.
BArley bread Barley bread.
must be made of the best barley that may be found or gotten, and not of the
meal whole and entire, as it comes from the mill, but of that part of it
which has been ^em^ed and cleansed from his gross bran. It is true that the
bread will be very dry, very apt to crumble, and of a sower taste; so that it
would be better to mingle amongst this meal, some meal of pure wheat, or
mes^in. The manner of seasoning it with leven, as also of kneading and baking of
it, is no other, than is used in wheat. After the same manner is bread made of
Secourgion: but neither the one nor the other is fit for the eating either of
the Lord of the f^rme or of his farmer, but rather for the servants, and that
especially in the time of dearth, for their better contentation, although there
be no great store of nourishment to be loo^ed for from the same. After this
sort also they make bread of oats, which is ^eldome or not at all eaten,
except it be in the time of extreme famine; for indeed it (...) very
unpleasantly.

Bread may be made of millet as also of panicke, Bread of milles
but such as is very dry and brittle, and yet the Gascoines use it very
commonly, and especially the Biarnoyes, who for this cause are called millet
mangers of their neighbors dwelling (...). The Biarnoyes do make hasty
pudding after this manner: They take three or (...) pounds of the meal of the
millet for the morning, and as much for the evening, they set it upon the fire
in a Kettle whereinto there is powered five or six pints of water: thus they
let them boil together, until such time as that it swell up to the top of the
kettle, and then taking it from off the fire, they stir it well about with a
round stick, so long as until the paste be very thoroughly broken and made all
one, then afterward taking it out of the kettle, they divide it with a thread
into many pieces and eat it in that sort with cheese, or with thin salted
milk.

Bread is likewise made of rye, Bread made of rye.
but such as eats very clammie, whereof we have spoken in the discourse of
rye: for the taking away of the clamminesse thereof it will be good to mingle
barley flower with it, or rather wheat flower, or else to take the flower of
the rye meal: it will be of a wax color, if yet while it is hot you lay upon
it some heavy meal.

It is used likewise, to make bread of rice, beans, spelt corn, and many
other sorts of corn and pulse, and that after the same sort that wheat corn
bread is made.

In like manner the industry and endeavor of the baker may be the cause of
the making of many sorts of bread, as that which is called the finest bread, or
Court bread which is the lightest of all the rest, and which is very exactly
kneaded, full of leven and of a well raised paste. Biscuit Biscuit.
bread which is of three sorts, one that is made of rye, another that is made
of maslin, or barley or oats, or of all the foresaid mixed together, fit for
Sailors to live withal, which undertake long voyages by sea, or for such as
are besieged within some ^ort or hold, because it will keep a long time: this
kind of bread has not much leu^n in it: the second kind of biscuit is made of
pure wheat without any mixture, fit for the poor that are infected with the
pox, to make their diet bread upon: Spiced bread.
the third sort is made of the flower of meal, and it is usual to put to the
paste thereof sugar, cynamome, pepper or ginger, and sometimes annise seeds,
and it serves to eat in the time of abstinence, as Lent, and such other. At
Reyns they use to make spiced bread with honey and a little quantity of pepper
or cynamome. The Bakers which belong unto the Court make their bread with
milk. Bread of milk.


CHAP. XXI.
Of the Pantrie.
IT is most certain that bread is the chiefest thing whereby man is fed and
nourished: and that it is so, we see that other victuals, how pleasant soever
they be unto the taste, how well soever prepared and set out with good sauces,
do (for the most part of them) cause very often a distaste and loathing of
themselves; but only bread holds out without dislike growing thereupon
whether it be in sickness or in health, it is the thing which appetite does last
of all refuse, and first like of and receive again in time of sickness: in
health it is the beginning and ending of our meat, very pleasant and
delightsome with all kind of meats. In like manner of a certainty bread is by a
marvelous benefit of nature endued with all sorts of tastes and relishes,
which particularly are the prouocations and allurements causing us to affect
and eat this or that or any kind of meat whatsoever. Some whereof do please
us by reason of their sweetness, other some by reason of their sowernes, some by
reason of their saltness, and other some by reason of their sharpness, and
some by reason of their pleasant smell: and all these well pleasing relishes,
making sauourie unto us all other sorts of meat, does bread contain and
comprehend in it self. Again other victuals, have they never so good a
taste, can neither be pleasant nor profitable for the health in eating, if
bread be not eaten with them, in as much as the bread by its own good nature
does correct the faults that are in other meats, and makes them stronger and
of more power in their properties and qualities: and hereupon grew the common
proverb, which is that all meat is good and profitable, when it is accompanied
with bread. Again we find by daily observation, that such as eat their meat,
whether it be flesh or any such sort of victuals without bread, have always
a stinking breath; so that I cannot but greatly marvel who was the Author of
the common proverb: Omais repl^tio mala, panis autem pessima.
viz. That all repletion of whatsoever meat was evil, but especially that of
bread: if it be not, because that bread (by reason of much solid and firm
nourishment which it brings unto the body, if it happen to be eaten in
excessive quantity) does fill the veins with abundant store of blood, but
such as is not apt to flow and stir, and such as is not apt and easy to be
euaporated and discussed, being given to endure and continue like solid things
in a constant and stayed course: of the which blood all the body being
nourished, is made more corpulent, full and massy; and so by reason of this
fullness the less perspirable, because the pores and passages of the skin,
by the which the whole body should have means for the breathing out of his
superfluous vapors, are stopped; and thereby the body made subject unto many
diseases, and sudden death: such was the issue ordinarily befalling professed
Wrastlers, and that as we may gather by reading, procured and wrought
especially in those men, by using of much bread and swines flesh. And I will
further confess (as Galen teaches us) that of all the errors, and
inconueniencies happening to the health, through the bad digestion and ill
concoction of the stomach, those are the most grievous, which grow of the ill
digesting of bread, rather than where flesh or such meat are badly digested,
because that bread does more trouble nature and is a longer time in digesting.
But all this notwithstanding there is no cause, why bread should not still be
preferred before all other sorts of victuals, seeing these discommodities
arise not of the mean and reasonable use, but of the excessive use rather of
the same, which is the high way to (...) and make hurtful not bread only, but
whatsoever other good and ex^ellent things; so greatly every where and in all
good things, is the merry mean commended. Again whatsoever has been
hitherto said of bread, has been not to ^harge it with begetting the said
vices and diseases, by any evil juice that is in it, but indeed by the
superfluousnesse of humors, which may rather be accounted for a virtue and
commendation unto it, than any dispraise: but the further discourse of this
matter I leave for another place. Seeing then the life of men consists more
in the use of bread than of all other things, who so is careful of his health
and life, must make choice of his bread, according as his substance, calling,
and natural disposition shall direct and guide him.

The bread that is made of wheat meal whole and entire, Bread made of the
whole flower.
as from which there is nothing taken by temze, is fit and meet for hindes and
other workefolkes, as deluers, porters, and such other persons as are in
continual travel, because they have need of such like food, as consists of
a gross, thick, and clammie juice, and in like manner such bread fitteth them
best, which has no leven in it, is not much baked, but remains somewhat
doughie and clammie, and which besides is made of the meal of Secourgeon, of
rye mingled with wheat, of chestnuts, rice, beans, and such other gross sort
of pulse.

The bread that is made of the flower of the meal, Bread of the flower of meal
being the purest and finest part thereof, is good for idle and unlabored
persons, such as are students, (...) and other fine and dainty persons, which
stand in need to be fed with ^ood of light and easy digestion. Such is the
white bread which is sold of the bakers, and (...) bread: as also that which is
well leuened, knodden, somewhat salt, somewhat hollow, and well risen, like unto
court bread.

The bread that is made only of rye flower, is very black, heavy, (...),
slimie and melancholicke, and for that cause hard to digest: as also fit to be
(...) of the country people and poor inhabitants of the land, but not for men
of (...) living at their ease: It is true that Physicians do chiefly comm^nd
it in Summer in the beginning of meat for to loosen the belly, as we see it
practiced in the (...) of great states: but such bread must not be made of the
entire meal of rye, but such as is well sifted: and it must bear the color
of wax, and be new baked; for that which is old grows sour, and loses
his pleasant smell. The women of Lyonnois, to the end they may be fair and have
a fresh color, and solid and substantial bodies, do use no other bread but
such as is made of rye. Such as are much altered and changed, in steed of
ptisanes, cidre, beer, or any other such drink, may drink of breaded water,
that is to say, water wherein rye bread has been well beaten and labored.

Bread made of barley meal only is very dry, easy to crumble away, and of
very small nourishment, and therefore fitter to loosen the belly than to feed
or nourish, by virtue and force of a detergent faculty, wherewith barley is
greatly furnished: And this is the cause why at Rome this kind of bread is made
no account of, as for to be used of men, leaving it as a food for cattle, or
else in reproach, for faint-hearted and dastardly soldiers; for it was utterly
forbidden for ever being set before such as were valiant and courageous in
fight, because of the small quantity of nutritive parts or nourishment that is
in it. It is true that many do imagine that the use of barley bread does make
them less subject unto the gout: contrary to that which Aristotle says in
his Problemes, That bakers and such as use baking are weakened thereby; but yet
more than the rest, such as use to handle and work much in barley stuff. The
thing I leave to be tried by the sequel.

Oaten bread is not commended, both because the employing of oats that way were
to rob cattle of their due food and prouander (a great argument of famine) as
also because such bread is of an unpleasant taste. It is better to use oatmeale
made of oats freed from their husk, as we have said before in the treatise of
pottage used either in flesh time, or in the time of Lent.

Bread made of millet and panicke is very common in Bearne and Gascoigne, not
only amongst the vulgar sort, but also in the houses of great Lords; but these
do use it rather for daintiness sake, or for want of a good stomach, than
otherwise: it is very dry, light, and easily crumbling, and so fit for to
dry up a stomach and body that is very moist. It is pleasant in taste when it
is new and well baked, especially when it is eaten coming hot out of the oven,
for then it tastes and eats with a marvelous pleasant sweetness: Likewise
in countries where such bread is made account of, the bakers carry it presently
after it is drawn into the town, and cry hot millet bread hot; but after it
is become hard, it loses all his grace.

Bread made of pure and clean meslin, is very good to be eaten according to
the mediocritie of the substance thereof, in such sort as that many compare it
with the bread made of Similago, which was in old times the best and most
excellent wheat that was.

There is no regard to be made of the bread made of the bran which comes of
the meal, Bread of bran.
that has its flower taken from it, and is commonly called meal bran: it is
better to leave it for the hounds or sheepherds dogs, or such as serve for the
keeping and watch of the house.

In England and other places they make a great and profitabe use of this meal,
as namely, a certain bread which they call horse-bread, and is so general
among them, that you shall not find an Inn, Alehouse or common Harbor, which
does want the ^^me: how excellent good and wholesome it is for horses, I will
not boast, because the bran is naturally hot and burning of it self, and
breeds many inflammations and hot diseases amongst horses: yet certain it is,
it will feed much, and for traveling horses it is a good food, and well
allowable during their labor or time of traveling: but in their time of rest
not so good nor wholesome, especially, that which is of the common or worse
sort; for you must understand that there be two kinds of this common
horse-bread: the first kind of it, is that which is made of Branne or Chyssell
only, and knoden with cold water, without any mixture of other meal with it
more than that which they mould it in, which seems only to bind the chissell
together, which otherwise would fall in sunder: the other kind of bread is,
when they take two bushells of Branne or Chissell, and add unto it one bushel
of bean or pease meal, and ^o kneade it up in water scalding hot, and after
the (...) are molded, to roll them in spelted beans crushed and bruised in a
mill, and so bake it well: This bread is not altogether so unwholesome as the
former, and may very well serve to feed horses with all the year; for it is both
hearty and strong, only a little too heavy, which makes it hard of
disgestion, and so more hurtful to horses of tender stomaches, or such as want
exercise, which is the only means of speedy ^^^cuation.

Soft bread Soft bread.
(otherwise called of the French Painm^llet, or Pain de (...)) is to be made
for none but great Lords. Biscuit.
Biscuit bread made of the flower of white meal, is for such as take the diet*
Biscuit made of rye and such other grain of the inferior sort, is for mariners
and such as are besieged in towns. The spiced bread is for such as are sweet
^oothed and li^ourishly given.

The most excellent and best bread of all other (if you have need at any time
to make choice) is that which is made of good and pure wheat, The mark^s and
sign^s of good bread.
that is new, not old, not corrupted, or any way spoiled, moist, or long kept,
having been well ground, well sifted, well wrought into paste with good store
of leven, and sufficient quantity of river or spring water, rather than that
which is taken out of Wells, but never out of ^ennes, pooles, or fi^h ponds,
nor yet out of troubled, dyrtie, muddie, unclean or salt water: being well
raised and thoroughly kneaded and turned on every side, and let rest certain
hours, being well covered and somewhat salted, of a reasonable mass of paste,
not too exceeding great, that so it may take the heat of the fire equally on
every side as well above as below: which is baked in the oven with a
reasonable fire, and such a one as did burn clear, feeding upon wood rather
than upon straw, stubble, reed, rotten or medicinable wood: which is
indifferently baked; so as that by over much and long baking the crust is not
scorched, not the sweet juice of paste, which is as it were the life and
substance of the meal, is not spent and consumed: or so as by too slight and
slender baking, the inner part of the bread remain raw, and so become a heavy
and burdensome bread unto the stomach very hardly to be digested, and
ingendring great store of windiness and spettle, drawn out of the oven in
time and place, and set up where there is a good air, and not in any filthy
or stinking air, that there it may euaporate the superfluous moisture that is
in it. Such bread having been thus prepared and ordered, must not be eaten
too hastily, as when it is new baked, nor yet the same day, but the day
following in Summer, or the third day after in Winter: for new bread especially
that which is hot, does re^aine a great part of the moisture, clamminesse and
(...) which (...) had in the kneading, and to being eaten new, would procure
the inflammation and puffing up of the stomach, provoke thirst, be hardly
digested, subvert and overthrow the stomach, and cause obstructions in the
liver and inward parts. It is true that physicians do greatly commend in
faintings and swounings the smelling of the (...) part of the loaf coming new
out of the oven, and sprinkled with wine. Old baked bread, especially that
which is three or four days old, loses all its best grace and savor, and
in steed thereof falls into drienesse and hardness, and so becomes hard of
digestion, passes slowly down into the bowels, causes costiuenesse, and
begets a melancholy juice and nourishment. The crust of bread Crust of
bread.
notwithstanding it be of better taste and relish than the crumbs, and that the
common people do think that it makes a stronger body, yet it ingendreth a
choleric, adust and melancholy juice, and that is the cause why in houses of
great personages they use to chip their bread.

What quantity of bread must be eaten.
THe quantity of bread that every man ought to eat every day, The quantiti^
of bread that is to be eaten.
cannot (...) and strictly be set down, with regard had to the time, (for in
Winter men eat more than in Summer) age, disposition of the body, every
particular (...) manner of living* and the custom of the country or place,
without the omitting of (...) other circumstances. It is true that Courties,
Chanons, Monks, and Scholars of Colleges do keep and observe some rule that
way, but not so constantly, but that it may be broken, as occasions may be
offered, which may persuade either to use more or less.

The diverse uses of bread:
BRead is diversely used: but the two most common ways are to eat it either
alone, or with other meats, whereunto it serves not only, as we have said
before, in steed of a sauce that is full pleasant and delightful: but also to
correct their vices and faults if they have any, and to help and strengthen
their properties and virtues, in so much that all meat is wholesome and
healthful, if it be accompanied with bread. Sometimes it is tosted being cut
into diverse thin shiues, for to eat after all other meat, for the drying of
the stomach that is too moist, and to hinder especially in fat folks, that the
meat which they have taken, be not so suddenly dispersed into all the several
parts of the body. Some say likewise, that tosted bread being often eaten,
does make fat folks lean, and consumes such phlegm as may be gathered in the
stomach: and being eaten all dry, in a morning fasting, it likewise dries up
and stays all manner of rhumes and humors falling or gathered into any part
or member whatsoever. This is the cause why Physicians appoint biscuit bread for
such as are troubled with rheumes and distillations. Some v^e tosted bread
steept in Wine with sugar and cynamome, to procure an appetite unto a dull
stomache, either in sickness or in health. Some do make sippe^s or small ^^ices
(as they call them) of bread dried upon the coals, which they steep an hour
or more in Water and Wine, and after force them through a strainer or temze,
adding thereto the powder of some small spice, and so make very pleasant sauces
therewithal.

Washed bread Washed bread*
is a meat very profitable for the health, in as much as it gives a light
kind of nourishment unto the body, without making of any obstructions: and
this because the washing of it does wholly take away the heaviness and clammines
belonging unto the earthie parts thereof, and so makes it light and altogether
airie: That this is true, you shall find by experience, because that if you
cast it into the water it swimmeth a loft like a piece of cork; and again, if
you weigh it after that it is washed, you will wonder at the lightness of it;
for indeed you shall find it not to be so heavy by the half. Old men of
ancient time did cut it in slices, and washing it in water, made great account
of it in sharp agues and such other diseases, because it is of small and light
nourishment, according as is required in such sicknesses: and in these days we
make no less account of it, save that we use not to wash it in water, but in
the broth of meat, as of veale or capon possibly, because of the daintines of
this age, or else for the parties feeblenes sake, which (it may be) falls
out to be greater than it was in the bodies of those which lived long a go. In
steed of this washed bread, we use a sort of bread which we call Panade, or a
cooling bread, which is thus prepared: They take and crumble small the crummie
part of a white loaf, not new, but old baked, or they grate it very small,
after which they steep it certain hours in warm water, or in cold water,
changing the same three or four times, and in the end boiling it at a
small-coale fire in an earthen pot, with buttered water, or some other fat put
thereto. They that will make it after a finer fashion, steep it, and boil it
in some capon broth, or the broth of a pullet, or some other such like meat,
stirring it a long time and often with a spoone: this Panade is good for such as
are troubled with long diseases, as also for such as are in health, but are
troubled with crudities upon their stomach, of what cause soever they come, as
also for them that have but bad digestion; but chiefly good for such as by
exquisite diet do go about to cure the pox. This Panade does not heat as bread
does of it self, not being washed, or prepared thus in Panade. The meal of
Amydon made in bread or pap-meat, does nourish in like manner that Panade does.
We have set down before how Amydon is to be made. Young children that suck
in like manner may be fed with Panade, and it is a great deal better meat
for them than the (...) accustomed to be made them with Cowes milk and Wheat
flower, because that such pap-meate causes infinite obstructions, feauers,
headache and worms.

Some use the meal of certain sorts of corn, and of many sorts of Pulse,
after the manner of pap-meate, as we have already said when we spoke of
mundified Barley, which is a thing so highly commended of ancient Physicians.
But besides such manner of preparing of it, as we have already delivered in
the Chapter of mundified Barley, these two following may seem unto me to be
most excellent: boil your Barley in a great deal of water, as it were almost
to the consumption of the water; gather the cream that is uppermost, and take
it with a spoone, and make ther^of ^^^dified Barley. Otherwise thus: take the
meal of Barley well sifted, put it in a bag* and boil it in a great quantity
of water, the space of five or (...) hours, afterward draw the bag out of
the pot, and let it drop, and strain it in a press: let it stand and dry,
and being dry, grate it as you would do dry paste, and make mundified Barley
of it. Some are of judgment that Barley thus prepared is not so windy. Some
do now and then put unto it bread crummes and bruised Almonds, to make it more
nourishing. It moistneth, nourishes reasonably, but cools much: it procures
not any gripes in the body, neither does it puff up and swell the body or
stomach; but to be brief, it performs all the h^lpes whereof Hippocrates
speaks. Some likewise do make pap-meate of Wheat meal and Rice, which in
truth do nourish more than mundified Barley: but they load the stomach
heavily, and cause great windiness, and that because, for the most part, they
are boiled in Cowes milk. The pap-meate made of Millet, Pannicke, Oats, and
especially of Lentils, besides that they are very unpleasant, are of very hard
digestion, in so much, as that the day after they be eaten they are to be found
in the stomach. The pap-meates made of Cich Pease, (...), Beans, Fetches,
Lupines, and other such like pulse, do swell up the belly, and beget gross
and melancholic blood.

CHAP. XXII.
Of Pastrie or baked meats.
We have spoken of the making, differences, and profit of bread, which may be
made of any manner of grain, corn, or pulse: now we will say somewhat of the
skill to make Cakes, Cheese-cakes, Flawnes, (...), and other baked meats, the
which we desire to be in our housewife, that now and then she may take occasion
at sometimes of the year, to present her Master and Mistress with one dish or
other, as also be able to serve and set before her family somewhat
extraordinary at feast times to cheer them up withal. Such baked meats are
of diverse sorts, according to the matter whereof they are made, the manner of
their baking, their shape and fashion, the time when they are to be in use, and
the country wherein they are made. The matter is as it were the groundwork
of all sorts of baked meats, and that is, the flower of Wheat meal forced
through a Bolter or fine Searce, whereunto many other things being added, do
cause a variety of baked meats. That it is so, some make Wafers of the flower
of Wheat meal very well soked in water, and tempered a long time therewith,
until it come to a certain thickness, mixing therewith a little salt finely
powdered, and after causing the same to be baked betwixt two irons made hot,
first with a reasonable gentle fire, and (...) anointed with the oil of Nuts:
these kinds of Wafers a man may see made in many places openly, and abroad
upon festival and solemn feast days. (...) may be made a tenderer and more
delicate kind of Wafers, in soaking the (...) of the Wheat meal in white
wine and water mixed together, and thoroughly labored and wrought, putting
thereto afterward the yolks of Eggs, a little Sugar and (...) so baking all
together between two irons, having within them many raced and ch^^kered
draughts after the manner of small squares, after that the said irons have
been anointed with fresh Butter or Oil olive. This sort of Wafers is wont to
be set on Tables at the second courses in solemn banquets. That which the
Parisians do call Mest^er, is made of the same flower of Wheat meal, tempered
with water and white wine, putting thereto a little sugar, and boiling it
all betwixt two irons, after the manner which you used in making of Wa^ers,
but that it must not be altogether so thick. The kind of Wafers called
Oublies, are made with Honey in stead of Sugar. Singing breads are made after
the manner of Oublies, sane only that the meal whereof they are kneaden is not
mingled with Honey, Sugar, or any manner of Leaven whatsoever. Estriez and
Bridaueaux, and such other dainty baked things, are made of the same stuff,
and after the same manner that fine Wafers are, before described. Marchpanes
March-panes.
are made of very little flower, but with addition of greater quantity of
Filberds, Pine Nuts, Pistaces, Almonds, and rosed Sugar; and they are the most
wholsome, delicate, and pleasant tarts, of all the rest. The Poplins are made
of the same flower, kneaden with milk, yolks of eggs, fresh butter. The
leaued cakes take not so much flower, and they are made without milk. Tarts
Tarts.
are made after diverse fashions, and according to the time: some with fruits,
that is to say, Apples, Pears, Cherries and Plumbs, especially in Summer:
others with Gooseberries, kernels of Crabs and Straw-berries in the beginning
of Summer. The Italians do make Tarts of herbs, as Scariole, Lettuse, Blites,
Sorrel, B^glosse, and other herbs chopped small, and finely tempered together.
The greatest part do make them with Cheese or Cream, and many of all these
things mixed together. I^ so be that the Tarts be of diverse matter and color,
that is to say, of Plums, Cherries, Gooseberries, Cheese, or Cream. Some make
with Butter, Cheese, and yolks of Eggs, diverse sorts of Cakes, Flammickes,
Cheese-cakes, Talmouses and little Lenten loaves. Wigges are made with paste of
flower of meal and fresh butter. Fritters and other such sweet conceits
accustomed to be in request upon great days and before Lent, are made of the
flower of meal, kneaden with the yolks of Eggs and Milk, and fried in a
Skillet with fresh Butter. To conclude, look how many countries, so many
fashions of paste works: in all which notwithstanding this is for the most
part common, namely, that they use not any Leaven in any of them all, but only
the rising of Beer, and that because Leaven made of paste would make them too
sour, or in^ect them which some other taste too unpleasant and unbeseeming
baked meat, and hinder the whole and entire incorporating of things mingled
amongst the meal whereof it is made.

Yet all this formerly spoken of, does not so truly belong to the Pastrie as
to the Confectionarie or Closet of sweet meats, tarts only excepted: yet in as
much as they are principal ornaments to the housewife, they are not meet here
to be omitted. To come then to the true Pastrie, which is the making of those
pastes which are meet for the lapping in or containing of all manner of baked
meats, whether it be flesh, fish, roots, herbs, fruits, or other
composition whatsoever; you shall understand that they are of four kinds: the
first for the preservation or long keeping of meats, whose proper and
true-natures are to be eaten cold, as Venison of all kinds, Kiddes, Beef,
Veale, Mutton, Lamb, Turkeyes, Gamons of Bakon, or any great or dainty foul:
the second for the containing of loose bodies, at Dousets, Custards, Tarts,
Cheese-cakes and such like: the third for the receiving of fine, dainty, and
tender bodies, as Chuets, Vmbles, Chickens, Calves feet, or any other good
thing which is to be eaten hot: and the last is that which is called pu^t
paste, being of all other the most daint^est and pleasantest in taste, and may
be employed to any use that any of the former will serve for, according to the
fancy and skill of the Cook, or the taste of him that is Master of the
Family. To speak then first of that paste which is for the preservation of
mea^s, or to keep them longest cold in good and wholsome temper, it is ever
best to be made of Rye flower, finely boulted and kneaden with hot water,
and barrelled butter, yet in such sort that the paste may be somewhat stiff
and ^ough; and thereby very apt to rise without cracking or breaking, which
is the greatest danger belonging to this kind of past, and the coffins raised
hereof must be very thick and substantial, for thereby they preserve their
inmeats a great deal the better, and they must also above all things be
exceedingly well bakt, because any doughinesse or rawnesse in the crust soon
putrifyeth that which is baked within it: these pa^^es may also for show or
feasts (though worse in regard of continuance) be made of wheat meal finely
boulted, and then it would have much more butter than the rye paste, and be
knodden as stiff as is possible, so it rise without cracks or breaking: as for
the l^king it asks much less than the rye paste, in as much as it is a drier
grain and not so moist in the working. The second paste which is for loose
bodies, or any thing that is liquid, would be made of the finest wheat meal
that can be gotten, and of the finest boulting: it must be knodden with hot
water, a little butter, and many eggs, both to make it light and strong in the
rising, as also to make it hold from cracking, least thereby the moisture run
forth and so you loose both cost and labor: This paste is commonly half bakt
before you put the moisture into it; for thereby it is made to hold much the
stronger and better. The third past, which is for all manner of dainty things
which are to be eaten hot, must be the tenderest, shortest, and pleasantest of
all ordinary past, and therefore must be made of the finest wheat flower you
can get, and also most finely boulted: and this flower if before you knead it,
you put it into a clean earthen pot, and bake it in an oven and hour or two,
it will be much better: it must be knodden with two parts butter (either fresh
or salt) or with sweet seame, and but one part hot water, together with an egg
or two to make it hold rising, and this paste must be made reasonable stiff,
because the weak paste ever falls after the hand, and either rises not at
all, or else so little that it is not comely to look on, which every good
cook must shun, because that pie which is as much cover as crust is ever a
sign of an unskillful workman. Lastly for the puff past, you shall make it of
fi^er flower (if it be possible) than any of the other, and you shall to two
parts of the flower add a third part of sugar finely beaten and ^earst: and
this you shall knead with cold butter and no water at all; and ever as you
fould, turn, and mould the paste about, so shall you put cold sweet butter
between the foulds, and so work it to a very stiff and well tempered paste,
and so ^oule it forth either for tart, florentine, pas^y, or any other thing
that may lie flat in the baking; for by reason of the much brittlenes and
tenderness of the past, it will not abide my higher raising, but will fall one
leaf of the paste from another, and so loose the (...) or grauy which should
be held in the same: which to prevent and to make the crust a great deal the
more delicate, whenever you intend to bake any pastie of fallow or red Dear,
or any other flesh to be eaten hot, you shall first knead a sufficient
quantity of the second sort of paste which is for liquid bodies, and having
rouled it forth as thin as conveniently you can, and of a sufficient largeness
to receive that which you are to bake, you shall then knead another quantity
of the puff paste and (...) it likewise forth, (yet much thicker) and then lay
it upon your first tough paste, and then put in your meat, suet, spice, and
other necessaries, and so in both those pastes fould it up close and so bake
it, and you shall find when it comes to eating that the inmost of those two
crusts will give that admirable content which any curious taste can desire: and
thus you may bake any other pie by making two coffins to pass one into
another, and closing them up and baking them with a moderate heat, for this
paste of all other must by no means be either burnt or ouer-dried, but by all
artificial means be kept in the strength of his moisture; and believe in all
the art of cookerie there is not any knowledge (except seasoning) which is more
excellent or more worthy to be embraced of every good huswife: and yet all
manner of baked (...) are more for the pleasing of the taste than for the
health of the body, in as ^uch as they are given to load the stomach very
heavily, and not to digest very (...). It is true that being eaten at the end
of meals after other meats, they may serve in steed of marmalade, to send the
former vitailes down into the bottom of the stomach, and to press together
the belly.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the brew house.
THe vine cannot grow in many places of France to prosper: but to recompense
such a want* there grows all sorts of corn very fruitful and in great
abundance, as in Normandy, Brittanie, Picardie, and other coasts lying upon
the North side of the land, where the cold seaseth most strongly, and where the
rugged and stern winds do ouerblow the earth with their coldness; so that in
those countries, necessity, the mother of all skill and cunning invention,
has stirred up the men to devise some kind of drink made of corn to serve
them in steed of wine. Of that sort is their drink called beer, ale, small
beer, meade, gootale, beer and bread, and many other drinks, which the
Germans, Flemmings, Polonians, English, Scots, and other nations toward the
North, do use in steed of wine.

This is the manner of making beer at Paris. The fairest, purest, and cleanest
barley and oats that may be gotten, being provided, and thrice as much barley
being taken as oats, but of both such a quantity as may be proportionable to
the intended quantity of beer, they put them to steep together in a fat for
the space of four and twenty hours more or less, according to the age of the
corn in a sufficient quantity of river water, rather than either Spring or
Wellwater, and after this steeping time, they take and carry them up into a
garner, to lay them on heaps to sprout: being sprouted they spread them abroad
round about the gar^er for to rot and putrify: being rotten they cast them
into rows: from out of the garner they carry them to the kill for to dry:
being dried, they carry them again into the garner or some chamber, or into
some other place for to fan them and cleanse them from all their dust and
filth, and from thence to the mill, there to grind them and make them into
meal. Which done, they put this meal into a fat, pouring upon the same hot
scalding and boiling water, proportionably and according to the quantity of the
meal, that is to say, four barrells of water, and a tun and a half of water
to four seame or quartets of meal, leaving the same for the space of an hour
to drink in this water, afterward they put the meal aside with their
stirrers: being thus cleared the one from the other, they pour in as much
boiling water as they did before; then afterward they take two maunds (made
like unto bee-hiues) of ozier, and these they sink and thrust down amongst
the corn, and cause to be so kept by two or three men, to the end that in the
mean time some other man may by the inside of these maunds draw and draine out
the water wherein the meal has steept, and pour it into another fat close
by: Then they take all the wort or drained water and pour it into some
sufficient large copper, holding betwixt ^iue or six tons more or les^e,
causing it to boil in a furnace a good hour, and afterward emptying the
copper of the boiling water that is therein, they put it in with pans again
very softly, and all boiling into the fat amongst the corn, or dross of the
flower from which it was drained before, and there they let it remain a
certain time, afterward they draw forth the thinnest of the liqour, as clear
as may be, by a stopple which they have for the purpose in the bottom of the
fat, and that they pour again into the copper suffering it to boil there for
the space of twelve hours: and into this thin clear liqour being thus in the
copper, they put some five or six pounds of the flowers of hop^ very dry and
sweet. When the hops and liquor shall have thus boiled twelve hours* they
empty the copper again, and put the wort to cool at leisure into other
ves^elles called ^^otes or coolers, and they be broad like unto the fats, but
only one foot deep. When it is cold, they put it to turn into a small vessel
containing a half a tun, with two kettles of beer and of the rising of
beer Beer rising.
already thoroughly made, for the better cleansing and purifying of the same.
This rising is made of the froth which rises out of the Fat, when the best and
cleerest Wort is newly turned in and falls to the bottom in the Tubs, which
froth turns into Leaven, and becomes hard, and with the same do the Bakers
or Cooks making baked meats, now and then (...) themselves to make their
Wigs, Buns and most part of their finest baked mea^s: they renew the force and
strength of yeast or leaven every hour with Beer already made, so long as
till the said leaven or yeast become strong enough of it self; which you shall
know when you see that it is well risen: even as workers in paste do g^esse
and gather, when they see their paste well risen. The Beer being sufficiently
ripened and leauened, they run it up into barrels or half barrels, and there
they let it boil and (...) 24. hours in their said vessels, then they bung up
the said vessels, and give them (...) sometimes, for otherwise they would
burst. And thus much concerning the manner of making of beer amongst the
Parisians: for with this beer thus made they (...) themselves, and it
endures all times and seasons, and stands out good both Winter and Summer,
Harvest and Spring. And whereas it goes for good payment and (...), that the
beer brewed in March is the best, it may possibly be so, by reason that then
the hops are in their prime and chiefest force and virtue.

The Germans do make their* Ale with Barley only, not using any hops:
sometimes they put thereunto a fourth or sixth part of Wheat, to make it more
substantial and nourishing. Very often in stead or for want of the flowers of
hop^, they (...) in of the seed of the said hops.

The Bohemians and Polonians do make theirs with Barley and Wheat, which
they steep in the decoction of the seed or flowers of hops, so greatly
standing upon the requisitenes of their hops thereunto, as that they were
wont to punish grieu^uly such as did cut down, or unprofitably destroy any
hops amongst them. Again they husband and dres^e their hops as carefully as
we do our Vines: they gather the flowers and fruit at a certain time, not
suffering any thing to perish and be lost: in as much as the decoction of hops
does not only ferment and leaven the corn and grain that is steept therein,
but vvithall indueth the Ale or Beer with a resemblance of some sort of Wine.

The English, Flemmings, as also the Picards, do make their beer with eq^al
quantity of barley and wheat very well boiled, which the Englishmen and
Flemmings do call Ale and Good Ale, or double Beer, and the Picards call it
double Quoite. They sometimes put thereto some darnell, to give it a quicker
and sharper taste. The Flemmings do put thereto the crumbs of bread, apples,
butter, and a little (...)* to make it the thicker. The English to make it the
more pleasant, do put into the vessels Sugar, Cinnamom, and Cloves, stirring
and rolling the said vessels afterward very much. The Flemmings also do mix
therewith sometimes honey and spices, (...) make, as it were, a kind of
hippocras, which they call Mede or Mete. But howsoever, according to the
mingling, steeping, fermenting and boiling together of the grain, in use for
the making of their Beer: so the beer becomes sharp, bitter, sweetish,
waterish, strong, mighty, weak, clear, troubled, more or less durable, and
of other such like qualities.

Yet to speak a little more particularly of the English, which are indeed the
^rue masters of Beer and Ale, for as yet I have but roaued wildely at their
practice, You shall understand that generally they have but these two drinks
in use, that i^* (...) and Ale: and of these they have diverse kinds, as first
strong Ale or good Ale, (...) middle Ale, and lastly small Ale: so likewise of
Beer; they have March beer, (...) hold beer, and small beer: the first is for
strangers, the second for the Master, (...) and better sort of the family, and
the last is for plow-men or hind (...). As touching the making of these
several drinks: all Ale, of what kind soever it be, is made of the best,
cleanest, and sweetest Barley malt that can be got, without any other mixture,
except it be in those countries where Barley will not grow, and then Oatmeale
will serve, or Oatmeale and Barley malt mixed together, according to the wealth
of the Farmer. Now four bushels of good Barley malt will make a (...) of
strong Ale, another barrel of middle Ale, and half a barrel of small Ale.
The general use is by no means to put any hops into ale, making that the
difference betwixt it and beer, that the one has hops, the other none: but
the wiser huswiues do find an error in that opinion, and say the utter want of
hops is ^he reason why ale lasts so little a time, but either dies or
foureth, and therefore they will to every barrel of the best ale allow half a
pound of good hops: ale asks less boiling than beer, and so a little less
cooling except it be bottle ale, and then it must not only be coold
sufficiently, but also blynckt a little to give it a quick and sharp taste: as
soon as you have drawn of your best ale, you must put in your middle ale, and
as soon as you draw of it, you must put in your small ale: your best ale must
be barmed as soon as it is coold, and after it has risen and wrought and bin
diverse times well beaten in, then it shall be tund in open or close vessels,
but the open is best if it be soon spent, and the close best, if you must let
it lie long: as for your middle or small ale, they would not be barmed all at
once, but kept and put to barme as you have occasion to spend it, that is to
say, some at one time and some at another. Now for your beer you shall
understand, that your March-beere, which is so called, because it is commoly
brewed in that month as being the principal of all other, would be made of the
best barley malt that can be got, for no oate-malt of it self will make the
same: and to every quarter of good barley male you shall add a pecke of oats,
a pecke of wheat, and a pecke of pease, and grind them all together, and they
will make a hogshead of March-beere, an hogshead of household beer, and a
barrel of small beer: to this proportion of malt you must allow also three
pounds of the best hops; but if they be but indifferent, then you must allow a
better quantity: you must boil it well, then mash it, then boil it very well
the second time with the hops, then drawing it from the hops put it into the
coolers and cool it, after put it to barme, and beat it in as you did your
strong ale many times for a day and a night together, then tun it, and after it
has purged well in the hogshed or other vessel, then close the bung hole, and
give it ven^ as occasion shall serve, and so let it lie till it be ripe, which
will be in no less space than three quarters or half a year at the soonest:
as for your beer of the second running, you shall use it like the first, and
both put it to barme and tun it in the same manner, only it will be ripe in
four or five weeks at the furthest: but for your small beer, you shall use
it like your small ale, and put to the barme as you have occasion to drink it.
There is another kind of brewing of household beer (for this before mentioned
is but for one month in the year) and that is to allow to every hogshead of
beer half a quarter of barley-malt, which is a good proportion for the
family either of nobleman, knight or gentleman: and to every quarter of malt a
pound and a half of the best hops: as for the second running of this beer
(for it will bear but one besides the best) it will either be good for hind
servants, if such be in the family, or else be an excellent relief for such
as labor hard for their living. The grains, washings of tubs, and all other
excrements which fall from the brew house, are a very good food for swine, and
keep them in good plight till they come to be fatted for the slaughter.

To prevent the decay of beer, The faults of beer.
and to cause it that it may continue and stand good a long time, cast into
your beer vessels a great bag full of many tender ears of wheat, and there
leave them a long time: and if it begin to fade and wear out of heart, hang
two or three whole eggs in the vessel. If it have lost its good relish, you may
recover it again by casting into the vessel the roots of Ireos* ginger,
cloves, nutmegs, bay berries, and organie.

As concerning the temperature of beer there is no doubt but that it is hot,
The temperatu^e of beer.
and that more or less according to the things going to the compounding and
making thereof: for notwithstanding that barley by nature is cold,
nevertheless by means of the steeping, fermenting, putrefying, killing and
boiling, that it endures whiles the beer is making, it is impossible but that
it should be made and become somewhat hot, then furthermore the hops, whether
^loures or seeds, being mixed therewithal, does by its heat, temper and alter
very much the natural coldness of the barley. If that wine (as Galen says)
be nothing else but a water, which in process of time purchases a hot
substance to it self in the stock and woodie parts of the vine, by the means
and force of the heat of the Sun, in like case, barley in the making of beer
purchases a heat by his long lying in steep, boiling and putrefying which it
indureth. Again the taste and relish of beer does argue the same to be hot,
seeing if it be good it must be either sharp, or bitter, or sweet; for that
which is sour or sharp, like vinegar, or eager, is not good nor well made:
The effects of beer do likewise prou^ it to be hot, for it makes drunken, yea
and that a great deal more than wine does, by reason of its vaporous and thick
substance: it seedeth also and nourishes, especially that which is made partly
of wheat or the grain called furmentie. Yet further, if it be distilled in an
alembecke, it makes Aqua vitae, no less than the wine. It is true that beer
though it be hot, yet it is in diverse and sundry degrees of hea^e according to
the temperature of the ingredients: for that which is made of barley and spel^
corn without hops, or with a very small quantity of hops, is the least hot of
all the rest; and that in such sort as that it becomes a fit drink to quench
the thirst and to cool the body during the scorching Summer heat: that which
is made of barley and oats is a little hotter: as that which is made of barley
and wheat is yet more hot and very much given to feed and nourish. But
howsoever, all beer of what corn soever it be made, is of a more thick
substance and harder of digestion than wine, and which (if either it be ill
boiled, or newly made or troubled,) ingendreth obstructions and inflations or
puffing and swelling up of the inward parts, headache, colicke, stone, gravel,
strangurie, and heat and scalding of the urine, especially if it be sharp
withal: if it be too old and drawing toward sowrenesse, it hurts the stomach
and sinuie parts; as also it begets the leprosy, if we will believe
Dioscorides: And therefore you must learn to drink only such as is well
boiled, fined, and grown to a mean and indifferent age.

Notwithstanding that beer (as Dioscorides will have it) be enemy to the
(...), and that those which are drunk by taking excessiuely of the same, have
their members and parts more weak, than they which have become drunken with
wine: yet the truth is, that it comfort the wearied by running or much
walking, if so be that such persons do but foment and bathe their feet in beer
reasonably warm.

You may fat your hens and capons The fa^ting of (...) and capons
in a short time, if in steed of water you give them beer to drink, or if you
mingle their meat with beer.

If you boil new hops with beer and keep them in your mouth, it will stay
the toothach. Toothach.


Bakers or makers of baked meats (as we have said before) do use (in steed of
leue^ to knead their crust withal) the hardened froth of beer, which because
it is windy and flatuous, does make the bread light as it were full of eyes.

The grounds of beer does serve to polish and scour brazen vessel, To scour
vessel
if they be^ laid to steep therein some certain time.

The end of the fifth Book.
THE SIXTH BOOK OF THE COVNTRIE HOUSE.
The Vine.
CHAP. I.
Of the profit rising of a well dressed Vine and Vineyard.
HItherto we have entreated of the husbanding, tilling, ordering and dressing
of garden plots, orchards, and arable ground: it now remains that we speak
of the vine, whereupon for certainty depends the greatest part of the
revenues and riches of a house-holder, howsoever many make small account of the
vine, and do more esteem to have possession of meadows, pasture, woods, and
other grounds, than to stand to the revenues growing by vines, in as much as
for the most part they yield not the fruit which may recompense the charges
laid out about them: But for all this the vine is not to be discredited, seeing
this is not the fault of the ground, but of the people that till it, and either
for covetousness or ignorance, or negligence offend in the tilling thereof. It
is true that the husbanding and ordering of the vine is chargeable, painful,
and a matter of great care, by reason of the tenderness of the wood, which
being well considered, may seem to have come to pass by a special providence
of God, directing the same and making it so weak, tender, and feeble, to the
end that this plant might not serve for any other thing, than to bring forth
the excellent and precious liquor of wine, which is so needful for the
sustentation and life of man: for if it were fit for any thing else, as the
wood of other trees is, it would be employed, and wine thereby would become a
great deal more dear than it is.

The greatest part of vine dressers do not esteem in what ground the vine be
planted, but do make choice of the worst quarter in all the country, as if the
worst ground, and that which is good for nothing else, were the best to plant
vines in. Others have not the judgment to know and choose their plants, and for
that cause do oftentimes plant their vineyards with such young vines as are
naught. Again many having no respect of the time to come, do in such sort
order and dress the vine, as if they thought to live but an hour, burdening
and loading it with so many branches and shootes for propagation, and leaving
upon it so much wood, as that it cannot prosper any long time. Others although
they know the way to order and dress it well, do yet continually omit certain
courses and seasons, as being more busily employed about their own profit, than
their masters welfare.

Likewise I would always advise the Lord of our country farm, that he would
not altogether commit the care and charge of his vineyard unto his farmer, but
that he himself would lay the chief burden about it, upon himself: for as
the masters eye makes the horse fat, so the careful industry of the Lord or
chief owner makes the field fruitful and to bear great store of increase;
and for that likewise the owner and Lord of the vine will not only spare it
better, but also see that it be not defrauded of any such toil and labor as
it requires, contrary (for the most part) to the practice of such as are but
secondarily interes^ed in such matters: the vine being such a piece of
inheritance as wherein every small fault committed, does draw after it great
loss, and such as oftentimes cannot be remedied or repaired, but by
supplanting what is done, and replanting it a new. And that it is no otherwise,
but just so, mark and see, if ever you hear the Guespines of Orleance, or the
Bea^uoies, and those of the duchy of Burgundy (which have large grounds
employed in vine^yards) to complain themselves of their vines, and that
because themselves take the whole care and reserve the principal oversight
unto themselves. On the contrary, the Parisians have no other complaints or
agreeuances to talk of but of their vines, The Parisians negligent overseers
and husbands about their vines.
and that because they credit deceitful and ignorant workmen to sway the
work; whose covetousness, ignorance, and negligence is for the most part of
the cause that they reap not the fruit of their vines in such plentiful
manner, as they should, or at the least that the fruit which they do reap, is
not so durable as it would. And this you must think that vines will yield a
larger revenue a great deal than gardens or other areable grounds, if they be
well and diligently husbanded; for there are few arpents of vines to be found
which yield not every year, one year helping another, ten or twelve tuns of
wine which is a great revenue, and yet remains vnreckoned a great benefit and
auailes which may be made of small plants and impes, which may be gathered to
transport or transplant into any other place, which will easily amount to more
than will satisfy and answer all the costs and charges which are laid out
any manner of way about the vines: wherefore either the revenue rising of such
plants by sale, or the hope of the vintage and gathering of wine, must be the
spur to prick forward the master of this our country farm, to look to the
ordering and dressing of the vines himself.

CHAP. II.
What soil and air the vine does most delight in.
THe vine grows not but in certain places that are fit and natural for it,
Two things to be considered in the planting of vines.
which is a thing to be accounted of by us, so much the more excellent, because
the special property of this plant is more commended by men than any other,
in respect of the good it ministers, which i^ that in such places as it
grows in, the men are found to be more strong and mighty by the use of it,
than other men are, which for want of it, are forced to use other drinks.

As concerning the soil to plant it in, there must two things be considered,
the quality of the ground where it is to be planted, and the disposition and
inclination of the air which rules in that place. As concerning the quality
of the ground, you shall choose such a one as is not very churlish and close,
neither yet very ligh^ and open, but yet of the two, more inclining unto a
small mould and open ground, neither lean nor very fat, and yet somewhat the
rather inclining to the fat, not champion, nor a very plain and flat, (and yet
in such grounds there grow more wine) neither very stiff and straight, but
rather somewhat raised than otherwise, that so it may be the better aided and
succored by the favorable beams of the Sun, neither dri^ nor moist and
watrish (because that in such kind of ground the vine continues not long,
neither does it bring forth good wine, but such as is quickly perished) and
yet indifferently served with water: not such a one as has any fresh springs
or fountains, either breaking out even with the uppermost face of the earth,
neither yet carried along within, in the depth of the earth below, but only in
such sort, as that near unto them there may be water to moisten their roots
withal: and the same moisture must not be either bitter or salt, to the end
that the taste and ^auor of the wine may not be spoiled. So that by this it
appears that it is not meet to plant Vines in deep and low valleys, albeit
they might, and would bring forth grapes in great abundance, and that because
they would not ripen in due time, and so there would be made of them no better
than a green wine of small value: add hereunto, that Vines seated in low
valleys, are very much endangered by the Frosts of the Winter and Spring time,
and are also subject to have their grapes to burst, and to run out their
juice and to rot, which would cause a mus^ie and foughtie taste in the wine:
and therewithal, when the year is rainie, the kernels cleave and burst out
through the abundance of moisture; by reason whereof the grape being in this
sort too much moistened, and nothing at all dried, the wine becomes
unsavory and apt to grow sour, and fall into many other faults. And if you
happen to light on such a place, then choose to plant there such plants, and
young shootes as may bear clusters, not too thick set, but growing somewhat
thin, that so the Sun may pierce through them: much less may you plant those
Vines which have their pith taken out, and bring forth a firm and solid
grape, in cold and moist grounds: as neither yet in a hot and dry ground,
such Vines as have substance enough in them, and bear a grape somevvhat soft.
But chiefly, if your place be so well appointed by nature, as that it consist
of and contain grounds that are fit and meet upon the tops of great hills,
together with some low and small hills, then make choice of them to plant your
Vines thereupon. It is true that it will hardly grow there at the first, but
having once taken root, it will yield a very pleasant and noble wine, such
as the vvines of Ay, Hadre, Argentueil, Meudon, and Seurre be.

In general, if you would plant a Vine which may profit you in bringing
forth abundant store of good fruit, you must see that the ground be gentle,
easy, fine, and indifferent light to be stirred: not as though such a ground
only were good for Vines, but for that it is most kind, natural, and best
agreeing for Vines to be planted in sandy, stony, grauelly, and flintie
ground, as also such as consists of a Potters clay in the bottom, and
covered over with earth is good, provided, that they be intermingled with some
fat earth, and that they be often refreshed by being dug even to the vein
of stones, or rock. In a sandy, clayie, and churlish stubborn ground, the
first digging and casting of it must be good and deep: and such grounds also
would be thrice dug or cast at the least. Such grounds bring forth strong
and delicate vvines: but such grounds as have of stones or flints great store
upon the uppermost face of the earth, are not fit for Vines, because in Summer
they stand at a stay, by reason of the great heat of the Sun, being beat back
upon them by the said stones: and they do no better in Winter, because of the
excessive cold which in like manner then troubles them. True it is, that if a
Vine be planted in a grauelly, rockie and stony ground, that then it will not
be needful to cast so deep, because the root is not so far down into the
earth, as is the new planted Vineyard which is made in a sandy ^oile, and it
is contented with twice digging for the most part. A soil standing upon
Walkers clay or marle, as loeg^y upon Yonne, is very good for Vines, but the
ground standing upon a Potters clay is not good. In like sort the grauelly
ground is not altogether fit: for though it yield a dainty good wine, yet it
yields but a ve^ie little: and there also the new planted Vineyard is very
subject unto the having of his grapes washed away. The dry and burning earth
does yield lean Vines if it be not helped by the dunghill.

As concerning the power of the Sun, that air is fit and requi^it for the
Vine.
and disposition of the air, the Vine delights not to be planted upon the
tops of mountains, and much less in places lying open unto the Northeast
wind: but it delights in an air that is rather hot than cold, and fair
rather than rainie: it cannot abide tempests and storms: it reioiceeth in a
small, gentle, and friendly wind, and would be turned toward the East or
South. It is true that generally in cold places vines must stand upon the
South, and in hot places upon the North or East: provided that they be sheltred
at such time from the winds, as well of the South as of the East: if the place
be subject to Winds, it will be better that it should be to the Northern or
Western Winds than otherwise: in temperate places either upon the East or
West; but the best is toward the East.

Furthermore in as much as it is a very difficult thing to find all these
commodities and good properties of ground and air in every country; the good
workman shall fit the plants of his vines unto the nature of the places and
countries: wherefore in a fat and ^ertile ground he shall set the young plant
of a small vine, and such a one as bears but little, as the Morillion, the
Melier and the Aubeine: and in a lean ground the plant that is very fruitful,
as that of Samoureau, Tresseau, Lombard, Ouch, Muscadet, Beauuois, and Pulceau:
in a thick and close ground, the plant that is strong and puts forth great
store of wood and leaves, as that of Morillion, Morlou, Tresseau, and Pulceau:
in a small mould and reasonable fat ground, the plant which puts forth but a
little wood, as that of Samoureau, Lombard, and Beaulnois: and by this means
the defect and want, or the excess and superfluity of any quality in the
young plant of the vine, shall be supplied or corrected by the nature of the
ground, and that in such sort and manner as that of two excesses shall spring
one mean and well tempered thing, which is a point to be wished and requisite
in the growing of all sorts of plants. Furthermore he may not plant in moist
places the young plant which is given to bear tender and gross grapes, as
that of Samoureau, Gouet, Mourlous, Pulceau, Cinquaine, and Tresseau. In places
^ossed with winds and storms, he must provide to plant such a kind of vine as
is wont to bring forth hard grapes and sticking fast and close unto the
stalk: but on the contrary, that which shall have accustomed to bear tender
grapes in places that are hot and given to be mild. In dry countries he must
plant those vines, the fruit whereof is wont lightly either through rain or
the dew to rot, as those be of samoureau, Gouet, Pinot, Blanke, and Beaunoies:
and in a moist place, those which are wont to spoil and perish through
dryness. In countries which are troubled with hail, such as are of a hard and
large leaf, for such are able the better to defend and cover the fruit.

CHAP. III.
How that there is not planted any vine by the way of making a seed nurcerie,
except it be only for pleasure.
I Am of that mind, that a man cannot but hinder and injury himself in making
nurcerices of vines, for besides that the tree does not grow sooner of kernels
than it does of the plant, there is also this inconvenience, namely, that the
vine growing of knernels does not yield any thing of profit or good for use.
This is indeed a work for such as love their pleasure, and have in their
purses largely to defray the charges thereof, being able thereby to sow seeds
out of some strange country, afterward to raise a nurcerie of stocks of the
same when they are grown up for to be transplanted and removed into a better
ground, and that they may graft thereon, and afterward again remove the
stocks so grafted into a better ground also, that so about two years after
they may reap the fruit thereof, which is wont to be both great and dainty
enough: but yet this same new vineyard thus planted is the least durable of all
others. (...)
Again, in this country we do not trouble our selves in planting vines to
run upon trees, in such sort as any man may easily see that they do in
Lombardie and other places: neither yet with such as are raised upon single and
double shadowing arbours, Vines after the fashion of an arbor.
neither yet with such as use to creep along and spread themselves upon elmes
or other trees; for the wine never proves so good, as well because the root of
the tree is corrupted, after the manner as it falls out with coleworts; as
also because this plant loves not to be hoi^ed and mounted too high, neither
yet shadowed with any building of timber-worke, higher than the stature of a
perfect man.

CHAP. IIII.
How that before you plant your vine, you must learn out what wine the earth
will bear, where you are purposed to plant it.
Whosoever does purpose to plant vines, How to try what wine the ground will
best bea^e.
must not so much trust unto the marks and signs of a good ground, ceclared
and set down before, as first to see that he have made trial what wine the
ground will best bear, where he minds to plant his vine; for it were but
labor lost, and money cast away to plant a vine for so small increase as can
nothing like answer and content your expectation. Thus then you may try and
prove your ground: make a pit in the ground where you mean to plant it, of two
foot depth, and of the earth cast out of the pit, take a clod, and put it in a
glass full of rain water that is very deane, mingle and beat together this
earth and water, then let it rest, until such time as the earth have made his
perfect residence and settling in the bottom of the glass, which is easily
perceived by the cleerenesse of the glass which will follow thereupon: and
after that the earth is thoroughly settled, taste the water, and look what relish
or taste it has, such would the wine be; and therefore a vine yielding such a
relished wine fittest to be planted there: therefore if you find therein a
bitter taste, To manur^ vi^es is a dangerous thing.
a saltie or alum like, or any other such unpleasant taste, avoid and cease to
plant any vine in any such ground. Which if it be true, then to dung and manure
vines is altogether to be condemned, because it is very hard that earth fed
and nourished with dung, should not taste and retain the smatch of the dung,
and so by consequence communicate the same with the wine. Wherefore the
Parisians are fowly and foolishly ouerseene to load and lay upon their vines
year by year such great quantity of dung, and that is the cause for the most
part, why their wines have an unpleasant taste, and do easily and very quickly
corrupt: and yet further the dung does cause the vines to grow old by and by
and become barren, because they put forth all their goodness the first year.

CHAP. V.
Of the choice of young vine plants.
THe choice of young plants whether they be crossets, The choice of young vine
plants.
marquets, or the tenais, must not be put to the discretion of the seller, who
little cares to take the fit season for the gathering of the said young
plants, neither yet for the goodness of them, but altogether to his diligent
and heedfull care which is the workemaster: and for that cause it were best for
men to take them of their own vines, or else at least to have those which he
shall buy, warranted to bee^ good: he must also have regard to the quality of
the air and situation of the ground where he will set his plants, that so he
may fit them for the same. For and if the ground lie upon the South, he shall
choose the young branches of vines which he will plant from the same part and
quarter: if he mean to plant them in a high place, he shall gather the plants
upon some high and tall vine: and if low, then out of some vineyard that is
very low: planting in a hot, cold, dry, or moist ground, he shall choose his
plants for the renewing of any failing or decayed, of the like situation: by
this means the plant will fasten the sooner in the ground, and it will bring
forth fruit sooner and a great deal better than if it should be otherwise.
Likewise he must not keep the young plant any long time before he plant it:
for, no more than trees which are to be removed, can the vine well and easily
endure after it is cut to be long unplanted: neither yet would it be carried
far, or removed out of its own soil into another, because it fears the
change of earth and air: and thereupon it comes that the young plants
brought out of strange countries, as of Beaune, Rochel, and Bordeaux cannot
prosper so well in our soil, as those which grew there first. To make good
choice therefore of crossets to plant new vines of, you must see that the vine
from which you gather such Cros^ets be but sparingly furnished with pith,
because that such a one is not only fruitful and bearing abundantly, but
because also it is not so subject to the iniuriousnesse of time, as Snow,
Fogges, Frostes, and the burning of the Sun in the time of Summer, as those
which have much pith in them: afterward when the vines begin to bud, you must
diligently view, about the beginning of September, those that are most laden
with grapes, and which are most fruitful, and have most eyes in their
branches, which have not been injured or hurt by the hardness of weather, and
which are neither young not old, but in their chiefest strength, and middle
age, or not much past. Of such vines must your branches be gathered (in the
increase of the new Moon, somewhat late of the day in the afternoon) not of
such as grow most low, not yet of such as grow highest, but of the middle
growth, and such as are round, smooth, and fi^me, having many eyes, and about
three fingers of old wood together with the new. It must be planted presently,
that so it may take the sooner in the earth, whiles yet it is in life: or else
presently as soon as it is cut off to wrap it in its own earth, not tying it
hard, as also, if you would keep it a long time, to put it in a vessel full
of earth, well closed and stopped perfectly on every side, that so the air may
not any way wrong it: or else, if it be to be carried into any far country,
to stick it in an onion, or wild garlic, and then before planting of it to
steep it in water, especially if the ground from whence it is gathered be dry
by nature. The vine-dressers of the duchy of Burgundy before the planting of
crossets do cause them to be steeped one whole day or a night in running water,
and find by experience that the said crossets do take more easily. Others cause
the branch to be set and planted by and by, that so it may take the sooner.

CHAP. VI.
The manner and way to plant Vines.
THe first casting of the earth for to plant the vine, must be done in the
Spring or Summer, in which first digging or casting of it, the ground must be
cleansed of all superfluities, as roots, weeds, and stones: it must be dug
and renewed oftentimes, to the end that the earth which is uppermost, may be
brought unto the bottom, and that in the bottom may be turned uppermost, to
moisten and refresh that which is dry, and to heat and dry that which is
moist and thick, and afterward made even and cast into many furrows and pits of
a foot and a half breadth, and depth, till you come to the hard stone in the
bottom^, and the knights or guids of the one side and the other, (...)
of such a thicknes above, as may answer to the depth of the furrow, which
yet must be made hollower in a rough and crabb^d ground than in sandy,
flintie, or wet ground: in the bottomes of the sides of which furrows, there
may be put stones, so that they be no bigger than a loaf and covered with
earth, for the cooling of the vines in the heat of Summer, as also to the end
that upon great rain, the water may find passage, and not stand at the roots
of the plants. Whereupon your ground being well laid with stones in this sort,
and rested and settled after the first dressing of it, and being in the time of
this rest turned over and wrought for the taking away of the couch grass and
other weeds, you must spy out some calm and quiet weather to plant in,
according to the place where you shall be, and the nature of your ground:
prepare, make ready, sharpen, and cut off the root and hairie threeds of your
young plants, and fit them well for the South Sun: plant them in the midst
of the furrow, in the plain flat, where your foot uses to ^read, and one
right over against another, and after the manner of a Burgundian cross, for to
make them (after that they are covered with earth, and old made dung, or with
the earth which has been cast out of the furrows, and thrown on the ridges)
leap to the two sides of the furrows toward the ridge of either part; for so
they bear more fruit, and this is called the double plant, which must be
understood of the plants only, which are so planted in doubt that if one do
die, the other may escape, or that and if they both take, the one of them may
be taken up, to put in place where others have failed: For howsoever the plant
set of a crosset may make the better foot and root, yet for certain it is
harder to take than the marquot, although the marquot be not so lasting and of
such continuance, in as much as the crossets do put forth roots of themselves.
Furthermore, you must cut off the greatest wood, and most knottie from the vine
stock, which you know to be the fairest and most fertile, and it must consist
both of old and new wood: It continues four years without fruit, and on the
other side, without some misfortune it is seen to continue thirty years in
his vigor and lustiness. After it is cut off, it must be cut fit not leaving
above three or four ioints at the most, two whereof (in planting it) may stand
above ground: and if it have put forth any eielet, you may rub it off with your
finger, or nip it off with your nail.

If you make lesser furrows, you must plant them after the fashion called ^n
godeau, after the Angeuin fashion, setting every one distant from another two
foot, one marquot betwixt two knights or guides as is usually observed in
planting of stocks in the nurcerie of fruit trees: Cheualiers.
and after that to leave it four years in the same state, that it may be laid
down again when it is grown, that is, some two or three years after it has
put forth strong and able wood, in such sort, as that to vines so planted there
need no propping or under bearing; for the chief and principal foot as it is
in trees, does sufficiently bear up the siences putting forth of the same. In
Languedoc and Prouence The manner of pla^ting of vines in Languedoc and
Prouence. The olive tree is no hinderanc^ to the vine.
they plant them in this sort, but they prick them down a great deal further
off one from another, and set an olive tree betwixt every two, which nothing
hinders by his shadow either their growth, or the Sun from having full
power upon them. And yet they leave not so, but as is used in Italy, they set
in every furrow five or six rows of pulse or wheat, and yet so as that there
grows no intanglement betwixt them and the vine, as not being set or planted
amongst them* and yet they let not to plant the olive trees in corn fields,
providing as has been heretofore said, that the shadow, thereof do not any
thing hinder the growth of the grain.

The marquot would be planted To plant the marquot.
as soon as it is raised from his stock, with his whole furniture of twigs,
and that alone in the midst of the furrow, because of his small sprigs,
seeing there is no doubt made of the taking of it: again, it must have a bed
and spreading place of great length: it grows sooner (as has been said)
than the crosset; but in like manner as the grafted one, it indureth the least
and shortest time of all the rest.

After that you have planted your crossets or marquots, you must bow them well
at the foot to make them take root, and afterward cast down the earth of the
ridges both of the one side and the other, that so it may fall upon the said
plants. At Clublyes, Touuerois, and Auxerrois, in planting of marquots (but not
having any hairie roots) they writhe them about very gently, and until they
crack and cleave a little, not suffering them to come together again.

There is another manner of planting of Crossets, and not the Marquots (for his
hairie root cannot endure and abide it) which is called by the terms of
planting, en barrhe, en fiche, or as it is called in Aniou, en godeau, and it
is by pricking down on a row the said plants, or else so as that two may stand
right over against one that is alone, as the manner is to do with Willowes,
and afterward to cover them over, and to pile and beat them, as has been said.

Furthermore, to the end that the new plant may take root very speedily, To
^ause the new plant to take root very speedily.
it will be good to put to the root thereof acornes and fetches, bruised and
ground together somewhat gross, or else Bean straw, or dung that is old and
made long since, or the chafe of Wheat, which is fittest of all, if there may
be found any that has lien rotting somewhere in standing water for the space
of one year or more, or fat earth, if in case that the ground where you plant
your Vine be but a lean earth: but if it be a fat soil, it will be fit to
put therein the dross of the pressing of grapes, mixed with dung made of the
dross of white grapes, if the plant be of a black Vine, or of black grapes,
if the plant be of a white Vine. Some do pour Vrin thereupon, to work the
feat withal, and others the lees of Wine. It is true that some hold it for
cer^aine, that Vrin is altogether contrary to the Vine plant, and that is
causes the same to look pale and white, and in succession of time to kill the
stalk, whether it be Crosset, or a Marquot.

You must not mingle, if it be possible, any other plants amongst the Vines
That nothing must be sown amongst the Vines.
(howsoever some do sow amongst them Beans, Gourds, and Cucumber^) because
that whatsoever is sown amongst the Vines, does steal away from them their
nourishment, and becomes wonderful harmefull and injurious: above all other
things the Vine hates the Colwor^, as we have already said in the second
Book.

Again, Vines must not be planted of diverse plants, That vines must not be
planted of diverse plants
because all vines do not grow at one time, neither are they all of one nature:
for some bear early fruits, and some late fruits. Likewise the fruits
themselves do differ one from another: for some are read, some black, some
white, some sweet, some eager and sour, some durable, and other some not
durable. Wine is better old than new: some is drunk presently after it is
made. One delights in one manner of dressing, and another in another:
wherefore you must not mingle diverse plants together, for there is nothing that
so much spoyleth Vines, as when the grapes that are early ripe are gathered
with the late ripe ones, and the white with the black, because they are of
contrary natures. And if any man be desirous to have many sorts then he must
plant them apart one from the other, that so he may order them, enrich, cut,
and gather them in their nature and season, that is to say, the more forward
and fruitful first, and the backward and late ones last: or, which is better,
if a man desire to have diverse sorts of young plants, to the end that if one
miss he may be in possibility to have others that will speed, in stead of
mingling diverse plants together in the same ground, he must have so many
enclosures, or quarters for Vines (to the end they may by them be every one
separated and distinguished from another) as he will have plan^s and
diversities of plants.

CHAP. VII.
In what ground, with what manner of enriching, and at what time of the year,
the young vine ought chiefly to be planted.
TO plant a new vineyard of a French vine, it behooves the Lord of the farm
(if he himself would see the fruit of his first labors) to have care and
consideration of the ground and of the young vineyard, which he means to
replenish with young plants, as we have said: for he may be well assured, that
in a sturdie, stiff, iuicie, and fat ground, the vine will bear much fruit,
and requires less to be enriched and helped, save that it may after some two
of three years stand in need to have some little supply of fresh and new
earth, wherein pulse have lately grown, or else some little relief at the
foot, according to the time and nature of the country. In a grauellie and
flintie ground, as suppose it might be in Vaugirard and Venues, where vines
yield not so much increase, the earth must be the ofter tilled, dressed, and
dunged for the purpose, but such manuring must be with neats dung, and not
with the dung of horse, swine, sheep, or leistals, with all which all manner
of ground whatsoever, is made worse, rather than amended: besides that such
amends does impair the taste of wine, and makes the vine sooner to grow old
and out of date, because that the overmuch trust that the workman puts in
the heat of these, does make him negligent, even as it fares with them which
put vnquencht lime to the feet of plants, To put vnque^cht lime to the roots of
vines.
to make them bear the timelier fruit, as also for to make them the sooner
ripe: seeing also that the workmen given to follow these courses, do not
vouchsafe them the labor of digging about the feet, neither yet to turn up
and dig their vineyards diverse times, The qualities of bad vine dressers.
as the season shall fit and require, loving rather to put their masters to the
charges of dung, young plants, and props, then that they would in a rainy and
fit time take pains and dig them often, yea rather spending the time of their
laboring in ^auerning, or else in wrangling with some of their nearest and
dearest kinsfolks, and that oftentimes for nothing: notwithstanding that the
thing which is the principal and chiefest cause of the bringing forth of wine
as well commendable for goodness, as abounding in store, is by bestowing as
many dressings upon the vine, as can be devised, or any way affoorded.

Wherefore you may undertake the planting of the French vine in the increase of
the Moon, when it is four or five days old, and that from about the
beginning of December, or the midst of December, until the next frosts that
follow, and then also according to their fierceness and sharpness, which if
it fall out to be great, you shall ^urcease and give over your work, for to
go about to break the ground, and lay open the earth, when it is taken and
hardened by the frost, is but so much labor for you, and so much loss unto
the earth, because that under the crust of the frost it inwardly gathers its
s^rength together afresh, that afterward it may show forth i^s whole force and
power in the Spring. Wherefore in cold places it will be better to plant your
vine before the Spring, as on the contrary, in hot, dry, and vnwatered places
in Autumn, to the end that the rain which shall fall all Winter, may supply
the defect of other water, and that the roots may the sooner take in the earth,
and then and at that time principally when nature ministers most nourishment
unto the roots.

My counsel is, that in planting vines there be not any holes made, but rather
little pits of a fadome and a half in wideness, and as much in depth, and
this is to be done in October if you mind to plant your vines in February, or
else in August, if you mean to plant your branches before Winter.

The principal tools of a vine-dresser, are the mattocke to dig and turn
over the ground withal, the forked pick axe to make pits withal, the spade,
the weed forke to cast up weeds withal, the rake, a little saw, a great
hedging bill, a little hedging bill, to crop and cut off the wood, and to make
young branches, and an a^gar to grant the Vine withal.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the plant of the Black Vine.
COncerning the natural plant of the black Vine, it grows every where: the
wild does yield a sharp and rough wine, such as that which grows of ground
newly broken up: but the Vine that is intended to be for Claret wine, is
planted half of black and half of white Wine, and thereupon stands in
need of another manner of dressing and seat than the common Vine does: in like
sort it is harder to order well, as requiring a very great care to be taken
about it, because the wine which comes thereof is most pleasant to the eye,
and of excellent taste, albeit that it do not nourish so much.

The young plants of the black Vine are the Morillion, Four sorts of the
black Vine
the Samoyrea^, the Negrier, and the Neraut: Besides which, for to make Claret
Wine, it is accustomed to add the young white wine plant. And for the mingling
of them afterward to make a Claret, it will in a manner suffice, if among three
or four plants or branches of the black there be one of the white.

The best of the black plants is the Morillion, the wood whereof being cut,
sends forth a redder liquor than any of the other: and the best of this sort
is the short one, being iointed, within the breadth of every three fingers at
the most, and growing more or less thick, according as the country is,
bearing and nourishing it: it bears a well packt fruit, and has a rounder
leaf than any other of that sort.

The other Morillion There be three sorts of the Morillion.
has a long wood, iointed with ioints at the end of every four fingers at
the least, it is thicker and fuller of pith within: and in cutting also it is
pithie, and so more loose: the bark, except that on the outside, is very red, and the leaf three forked after the manner of a goose foot, and like
unto the leaf of the ^igge-tree. This second Morillion is otherwise called
wild Pinot: it bears but few clear grapes, and those also small, but the
wine proves strong, yea better than that of the first Morillion.

The third Morillion called Beccane has a blackewood, and the fruit is like
unto it: in the blossom it makes a great show of Wine, but when it comes to
ripenes, half the fruit, and sometimes more, falls away. The branch is
longest iointed of all the rest, and grows more in length and height of wood
than any of the other. This third kind of Morillion is called Le frane Merillon
lampereau: it ripeneth before the other Vine plants, and yields good wine and
as much as both the other.

The Samoyreau is likewise found to be of three sorts: There be three sorts of
the Samoy^ea^.
the best of which branches is short iointed, and of a very hard wood: the
other draws very near unto it: The third sort is called indented Samoyreau,
otherwise white Prunelat, and that because that his wood is whiter than the
other: the wine it yields is of an unpleasant taste, and it bears but some
years. It has furthermore this fault, that when the fruit should come to be
gathered, it is for the most part found fallen down and shed upon the earth.

The Negrier, called read Prunelat, has a red bark: the wood is long
iointed, of a thick and gross pitch, a leaf very much cut, and the grape
great, clear, very red and last ripe. Wherefore there needs to plant but
a few of these red plants, for the coloring of the other black, and fastening
of them: it keeps and defends itself from the frost, because it has a
high stock.

The Neraut, called the black Bourguignon, Neraut Bourg^ignon.
has the same nature with the white Bourguignon, a hard and a very black
vvood, a fast and small pith, ioints one upon another, an indifferent leaf and
altogether round, the foot thereof being very red, the fruit very thick and
close standing one by another, as though it were a piled or packed thing: it
saves it self better from the frost than any other: there needs not so much
to be planted of it, for it makes a deep color, in such sort as that they
which have great store of it planted, make wine for woollen-diers, and ^ell it
very dear.

The small Rochell and Bourdelais of the same nature, are scarce to be found,
because they are not any great bearers, neither yet good for any thing but
making of arbours: the wood is red, as shall be said afterward in in^reating of
the white vine, except because it is ^ound a little redder, and of a very
vermillion color where it is cut off

CHAP. IX.
Of the plants of the white vine.
THe best young plant of the white vine is the Frumenteau, Frumenteau.
whose wood draws toward a yellow color: next unto it is the Muscadet,
which bears a red wood: next unto the Muscadet Mauscadet.
is the ^ine Pinet of Anjou, Pinet of Aniou
which has a wood drawing near unto a green, and the fruit yellow as wax.

There is no young plant that is more apt to bear and endure the frost than
the Gouest, Gouest.
which bears a tawnie colored wood, and is very thick in his stock, having
a round leaf, and yielding much fruit. There is another kind of Gouest which
is called sage Gouest, so called because of the taste that it makes in the
mouth: it is smally in request, notwithstanding that it yield great store of
wine, and be no more subject to the frost than the other Gouest of the same
^ort.

The fruitfullest of all the white vine plants, is that which is called the
white Bourguignon The Burguignon.
or Mourlon, or else the Clozier, whose ioints are distant some two fingers and
a half, and the fruit having a short tail is thicker and closer grown than
the Rochelle, the leaf is very round, after the manner of Gouests: in
continuance it defends it self from frosts.

That which the Parisians by reason of his operation do call Foirard, The
Foirard.
and the Burgundians Cinquian, because it bears but upon the fifth part of
quantity, notwithstanding it bring forth very great fruit, and the wood
thereof is drawing somewhat near unto a blew, and as it were affoording much
work for the hedge-bill, yet notwithstanding it is the least of all in value
and goodness of juice.

The Mes^ier, The Mes^ier*
otherwise called the Saruinien, bears much fruit: and for this cause many
give themselves to plant it abundantly. It has a wood of color betwixt a
yellow and a red, and yields not very much to the frost: the leaves thereof
are in a manner round. As concerning the differences of this kind of vine
branch, I find them to be three: the one is called the common Mes^ier, Three
sorts of M^s^^er.
and this bears great store of fruit: the other is called the gross M^s^ier,
as having his wood and fruit very gross and great: and the third is called the
frank Meslier, and this bears a better and an opener fruit than the rest*

The Bourdelais, The Bourdelais*
otherwise named Legrais is best to make arbours of in gardens: and yet some
plant it because it is a great bearer of fruit: the wood thereof is red, and
grosser than any other young vine plant, and accordingly growing up in greater
hight, craves also a longer frame to run upon: in like manner it yields a
grosser fruit, and for a good plant, there is small need of it, as there is
also of the Rochelle, which has a whiter wood than any of the black vines
have, and notwithstanding it is but little subject to the frost: but howsoever,
it ripeneth more slowly, and there must not be set above a quarter of a hundred
of branches in a quarter, for it makes a green wine, notwithstanding that it
give it his sharpness, and make it dry, and holding little of the liquour.

CHAP. X.
Of the manner of dressing of the Vine, as well that which is newly planted, as
that which is grown up and old.
AFter that the plant has been dressed and ordered in such sort as has
already been said, and that you may perceive that it begins to put forth
wood the first year, and to take earth (which is a thing that should be
known by mid-May) when also you find that his shoot is able to endure
dressing, you must begin with it and cut it with a hedge-bill: this may be
done if it have any shoots put forth more than one principal branch, that so
by this means it may join all his force and strength together into one stock
or leg, but in cutting it, you must take heed and see that it be done, as far
off from the body of the stock as possibly may be, and not betwixt two
earths, least the body and trunk thereof might dry up: so likewise you must
see, not to let it enioie his wood, but to prune and lop it, taking away such
sprigs as may grow upon it, that so it may swell up into a firmer stalk: as is
wont to be practiced in Anjou and Languedoc. It must likewise be observed
that the cutting of it in the old of the Moon, causes the fleshie parts of
the grapes to be more gros^e and better fed, and that such cutting does serve
and profit much in Vines growing in a gross ground, or in valleys, as also in
those vines which are given to be over rank of wood: afterward you must trim
them, for the first dressing of a plant has his first manner of work and
travel. In trimming of them the second time, there must pains be taken about
the ridges, least that weeds should ouergrow and get the head of the plants,
and yet always with this charge and care, that in digging and stirring of the
earth you do not wound the roots of the vine, being assured that it always
more fears and is hurt by the encounter of edge-tooles than a man could
think: and it must not only be dug with a mat^ocke somewhat deep, or
forked pickaxe, but also the weeds which could not be wholly cast up, must be
turned in, beaten down, and broken in their roots: and first before this be
done, there must good regard be taken every where, what plants of branches or
vndergrowth are dead since the first seating of them, which was in the end of
December, or in the beginning of January, and in their place to plant others
in this time of May, if so be you be disposed: in which month, they are
sometimes seen to grow and prosper, but and if you do not in this month make
such supply of those which are dead, then you shall stay till the beginning of
December following, and you shall note very well the places where any are
wanting, that so you may the better bear them in mind.

The second year you shall begin to give to the young plant all such helps of
dressing and trimming as are thought meet for the vine that is already grown,
and has been planted a long time, the matter of propagating of it only
excepted; for the more pain and labor that is bestowed upon this new and
young plant in the new of the Moon, and in a time of mild and gentle rain, by
so much always it proves the better and the more precious.

If the third year when you dig and trim them, there be any perceiuerance and
show that the bud will likewise blossom and flower, you must nip it off with
your nail.

In the same year, To dung the young vine.
the plants first planted must be dunged, and the furrows made very clean,
and scowred of all manner of weeds, and by the same means there must be dung
laid unto and spread about it, which that it may be the best and most
agreeable, would be Cowes-dung, but for want thereof, the best next is
Horse-dung, and last Swines-dung, and where it cannot be come by, then any
such as the poor workman can get, except it be marle, or fresh and black
mould which is the best help of all others for the vine: and yet the good
vine-dresser says that the good vine of Pierrotte or Griotte craves and
loves more pain, and less manuring, that it may not be constrained to cast
and let fall his fruit before the due time.

The fourth year likewise it must be picked and freed with the hand in very
nimble and fine manner, To prune and (...) the new vine.
and not to be touched with any iron instrument, to the taking away of the
feeble and bad buds, the fair and beautiful being let alone, to see if they
will prove as good as the young planted branch it self out of which they
sprung: and this must be done about May.

Therefore to speak in general of the tilling, To dig and turn over the
ground after the first manner and fashion.
ordering and dressing of the vine whether it be new planted or old grown, the
first labor to be bestowed upon it, is called the digging of it after the
first fashion, which others call the tanning of it; for by it the earth is made
the more supple and tractable. In this piece of work is contained the laying
bare of the roots of the principal stocks, and if the plant be grown high,
then this may be done in the calm and quiet time of March, according to the
difference and alteration of places: for in this chill and cold place, which is
subject unto frosts and blastings, as also in places seated in the upper parts
and tops of mountains, this first order and fashion of dressing them, must be
done in the after end of Winter which is called mid-May.

The second fashion of dressing and tilling the vine, To dig it after the
second manner and fashion.
is to weed, rake, and cut the same, as has been said before: but before this
work come in hand, the plants must be fitted by being cut, that so they may
be able to continue in the place where they are planted, and not to be tossed
and carried to and fro with strong and blustering winds.

The third sort of labor to be performeed in dressing of vines, is to
propagate them: Propag^tion the third manner and fashion of vines dressing.
but this work fitteth them not, for the second year, no nor yet for the
third year, except in some certain places, and in such vines as at that age
are grown to very strong wood.

The third year besides the foresaid dressings, if the plant be strong and
seated in a good ground, and that it has put forth fair and goodly wood, it
is wont to be propagated betwixt mid-Aprill, (and for surenes sake) unto
mid-May, and then the propagated branches are buried in the places where the
ridges are broken and cast down, and that alike on both sides, by which means
is made the checker whereof Columella speaks.

In this same third year of the new plant, according to the strength of the
wood which it has put forth, notwithstanding for the cause above mentioned,
you have with your nail nipped off such buds as were ready to blossom: yet
according to the store that it has of strong wood, after you have cut it and
amended the stock, some begin to prop, underset, and bind it, for the bearing
up of the fair and jolly branches thereof, that they may not fall and lie flat
upon the ground: which done, you must go over it with the second fashion of
dressing of it: and yet before this be done, it must be raised, thrust up and
bound with his first band.

Vines are propagated The propagate vines.
in Aduent and January after they have been cut, howbeit in places that are
more chill, they be let alone till February and March, and for the doing
hereof, they make choice of the fairest branch, that they can find grown out
of the stock, cutting off the rest of the branches some two ioints from the
stalk. Sometimes if they were of a fair stock, some use to take two of the
fairest branches of the chiefest plant, and then lay them very gently one
after another low under foot, in a pit that shall have been made in the
ridges, afterward they must be covered with earth: some do lay the chief
branch that is to be propagated very deep, to the end that the year after
that it shall have been dres^ed, and the branches handsomely laid down in the
earth without any offense or hurt done unto them, it may abide the manuring
with dung; for the chief and mother branch is not wont to be manured at any
time, but rather it is to be uncovered and laid open at the foot in January,
and in the beginning of December, when the propagated branch is manured, to
the end it may the better take in the snow and rain water which may make it to
have a thick foot: In Chablyes and throughout all To^uerroies and Auuerroies,
they use to propagate their vines in October, and in the beginning of December
when they fall calm, in stony and grauelly grounds. And from mid-May unto
mid-Aprill they propagate their vines in the said conutries, in their sandy
grounds, and such as stand on a potters clay, and not sooner than that, because
the water that would stand in the pits, would rot and kill the young branches
newly planted, because of the frosts there contin^ed both in Winter and in the
Spring.

After August you must dress your vine again, whether it be young or old, The
sec^nd dressing of the vine.
binding it over again by reason of his former young sprigs which might have
been hurt by the first band and withered away, and now at this time it must
have two bands bestowed upon it, though they use not so to do in Anjou and
Tourraine, because their dressing of their vines is diverse, and differing from
that which we use. We have forgotten how that at mid-May, before the raifing
of the plant, it must be stripped of his buds, and in doing hereof to be heedy
and wary, that the principal sprigs which shall be about the blossom, be not
hurt or touched, except there be too many of them upon one stock.

For the third dressing of the vine, The third dressing of the vine.
which shall be in August, it is wont to be trimmed and tied again, after
which in a gentle and calm weather, after some rain has fallen, the earth
must be stird with the pick-axe very gently and softly, and the weeds turned
underneath: and sometimes it is weeded, if the year have been rainie. Besides
which ordinary dressings, you must be further advertised that indeed it is
requisit^ never to go without a spade in your hand, whiles you are amongst
vines, if so be that you would have them to prosper, and that this business
be not posted over to rascally fellows or maids, especially the propagating
of them, and the stripping of them of their buds. To conclude and shut up the
whole matter of the dressing of the vine set down in his diverse sorts here
before, it is to be understood in general, that in the months of December and
January, the new propagated plant must be cut, and the old one of the year
past looked unto, in laying bare the foot of the old, and dressing a new the
propagated one, and manuring of it, if there be any need. In March and April
it must be cut, The conclusion of the three sort^ of ^^essing due to the vine.
and more new plants made at the same time, also some lay bare their vines, and
manure such as have need: within a sho^t time after, they must be laid bare
again, as also covered again afterward: before they blossom and flower, they
must be stripped of their buds with your hand, especially whiles the branches
shall appear so tender, as that they will scarce abide touching with ones
finger, for fear of spoiling and breaking off: then shortly afterward to prop
them up with railes and stays, to tie them with soft and nimble bands, and of
all this while, not to forget to give them their several orders, such as have
been^ m^ntioned and spoken of before.

CHAP. XI.
Of the manner of grafting the vine.
THe vine in this country is seldom grafted, To graft vines.
notwithstanding we will speak a word or two of it, having already in the
third book handled this point more largely, where we have spoken of all the
sorts and properties of grafting. The vine then may be grafted either: upon it
self or on other trees. The vine grafted upon a vine, is after two manner of
ways, the on^ in the stock, the other in the branch. To graft a vine in the
stock, you must make choice of a gross and firm one, and such as is full of
moisture, not being too old, cutting it close by the ground, or which is better
a foot within ground. The grafts that you mean to graft* must be round, firm,
full of little eyes and set one near unto another, and cut in the decreease of
the Moon, and taken from the stock and foot of the vine. The manner of
grafting of them, is to insert and set the graft into the body of the vine
about two fingers deep. And you shall do the like, if you would graft the vine
upon the branches of the vine.

At Auxerrois and especially at Chablies, they have another manner of grafting
besides the former and they use it much, it is in this sort: They cut off all
the green buds and sprigs from the stock, except only the shoot or branch
which was put forth the year before, which they leave of the length of some
two ^oot. This branch they cleave the breadth of two or three fingers, they
hollow and also make fit the cleft within on every side, to the end that the
graft of the branch being made cornered, may fit the said cleft the better, and
in this cleft they put the graft (consisting both of old and new wood) made
sharp at the end, which shall go into the cleft with his pith, shaped in
manner of a wedge, over which they cause the said cloven branch so to close and
come together in such proportion as that the rindes of every part of the cleft
may join, after which they bind it gently without straiting of it much, with
a cloven ozier having the woodie part taken away, in such sort as that there
remain almost nothing but the very pilling, that so it may be the softer to
tie them and the sooner rotten. This done, they lay the said graft in the earth
about half a foot, and cover it with soft earth. Neither do they forget to
pick off the buds or sprigs that may grow on the same stock that year, to the
end there may be no attraction or rising of the sap, for the putting forth and
feeding of any thing else but the young graft, which for the first year grows
for the most part about two or three foot. Then at the end of two years they
propagate the stock and the graft, which by such means will put forth many
new shootes. The like may be practiced in one of the twigs putting up at the
foot of the stock.

The vine is grafted after the same manner upon trees, as cherry-trees,
plum-trees, and others such like, and thereof Columella in^reateth very largely
in his Elm grove, whereunto I will refer you, seeing in this our country of
France there is account or estimation made of the grafting of vines.

CHAP. XII.
Of certain petty practices and experiments touching and concerning the vines.
YOu shall have your vines to bear abundantly, Abundance of grapes.
and withal a very good and durable wine, if your vine-dresser wear a garland
of iuie at such time as he croppeth and cutteth your vines, if we may believe
Palladius: but indeed the surest way is if there be cast into the pit with it
when it is planted, the acorns of oaks brayed, and ground-fetches.

You shall perceive before the vintage, that there will be a great abundance
of wines, Abundance of wine.
if whiles you pluck very lightly with your fingers one grape off from the
bunch, there follow and issue forth some liqour after it. In like manner a
plentiful harvest of wheat, does prognosticate a plentiful vintage of wine.
Raines in the Spring time do foreshew that the wines coming after will be
strong and mighty.

Men of old and ancient times past have highly esteemed of the treacle vine,
The ^reacle vin^
in respect of the great virtue which his win^ has against the bitings of
serpents, and other venomous beasts: and not only the wine but also his leaves
stamped and applied in form of a cataplasme unto the grieved part, as also the
ashes of the branches. The manner of preparing of it, is to cleave three or
four fingers of the nether end of the branch, which you mean to plant: and
after that you have taken out the pith, you must put in steed of the pith some
quantity of triacle: afterward you must cover it and wrap it in paper, and set
the cloven end into the ground: some oth^r^ not contented with this course, do
pour treacle upon the roots of the Vine.

A Vine may after the same manner be made laxatiue, The laxatiue Vine.
as, if in the cloven branch you put some soluble purge, or if the roots
thereof be watered with some laxatiu^ things. Note notwithstanding that the
branch, taken from the treacle or laxatiue Vine to be planted, will not hold
the properties of the said Vine whereof it was gathered, because the treacle
and laxatiue drugs do loose their force and power in the Vine in process of
time.

Your Vine will bear a Wine apt to procure sleep, To plant a Vine whose wine
shall procure sleep.
if after the manner used in your treacle wine, you put Opium, of the juice of
Mandrakes, in the cleft which you shall have made in the body of the Vine.

To make grapes to grow without kernels, Grapes without kernels.
take the pith out of the branch that you mean to plant, and yet not from the
one end to the other, but only so much as is to stand within the ground:
afterward wrap it in wet paper, or graft it in an Onion (for the Onion helps
the branch very well to grow) and so plant it. There are some that do advise
to water it often with water wherein has lain to steep some Beniouin, and that
so long as till it has put forth some buds.

To have grapes in the spring, Grapes in the Spring.
you must graft the branch of a black Vine upon a Cherrie tree.

To cause a Vine to budde betimes, To make a Vine to bud early.
you must rub the eyes of the branch newly cut, with water wherein has been
steeped Sal nitrum, and within eight days after it will budde.

To make your clusters to consist partly of white, Clust^rs bearing both read
and white grapes.
and partly of black grapes, you must take two diverse branches, differing the
one from the other, and cleave them in the midst, having regard that the cleft
run not through any of their eyes, as also that there be not any part of their
pith lost: then afterward you must join them together, and that in such sort
as that their eyes may be near one unto another, and that in such sort as that
they may touch, and of two, there may become but one only: afterward the
branches must be well tied together with paper, and cover them with clammie
earth, or with the leaves of the heads of Onions, and to plant them in this
order, and to water them often, so long as until the buds do put forth.

To keep grapes To keep grapes.
all winter long, you must cut them down after the full Moon in a fair and
calm season, about eight a clock in the morning when the deaw is vanished,
and afterward dip them in the Sea water over head and ears, or else in salt
brine mixed with a little boiling wine, laying them afterward upon barley straw.
Some put them in a vessel full of new wine, or else in a vessel close covered
and luted: Other some do keep them in honey, others anoint them over with
the juice of Purslaine, others keep them in Oate chafe.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the diseases of the Vine, and the remedies for the same.
Sometimes the Vine is troubled with violence of winds, or else by the
vnwarines of the Vine dresser, wounding the same with his pickaxe: in these
cases you must cover the bruised or hurt place with go^^es dung or sheep
dung, mingled amongst very choice earth, and cast the ground round about them
oftentimes with the pickeaxe.

The Vines will not be spoiled with the frost, To guard the Vine from the ^rost.
if in diverse places amongst th^^ there be made heaps of dry dung or chafe,
and when you perceive that frosts are toward, to set the same on fire, for the
smoke rising thereof will break the force of the frost: notwithstanding, if
it come to pass that the Vine be already spoiled, and the fruit destroyed,
it must be cut off very short, that so his strength may yet continue in the
remainder; for the year following it will b^are twice as much fruit.

The vine will not be blasted, The blasting of vines.
if when it is about to bud, you cut it as late as it may; for this late
cutting of it, will make it to be in blossom at such time as the Sun is in
his greatest and most fervent heat.

To break off such mists and fogs Against mist and fogs.
as are already gathered in the air, for fear they should fall upon the
vines, you must make a smoke round about the vineyard, with the dung of goats
well kindled and set on fire. Against such fogs as have already hurt the vines,
you must stamp the roots or leaves of wild cucumbers, or of coloquintida, and
lay them to steep in water, and with the same to water the vines, after the
mists. Some say that if there be many bay trees planted in the vineyard, that
then all the malitiousnesse of the mists will fall upon their boughs.

Some say that the barren vine will become fruitful, To make the barren vine
fruitful.
if the body thereof be watered with man or woman's water that has been made
long before, and dropped upon the vine stock by little and little, and if
therewithal presently after it be laid about with dung mixed with earth, and
this cure must be done in Autumn.

Vines are perceived to want moisture, The withered vine.
when their leaves turn very red: this disease must be helped by watering them
with sea water, or man or woman's urine.

The vine sometimes pours forth great store of tears, Remedies for the
weeping of the vine.
whereupon it comes to pass that it loses his force altogether. The
remedy is to break the bark of the vine upon the body thereof, and to
anoint the wound with oil boiled to the half, or else with the lees of oil
not salted, and afterward to water it with the strongest vinegar that may
possibly be found.

The vine sometimes falle^h into such a scattering disease, The scattering vine.
as that it lets its grapes fall off: the marks and signs thereof are when
the leaves thereof become white and dry, and the branch falls broad, lenow,
and soft: this is to be remedied with ashes beaten and mixed with strong
vinegar, and rubd about the foot of the vine, and by watering all that is round
about the stock.

The vine shooting out into over many branches, The vine that is too full of
branches.
must be cut off very short, and if for all this it give not over, it must
be barred at the roots, and river gravel laid round about the stock,
together with a few ashes, or else some stones, for to cool the same.

If the grapes wither and dry away as they hang upon the vine, Withering
grapes.
you must take away such as are already withered and water the rest with
vinegar and ashes of vine branches: or for the more certainty, water the foot
of the vine with strong urine which has stood a long time.

There are some vines that do rot the fruit which they have newly brought
forth, The rotting of grapes.
before such time as they become fully grown and ripe: to cure this mischief,
you must put old ashes unto their roots, or gravel, or else barley meal mixed
with seed of purcelane about the stock and body.

To prevent that the biting or breath of oxen and kine (which are very hurtful
unto vines) may not do them any hurt at all: you must wate^ the foot of every
vine stock with water wherein the hides of oxen or kine, The biting of the ox
or cow.
or some such other beasts have been steept and mollified; for oxen and kine
have the stench of this water in such detestation, as that they will not abide
to come near unto the vine.

Caterpillars, Against ca^^rpillers and lice.
lice, and such other like small vermin will not hurt ^he bud, or the leaf of
the vine, if the hook or hedgebill wherewith you prune and cut away the
superfluous bough^ of your vine be anointed over with the blood of a male
goat, or the fat of an ass, or of a bear, or with the oil wherein
caterpillars, or brayed garlic have been boiled, or if you anoint and rub
them with the purse and sheath of a badgers stones after that it has been
ground.

To drive away little noisome beasts which are called locusts, Against locusts.
from the vines, you must procure smoakes to be raised amongst the vines of the
dung of oxen, or Galba^um, or of some old shooe-soles, or of hartshorn, or of
woman's hair, or for to plant amongst the said plants some pionie.

To preserve the vines from being annoied of the small beasts called shrewes,
you must cut them in the night when the Moon is in the sign Leo, Against the
^ouse-like beast alled a Shrew.
Scorpio, Sagittarius, or Taurus, or else you must water your vines with water
wherein have been steeped in the Sun for the space of ten days, ten river
or sea craie fishes.

Pismires Pismires.
fretting in sunder the wood of the vine, even unto the marrow, will not hurt
the same at all, if you anoint and rub the stock with the dung of kine or
grea^e of asses.

The bay tree, That Colewort^ are hartfull to vines.
and coleworts do likewise hurt vines very much if they be planted in the same
ground, but especially the coleworts, which the vine hates above all the rest,
there being a natural and deadly contrariety betwixt those two plants, in so
much as that coleworts are a preservative from drunkenness, at we shall
further declare by and by, wherefore the good vine-dresser shall never sow or
plan^ any coleworts, baie-trees, or hasell, in his garden of vines.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of the manner of gathering grapes, or of vintage.
THe last pain and labor to be taken with the vine is the gathering of the
fruit, The gathering of the fruit of vines.
which may not be attempted by the vine-dres^er, until the grapes be ripe, To
know when grapes are ripe.
which is manifestly perceived by their growing black, as also by having their
kernels black and all bare, as being altogether separated from the flesh or
pulpe of the grape, if so be that there be any pressing of the graps. Or else,
if after taking away a kernel or two out of a grape, you find that the room
whereout they were taken, does not lessen, but abides as large as it was, not
being filled up by the other kernells coming in place. You must gather them in
fair and calm weather, The time and hour of gathering grapes.
not in rainie weather, nor when the grapes are full of dew, but when it is
wasted and gone, and the air is become somewhat hot rather than cold, for so
the wine will be the better, and endure good a longer time, yea (if it be
possible) in the waine of the Moon, and when it is under the earth; at the
least after that the Moon is eighteen or twenty days old, for so the wines
will be stronger, and last better, than if the grapes should be gathered in
the new of the Moon. It is true that before the gathering of them, you must
have all the furniture necessary thereto in readiness, as baskets and vessels
to^gather them into, great hedge-bills, and small oncs very sharp, caske well
hooped, and made very clean by washing, cleanefats, and every way well fitted,
tubbes, great and small stands, well pitched and fitted for the purpose, and
presses aired, scoured, washed, and furnished with their necessary implements.

The grape-gatherers The duty of grape gathetherers.
shall do their endeavor to put asunder the leaves, green, sour, withered,
and rotten grapes, from those that are ripe and whole, to the end that the wine
may not be i^dammaged and made worse than it would be. And for the making of
perfect good and dainty wine, to choose ou^ the finest of the grapes from
amongst the common and gross ones, as also the white from the black, not
mingling the two best sorts together of any kind, as if there should be a
mingling of the well tasted grape with those which are sweet, or of the white
which is strong, with another which is weak and of a sad color. The gathered
grapes must be left in the ground at the least for a day or two, and that
uncovered (provided that it rain not) for so they will become better, in as
much as both the Sun, the dew, and the earth do refine and purify them, as
taking from them whatsoever bad and unprofitable moisture that is in them: then
after that to leave them in the fat, but not above two days, after which time,
the next morning they must be trodden out equally, and in such sort, as that
there may not any of the grapes of the clusters remain whole. It is true that
the treaders Treaders of grapes.
must not go into the fat before their feet be well washed, and their whole
bodies be made very clean, and covered with a shirt, to the end that their
sweat may not hurt the Wine, and they must likewise abstain from eating therein.

The grapes being trodden, What time Wines must work together after they be
trodden.
the wine or liquor must be let boil and work together for the space of four
and twenty hours, more or less, according as it is purposed that the wine
should be: for the longer it works together, the grosser, deeper colored,
and mightier it will be; as the less it works together, the finer, more
thin, subtle, and delicate it will be. Likewise, if you would have a strong
and mighty wine, you must in this time of the working cover your Fat with some
cover, that so the vapor thereof may not breathe out, or his force and strength
spend.

The dross and gross parts of the grapes that are trodden, which shall have
some juice and liquor yet left and remaining in them, shall be carried to the
press for to be pressed out, and there it shall abide three or four strokes.
It is true that this which is thus pressed out will make the other les^e
pleasant, and therefore it will be best to put that which flows and runs
out of its own accord by treading, by it self; and the other which is pressed
out, by it self. But howsoever you bestow them, the caske into which you
shall put them must not be quite filled up: but have some space left empty for
the boiling up of the new Wine, Vessels to put Wine in.
and the casting forth of such scumme and forth as shall rise out of it with
ease: It is true that you must be filling up of it every day, so long as till
it appear that the Wine has rid it self from all its scumme and f^oth. And
yet as then it may not be bunged up, but rather some stone or wispe of Hay
laid upon the bung-hole: and after, when it shall manifestly appear that the
wine is thoroughly settled and pacified, then you may bung the caske. The caske
must be all this while either in the open air, or else in some barn that is
well aired: for it is not to be laid into any Cellar under ground, before
such time as the new wine have utterly ceased and cast off his rage. And
withal, you must beware not to fill up the wine already cooled and turned up
with wine which is yet hot and boiling, for be it either white or claret, it
will make it fat.

After that the wine is thoroughly settled, and cease to boil and work any
more, it may be carried down into some Cellar, The couching of the Wine in the
Cellar.
which must stand upon the North, paued with gravel or dry earth, and free
and far off from all ill smells, horse-stables, sinks, bathes, What manner of
Cellar must be provided.
and marishie places, not having any thing shut up and kept in it which is of
evil smell, as Cheese, Garlike, Onyons, Oiles, or Hides: for there is nothing
more subject to be infected than wine, Wine ^pt to be infected.
especially that which is new.

Your vessels must be so ranked in order, as that they touch not one another,
having some distance left betwixt them, that so they may the more easily be
looked unto all they year. The vessels to avoid the venting which commonly
happens unto wine, must have the bunghole very well stopped with gravel, and
not stirred or touched at any time, until the time to drink the wine
become. If, upon some hap, the good householder presently, or a little after the
time of Vintage, be not minded to sell some part of his Wine, according as
opportunity may serve for his profit: notwithstanding I find that men in
times past (to the end they might have a purer, neater, and more subtle wine,
after that the wine has purged and cast forth his scumme, ceasing to boil)
did use to put it into new vessels, that is to say, did change it out of one
vessel into another, having this opinion, that wine separated from its lees,
does make a more subtle kind of mother in Winter, and becomes more delicate
and durable, and refineth it self far better in the spring time, than it
would have done upon the first lees; as also that when wine stands long upon
the first lees, which are thick and sour, it easily loses its natural
verdure, and gets a sharp and unpleasant ^aste, and a thick substance.
They did furthermore observe the time and course of the heavens: for they never
drew wine out of one vessel into another; but when the Northren vvinde did
blow, when the the Moon was either new or under the earth, and when as
Roses had put forth their first flowers, and the Vine his buddes. And Hesiodus
following this custom, does counsel men that in changing wine out of one
vessel into another, they should separate the Wine which is the uppermost in
the vessel, from that which draws somewhat near unto the lees, and both of
them from that which is in the midst of the vessel, because that the wine
which is next unto the bunghole, The wine in the midst of the vessel is the
best.
is euaporated much, as being next unto the air: and that which is in the
bottom corrupts very easily, as being near unto the leese: but contrarily
that which is in the midst is most durable and convenient for nourishment. Such
custom used by those of ancient time, is not observed now adays, especially
in the countries of France, and therefore we will not say any thing of this
changing of wine out of one vessel into another.

CHAP. XV.
Of the time of pearsing the vessels and tasting the wine and how to draw it
without causing it to take wind.
MEn of ancient time The time to pearce wines according to those of ancient
time.
did attribute so much unto the influence of the star^, as that they did pearse
their vessels either for tasting or drinking of their wine, at the rising of
the Sun or the Moon, having this opinion, that at such times the wine does
move, and therefore ought not in any case to be touched or dealt withal. We
do not so curiously pry into the matter, but we pearse our vessels at all
times, and as often, as either necessity or commodity will persuade and does
require. Notwithstanding in pearcing of them, The way to pearce wines.
you must have this wisdom, as to beware that they take as little wind as
possibly may be, and when there is but a very little drawn of it, you must
presently fill up the vessel again for fear of spending of it self. As
concerning the tasting of wine, To taste wine.
whether it be to sell or drink, or if it be to find out whether there be
any that is in danger to be turned, some do give counsel, that it is good
to make the assay at such time as the North-East wind blows, because at such
times it is more pure and neat than at others: others think it best when the
South Wind blows, At what time and how wine is to be tasted.
because this vvind stirs and moves the wine very much, and shows it in
deed to be the same that it is: but howsoever it is, it is not good to taste
the wine fasting; for before meat wine has but a dull and dead taste, neither
yet after that you have drunk of other wine, nor after you have got a full
belly. Furthermore the as^aier of wines must not have eaten any sour thing,
salt, bitter, or any other thing which may alter his taste, but must only have
eaten something without having digested it.

When our house-holder is disposed to pearce his wine, To give ven^ unto wine.
and that he means to draw it by a little and a little for his own
drinking, and leasurably without giving unto it any vent at all: he must
pearce it in the upper part of the vessel with a pearcer which is for the same
purpose, and put into the hole the quill of a feather which must be open on
both sides, and it must be as long as three fingers are broad: and that upon
the top of that end of the quill which shall be upward, he put some cotton,
covering the said cotton afterward with half a Walnut-shell, and upon it
again some ashes or wet lime laid: and when he has done all this, let him
set the tap in the vessel: and by this means he shall draw his wine easily,
and unto the lees without giving of it any vent.

CHAP. XVI.
Certain small things to be observed concerning Wine.
WHen the case so stands, as that the Vintage proves small, and that the
Lord of the farm, in respect of sparing, desires to make a small Wine,
wherewith he would pass over the requisite provision of his house in stead of
a better and stronger wine, he shall make it in this sort after the manner of
a rappe Vine. In the time of Vintage he shall cause to be taken a good
quantity of the knots of the grapes called Pinots and Sarminians, when they
are very ripe and have a hard skin, and of these knots alone and whole,
without bursting of them, he shall cause a vessel to be silled near full;
which he shall cause to be set down upon one of the ends, and afterward cause
it to be taken down again, and set upon a cantling, and so shall cause to be
turned into it two pints of good wine that is old and mighty. This being
done, he shall cause there to be water boiled, whereof when it is hot, he shall
go forward, and proceed to the filling up of the vessel, and so shall leave
it until his small wine have done boiling, and be become thoroughly cold (which
is sometimes sooner, sometimes later, according as the year proves hot or
cold) whereunto he may then put a ^ap to draw out of the same, and to begin to
drink thereof. And as often as he draws out thereof, he shall fill up his
vessel again with so much cold water as he drew forth of his wine, and so by
that means keep his vessel always full. And by this means his said small
wine will pass over the greatest part of the year in one state of goodness.
And when this small wine shall begin to grow too weak, he shall draw out
thereof a quart, and put in place thereof as much good old wine. And in
drinking of it he shall hold on (if so it seem good unto him) his putting in
of water, as before, except that it be found too weak to put in any more wine,
and then he shall make his worke-folkes to drink of it, filling it up still
daily with water, as before. The color of this small Wine is very pleasant
and fair.

The way to keep new wine that it shed not in the time of the boiling in the
vessel, Of the boiling over of the new wine, while it is in working.
is to put about the hole at which the new wine comes forth, a wreathe of
Pennie-royall, Calamint, or Organie: or else you shall anoint the edges of the
said hole within with Milk, or Cheese made of Cowes milk: or else you shall
cast into the vessel of Wine a morsel of Cheese, for it will keep in the
great heat of the new Wine.

To cause new Wine to be quickly purged, How new Wine is p^rged.
you must put into fifteen quarts of new Wine, half a pint of Vinegar, and
within three days it will be sined.

If you desire to have new Wine all the year, To have new Wine all the year
long.
you must take the new Wine which distilleth by it self from the grapes before
they be trodden, and put it the same day in a vessel pitched within and
without, in such sort, as that the vessel may be half full, and very well
stopped with plaster above: and thus the new Wine will continue a long time in
its sweetness: and yet it will be kept thus a great while longer, if you put
the vessel in a Well or River, covered with some little skin, and so leave it
there thirty days: for in not having boiled, it will continue always
sweet, and will be preserved by the heat of the pitch: or else it will be
good to bruise the grapes very gently, without much straining of them, and
the new Wine which shall issue out of them by that means, will keep new a
long time. Othersome do lay their vessel filled with sweet Wine in moist
gravel: some do pitch their vessels within and without, and so lay it only
out of the water: other some do cover it with the dross of the wine press,
and afterward to heap upon it moist gravel.

To know if there be any water either in new Wine or other, To know if there
be any Water in the Wine*
take a withered rush, and cast it into the Wine, and if there be any water
in it, it will draw thereof unto it: or else take raw and vvilde Pears, and
cutting them in the midst, make them clean: or, if you will, take Mulberries,
and cast them into the Wine; for if they swim aloft it is a neat Wine, but
and if they sink there is water therein. Some do anoint a reed or a piece of
wood, or paper, haie, or some other little bundle of berbes, or of straw, which
they dry, and put into the Wine, and after drawing them out, they take trial
and knowledge thereof; for if the Wine have water in it, drops thereof will
gather unto the oil. Others cast vnquencht lime into the Wine, and if there be
water amongst the Wine, the lime will dissolve and melt, whereas if the Wine be
neat, it will bind and fasten the lime together. Some take of the Wine and
pour it in a frying pan, wherein there is boiling oil, and if there be any
water it will make a great noise, and will boil ragiously: again, others cast
an egg into the Wine, for if the egg descend and sink down, then there is
water in the Wine, but if it do not descend, then there is no water in it.

If the year fall out rainie, The way to correcti^e overmuch wa^rishhesse of
Wine.
and that it happen that the grapes hanging yet upon the vine be much wet, or
if it fall out that after the time of gathering them, there fall some great
store of rain, so as that the grapes are watered and wet more a great deal
than is needful, they must of necessity be trodden, and then if you perceive
the new Wine coming of that vintage to have small strength in it, (which
knowledge you may come by, in tasting it after that the Wine shall be put up
in vessels, and shall first begin to boil and work in them) it must
presently be changed and drawn out into another vessel, for so all the
watrie parts that are in it, will stay behind in the bottom: for as much as
the Wine will yet stand charged, you shall put to every fifteen quarters of
Wine one pint and a half of salt. Others do boil the Wine upon the fire, so
long, as till the third part be consumed, and the rest they use four years
after.

If it should happen that the new Wine prepared in such sort as we have spoken
of, To recover the new Wine which begins to sour.
after long time should begin to sour and turn eager: to meet with this
mischief, you must cast to steep therein a pint of grapes boiled, till they
be full swollen, afterward straining them out into an eight part of new Wine, or
else cause the said new Wine to run through ^iuer gravel.

If you would have new Wine settled in four and twenty hours without boiling
of it, To cause new win^ to s^ttle quickly.
that so you might presently use it, fill a vessel with the small chips of
wood called in French Sayett^, which the inhabitants of Champagne do call
Buchettes: upon these chips cast your new Wine, and within the foresaid four
and twenty hours, you shall have a settled Wine without having cast any scum.
The inhabitants of Champagne, especially the towns men of Troy, use this
receipt not only to cause Wine to settle quickly, but also to make rap Wine
withal.

If it come to pass that Wine have water in it, and if we find it to be so, by
the means lately laid down: to separate then this water from this Wine, To
separate water from wine.
you must put into the vessel of Wine melted allo^e, and after stopping the
mouth of the said vessel* with a sponge drenched in oil, to turn the mouth
of the vessel so stopped downward, and so the water only will come forth: or
else cause a vessel of i^ie wood to be made, and put therein such quantity of
Wine as it will be able to hold, the water will come forth presently, and the
Wine will abide pure and neat.

You shall make an odoriferous sweet smelling Wine in this manner: To make an
od^riferous Wine.
take a few myrtle berries, dry and bray the same, and put them in a little
barrel of Wine, and letting them so rest for ten days, afterward open the
barrel and use the Wine. You shall work the like effect, if you take the
blossoms of the grapes (those especially which grow upon the shrubbie vines)
when the vine is in flower, and cast them into the vessel of Wine, the brims
of the Wine vessel being rubd over with the leaves of the pine and cypres
tree, and after cast into the Wine, for they make it very odoriferous: or more
easily, you must hang therein an orange, or a pome cytron which is not very
gross and th^cke, and prick it full of cloves, and that in such sort as it
may not touch the Wine, and after shut up the vessel close, or else infuse and
steep in Aqua vitae the simples or such matter as you have your Wine to smell
of, and afterward straining the same Aqua vitae, to put it into the vessel
amongst the Wine.

To make red Wine of white, and contrariwise of red Wine white: Take common
salt eight drams and put in in five pints of red wine: To make white wine red,
and red wine white*
or else pour into red wine some whay, with the ashes of the branches of the
white vine, and turn and roll it well for the space of forty days, then let
it rest, and it will become white wine. On the contrary, white wine will
become red, if you put into it the ashes of the branches of the red vine: or if
you cast into white wine the powder of honey boiled to the hardness of a
stone, and then made into powder, changing it from one vessel into another to
mingle them together: you may do this the more easily, if you cast into the
white wine the dried or green roots of all the sorts of ^orrell.

To make clarret wine, To make claret wine.
beat the vvhites of three eggs in a dish, until the froth arise, and add
thereto some white salt, and as much wine, beat them all together again
until such time as that they become very white, afterward fill up the platter
with wine, and put all into the vessel of wine and keep it.

You shall make a wine that will bear great store of water, Wine be^ring great
store of water.
if drying the roots of hollihockes you shave and scrape them, casting the said
shauings into the wine, which afterward you must roll and mingle together very
carefully.

Wine will have no flower, Wine that flowreth not.
if you put in the wine the flowers of the vine gathered and dried, or the
meal of fetches, changing the wine into another vessel, when the meal and
the flowers are settled down to the bottom.

You shall make the boiled wine called Cute, Boiled wine.
if you boil new wine that is good, lovely, and very sweet, until the third
part thereof be consumed, and then when it is grown cold, you must put it into
vessels for your use.

To make sweet wine that will so continue all the year, To continu^ wine
sweet all the year long.
you must gather your grapes whole, and let them lie spread three days in the
Sun, and tread them the fourth about noone. The sweet wine, that is to say,
the very liquor which shall run out into the fat, before the drossie substance
come under the press, must be taken away, be put by its self, and boiled,
and after it is boiled, put to nineteen quarters of it an ounce of Ireos or
corn flag well braied, and strain this wine without the lees, which being
done, it will continue sweet, firm and wholesome for the body.

To make wine like unto Greekish wine, Greekish wine*
you must gather from the vines early grapes very ripe, and those you shall
dry in the Sun three days, and tread them out in the fourth, and the wine
thus made you shall put in a vessel, having care to cause it to purge and cast
out the filth within it, as also its lees, at such time as it shall boil. And
the fifth day after that it shall be purged, you shall put into it two pounds of
reboiled salt, or very small beaten salt, or at the least one pound in
eighteen quartes and a half of wine.

To make a vveake and feebie wine to become an excellent good wine: take a
handful of the leaves of Tota bona, and a handful of fennel and smallage
seed, and cast them into the vessel.

To make good household wine, Good household wine.
you must cast how much the tenth part of the wine comes to which you have
drawn or made in one day, and to cast as much spring water upon the dross,
out of which the said wine was gathered and pressed: with this you must mingle
the scum taken off from the wine in the boiling of seething of it, as also the
lees remaining in the bottom of the treading fat, which shall be lee lie and
steep in the same a whole night: the day following, you must tread them all
together with your feet, and afterward press them out: then you must put that
which shall come forth into vessels, and stop it up when it has boiled and
purged.

To cause troubled wines and such as are full of lees to settle, To cause
troubled wine to settle.
pour into thirty quarters of wine, half a pint of the lees of oil boiled
till the third part be wasted, and the wines will settle by and by and return
unto their former estate: or else, which is better and more easy, cast into
the wine vessel the whites of six or seven eggs, and stir them together very
well with a stick.

You may take away the force and strength of wine, The taking away of the
strength of the wine.
if you put into it some juice of coleworts, which you shall have bruised
before hand, and thereupon drawn out the juice.

To drink great store of Wine and not to be drunk, To drink much wine and
yet not to be drunk.
you must eat of the roasted lungs of a goat: or otherwise, eat six or seven
bitter almonds fasting: or otherwise, eat raw coleworts before you drink, and
you shall not become drunk. Some say that a great drinker shall never become
drunk, if he wear a wreath of Iua moscata about his head: or, if at his first
draught he repeat this vearse of Homers, Jupiter his alta sonuit clementer ab
Ida, which is to say, Jupiter was heard speaking in a soft and gentle manner
from the high mount of Ida.

To provoke hatred of Wine, To hate wine.
you must take the thin liquor which droppeth from the branches after they be
cut, and put it in the drunken man's glass against such time as he shall
drink, but so as that he know not any thing of its; and thereupon his
appetite and lust to drink Wine will depart quite away from him: or else,
cause him to drink with white wine the blossoms of rye, gathered at such time
as the rye bloometh: or else, take three or four e^les alive, and let them lie
in wine till they die, and afterward cause this wine to be drunk off by such
as are given to be drunk: or else, take a green frog, which is ordinarily
found in fre^h springs, and let the same lie in wine till she die: otherwise,
mark diligently where the owl haunteth, that so you may get some of her eggs,
fry them, and give them to the drunken gallant to eat.

To make drunken men to become sober, To make them which are drunk sober.
you must make them eat colewoorts and some manner of confections made of
honey: or else drink great draughts of vinegar.

To be the means that wine shall not become strong, To cause wine that it shall
not become strong.
take a piece of salt lord, and tie it to the hole by which you turn up your
wine into the vessel, with so strong a thread as may bear up the lard, which
lard must hang in such manner, as that it may but touch the uppermost part of
the wine: and this will keep the wine from becoming strong, through his
fatness and saltness, which hinder the separating and refining of the same,
which is the thing that gives strength unto the wine.

To cause new wine to become old by and by, To make old wine of n^w.
take bitter almonds and melilot, of each an ounce, of licorice three ounces,
of the flowers of lauander as much, of alo^s hepaticke two ounces, bray them
all and tie them together in a linen cloth, and so sink them in the wine.

You shall find out and know whether the wine will keep long or not, Wine
that will keep long.
after this manner: when the wine shall be turned up, you must, within a
certain time after, change it into another vessel, leaving the lees behind in
the first vessel, which must be very well stopped on every side, and then
afterward you must diligently try out and see, whether the lees do change and
begin to get any ill smell or no, or whether they breed any gnats, or such
other little wild beasts, and if you perceive that nothing of all these
falls out, then you need not fear the turning of your wine: but if it fall
out otherwise, you may assure your self, that such wine is apt to corrupt and
become naught. Others do put down to the bottom of the vessel and elder
pipe, or some other of such like wood, as may be made hollow, through which
they take the sent of lees, and so are thoroughly certified how they smell, and
according as they find the lees to be conditioned, so they judge of the state
of the wine. Some take upon them to foretell by the couers of vessels, wherein
if they find and perceive the savor of wine, they by and by judge the wine to
be good: but if in them they find the savor of water, they make no great
reckoning of any such wine. Others judge them by the savor and relish of the
wine, which if they find to be sharp in the beginning* they hope well of the
goodness thereof: but and if they taste flat and soft, then they fear the
contrary: if when the wine is put into the vessels, it be fat and glewie, it
is a good sign: but if it be void of all strength, it will easily be turned.

To keep wine at all times, The keeping of wine.
cast of the powder of roch allome powdered very finely into the vessel,
whereinto you shall turn your new wine: or the powder of salt finely powdered:
or pebble stones, and little flints, taken out of some brook: or aqua vitae:
or else hang in the vessel by the bung, a glass violl full of quick silver, but
very well and close stopped every where, and let it lower and lower as the wine
shall sink lower and lower, so that the violl may hang within the wine
continually: or else power common oil upon it.

CHAP. XVII.
A discourse of certain wines that serve for the use of Physic.
AS we have said in the second Book, To make medicinable wines.
that the provident huswife must sow and plant upon some bed in her Kitchen
garden certain medicinable herbs: in like manner it will not be amiss, that
the farmer or his wife should yearly, in Vintage time, make and compound wines
for the necessities that may grow by reason of diseases happening amongst their
family. Wherefore, to the end we may not forget any thing which may fall out
to be necessary for the better keeping of our Country Farm, we would not
omit the manner of compounding such wines: which notwithstanding the good wife
must not use or give others counsel to use hand over head, at hap hazard* and
without good reason: for it is not good to use them where there is an ague,
neither yet till forty days past after that they be made. Their vessels must
be always kept close shut, for else they will grow sour, or else spend
themselves very easily: and after that it is perceived by the taste, that they
retain the relish of the simples infused, it will be good to take the said
simples out of the vessels.

To make wine of Roses: take dry Roses of the mountains, Rose-wine.
Annise, and Honey, of every one alike, and a little Saffron, bind them
together, and put them in the wine: this wine is very good for the weakness
of the stomach, and for pleurisies.

For to make wine of Wormwood: take Sea Wormwood, Wormewood-wine.
or for want thereof, common Wormwood, especially that which has the small
stalks and short leaves, about eight drams; stamp them, and bind them in a
cloth which is not ouer-thicke wouen, and so cast it into the vessel,
afterward pour new wine in upon it, and that after such a proportion, as that
for every three pints of wine there may be an ounce of Wormwood, and so to
hold on till the vessels be full, leaving a vent open, that so it may not fall
a boiling again. The use of this wine is good for the pain of the stomach
and liver, and to kill such worms as are in the guts.

To make wine of Horehound that is good for the cough in the Vintage time, Wine
of Horehound.
you must gather of the crops and tender stalks of Horehound, growing
especially in such places as are lean and untilled, and afterward cause them
to be dried in the Sun, and made up into bundles, tying them together with a
rush sinking them in the vessel: in sixty five quarts of new wine, you must
put eight pound of Horehound to boil therewith, after that the Horehound shall
be taken out, and the wine stopped up very diligently.

The wine of Annise and Dill, Wine of Annise, Dill, Pears, Bays, Asarum
bacchar, and Sage.
against the difficulty of urine, the wine of Pears against the flux of the
belly: the wine of Bays against the ach of the belly and wringings in the
same: the wine of Asarum bacchar, against the Iaundise, Dropsy, and tertian
ague: the wine of Sage against the pains and weakness of the sinews, and
they are made as the wine of Wormwood.

For to make wine of Thyme: you must gather the Thyme wine it is in flower,
Wine of Thyme.
and drying it, stamp it and put thereof the quantity of a twelfth part in a
vessel of thirty quarts of white wine.

To make wine of Betonie: take Betonie the leaves and seed about one pound,
Betonie wine.
put them in twenty quarts of new wine: when seven months are past, change
the wine into a new vessel.

For to make wine of Hysope: take the leaves of Hysope well pouned, Hysope wine.
make them fast in a very fine cloth, and cast them into twenty quarts of new
wine: this wine is good against the diseases of the lungs, an old cough, and
shortness of breath.

Wine of Pomegranates is made of Pomegranates that are scarce ripe, Wine of
pomegranats, quintes, mulberries, and services.
being thoroughly bruised, and put in a vessel in three quarts of thick red
Wine, to use against the flux of the belly: to the same end serves the Wine
made of services, mulberries and quinces. You may see a large discourse of
Wines in the fifth Book of Dioscorides.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of such faults and accidents as happen to Wine.
WIne is not exempt from loss and inconueniencies any more than all other
things which are contained under the cope of Heaven, How Wines must be ordered
in cellers or rooms under ground.
therefore to meet with all the inconueniencies which may happen to Wine, you
must carefully and often look unto the Wine-vessell: notwithstanding, from the
time that the said vessels are covered and stopped up, unto the Spring
Equinoctial, it will be sufficient to fill up and handle the Wine once every
six and twenty days, but after this time, twice in the said space: and if the
Wine begin to flower, then you must look to it more often, least the flower
thereof should fall to the bottom and spoil the Wine. Look by how much the
heat is the greater, by so much you must visit and look to your Wines the
ofter, and ever keep it with filling of it up, refreshing and giving of it
vent, for so long as it holds cold, it will remain and continue sound and
entire.

If your Wine should begin to wax sour, Against the eagerness or sowrenesse
of Wines.
you must put in the bottom of the vessel a pot full of water well stopped, and
thereupon also, stopping the vessel, leave therein some small hole to vent at,
the third day after, you must draw out the pot, and you shall find the water
therein stinking, but the wine sound and neat.

Wines are most subject to turn, At what time Wine is most apt to turn and
corrupt.
especially about the eleventh day of June, being the Summers solstice: and the
time when the vine flowreth, somewhat before the dog days enter through the
great change of heat and cold, and generally when the Southern wind blows,
whether it be in Summer or Winter: as also in time of great rain, of great
winds, earthquakes, or mighty thunders, and whenas vines or roses begin to
flower: to keep them from turning, you must put into them when they boil up
and work, boiled salt, or else the seed of smallage, barley bran, and the
leaves of the bay tree, or ashes of the branches of the vine, with fennel
seed brayed.

Others do appoint these remedies: take the roots of mugwort, and cinquefoile,
make them in powder, and when the Wine shall have boiled, put them in, and it
will not turn nor change. Likewise if you lay your vessels in vaulted
cellars, or if you put in them a plate of iron or flint stones, or leven made
of rye paste, or a covering upon the vessel, you keep your Wine from all
inconueniencies that might happen unto it by thunder and lightning.

Sweet almonds cast into red Wine, keep it from turning: the ashes of
oake-wood cast into the Wine do the like: the meal of the white fetch does
save the Wine from turning, and keeps it in his soundness: allom^ broken in
pieces does the like: as also brimsone, lime, sand and plaster.

If it happen that the Wine be turned, To help the ^ine that is turned.
you must cast into the vessel a good quantity of beaten pepper; and which is
better, change its vessel: take cetaine whites of eggs, which after that you
have beaten them very well a long time, and taken off the froth rising upon
them, cast them into the vessel and roll it: or else, take twelve kernels of
old wal-nuts, draw a thread through them, roast them under the ashes, and whiles
they are yet hot, hang them in the vessel within the Wine, and leave them there
so long as until you see the Wine to have recovered his former color.

If the Wine be become troubled, For troubled Wine.
it will quickly grow clear and become fined again, with the kernel of a
pine apple, or of peaches, or with the whites of eggs and a little salt:
otherwise, take half a pound of roch allome, and as much sugar, make a very
small powder thereof and cast it into the vessel.

If it appear and show manifest unto you that your Wine would mar and
spoil, To help Wine the begins to wax away and di^.
take this course with it: If it be claret Wine, take the yelke of an egg,
and if it be white, take only the white of an egg, putting thereto only
three ounces of clear bright stones taken out of some swift running river,
make them into powder with two ounces of salt poudred very small, and mingled
all together: after that, put the Wine into another vessel that is neat and
clean, and not tainted with any manner of smell before hand: which done, cast
into the same all the foresaid composition, and mingle it with the Wine five or
six times a day, until three or four days be past: remember and mark to
do this same before such time as the Wine be all together marred; for when it
is once thoroughly corrupted and marred, this composition will serve you to no
end, and the labor and time is but lost that you bestow about it.

To restore again into his former and sound estate, the Wine that is grown
fat, fustie, and has taken wind: cast into the vessel cowes^milke somewhat
salted: some cast thereinto allome, lime, and brimstone, but not without their
great hurt that shall drink the same: but indeed it would do better, if they
would put into it some Juniper berries and Ireos roots.

If that your Wine do continue to hold and still retain any ill quality by
its having taken wind, you must make it loose the same, by making two or three
towers in the vessels, and afterward setting it again upon his cantling, and
then to fill it up.

To take away the fustie smell of wine, To take away the fustie smell of Wine.
you must take medlers ripened upon the straw, and opening them in four
quarters, tie them with a small thread, and thereby make them fast unto the
bunghole of the vessel, in such sort as that they may hang all covered over in
the Wine: having left them thus for the space of a month, then take them out,
and by this means you shall likewise take away the ill smell of your Wine; or
else take bay berries, and boiling them in Wine, cast the same afterward into
the said vessel: otherwise, make a bag and fill it with sage, putting it in
the vessel, but not laying it in the Wine: To help the sowrenesse of Wine.
the same remedy serves to recover Wine that is become sour; if you had not
rather choose for the helping of your Wine to cast into it some leeke seed.

To keep Wines from sowring, To keep the Wine from sowring.
you must place the vessel in a cold place, very full and well stopped, so as
they may not have any breathing place: or else if you want the benefit of a
cold place, and that you are forced to set it in a place that is hot: or else
if the Wine fail through having been a long time pierced: to keep it from
falling quit sour, you must hang at a small coard a great piece of larde well
wrapped in a linen cloth, and let it down by the bung-hole into the midst of
the Wine: and as the Wine shall grow lower and lower, so you must still let
lower the lard, that so it may always continue in the midst. In the mean
time, the vessel must be continually well covered and stopped: and by how much
the piece of lard shall be the greater, so much the better will it keep the
Wine from sowring. Some advice and give counsel for the same purpose to put
into the vessel oil olive, Oil olive a preuenter of the the sowrenesse of
Wine.
in such quantity as that it may only cover the uppermost face of the Wine:
and when the Wine is all drawn out, the oil may easily be separate from the
lees, and ga^dered into a vessel by it self.

To take away the waterishnesse and overmuch moisture of Wine. For wattrish
Wine.
you must put into the vessel the leaves of the pomegranete tree.

If any beast be fallen into the vessel of Wine, Against venime or venomous
beasts falling into Wine.
and dead therein, as an adder, rat, or mouse, to soon as the dead body is
found, you must burn it, and cast the cole ashes into the vessel whereinto it
had fallen before, and stir it about with a wooden stick: others give counsel
to put hot bread into the Wine, or any iron ring, and then the venime will
vanish and depart.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the manner of making Vinegar.
Vinegar comes through the defect of wine, Vinegar is a ^ault of wine.
as we may understand by that which is gone before: the riotousnesse and
pleasure of men, has been the cause that Vinegar came ever in request, not
only for sauces, but also for many other uses: It shall not therefore be
thought unreasonable to use a word or two about making of Vinegar.

The most common way to make Vinegar is on this sort: They use to take good
wine, and therewithal to ^ill the vessel to the half, leaving it vnstopt and
set in a hot place, as in some corn loft, or in some gutter betwixt the tiles.

If you desire to make Vinegar in have, you must cast into your wine, salt,
pepper, and sour leven mingled together: and yet to make it the more hastly,
you must heat red hot some stone, tile, or gad of steel, and put it all hot
into the wine, or else the mouth of the vessel must stand always open, or
else the vessel must be set in the Sun three or four days* and
therewithal a little salt put in the vessel: or else fill a new ear^hen pot
that is not half baked with wine, and stop it well, afterward put it in a
kettle full of boiled water upon the fire, and letting it there remain a long
time in the boiling water, it will grow sour; or else put into the wine a
beete root stamped, or a radish root, Rad^sh and beete roots ma^e vinegar.
or medlars, ceruises or horns, mulberries, unripe sloes, or a shiue of barley
bread new baked: or else you must take of the blossoms of the ceruise tree in
there season, and drying them in the Sun after the manner of rose-leaues,
either in a glass vessel, or in one of black earth, fill up the same vessel
with pure Vinegar or Wine, and so set it forth again into the Sun or in the
chimny end to the heat of the fire, and in a short time it will become strong
and very sharp Vinegar: but if you would restore it again to his former state
of wine, then you must cast, of colewort roots into it. The roots of cale-words
make Vinegar to ^u^ne again into wine.


CHAP. XX.
Of some observations and instructions concerning Vinegar.
TO make strong vinegar, Strong Vinegar.
take the fruit of the cornell tree, when it begins to grow red, and of
bramble berries, such as grow in the fields, when they are half ripe, dry
them, make them into powder, and with a little strong Vinegar, you shall make
little pretty balls, which you shall dry in the Sun, afterward you must
take wine, and heat it, and when it is hot put into it this composition, and
it will be turned very speedily into very strong Vinegar.

To make Vinegar with corrupted wine: take a rotten and corrupt wine and boil
it, To make Vinegar o^ marr^d wine.
taking away all the scum that rises in the boiling thereof, thus let it
continue upon the fire till it be boiled away one third part, then put it into
a vessel wherein has bin Vinegar, putting thereto some cheruile, cover the
vessel in such sort, that there get no air into it, and in a short time it
will prove good and strong Vinegar.

To make dry Vinegar Dri^ Vinegar.
to carry whither a man lists, take of wild cherries when they begin to be
ripe (and yet the fruit of the cornell tree is better) of mulberies when they
be red, and unripe grapes that are very thick, and of wild a corns before
they be ripe, stamped all together, then take of the best Vinegar you can
find, and mingle them all together, make up the mass into small loaves,
setting them to dry in the Sun: and when you would make Vinegar, temper some
of these small loaves in wine, and you shall have very good Vinegar. Otherwise,
take the unripe juice of corn that is very green, and stamp the same putting
Vinegar thereto, and thereof make a past, whereof you shall make little loaves
to be dried in the Sun, and when you would have Vinegar, temper of these
loaves in so much wine as you shall see sufficient, and you shall have very
good Vinegar.

To make rose-vineger, Rose Vinegar.
take good white Vinegar, and put therein red roses, either new or dried,
keeping them many days in the vessel, and afterward taking them out, put them
in another glass, and so keep them in a cool place: after the same manner
you may make Vinegar of elder-tree flowers.

To make Vinegar without wine, put into a vessel soft and dainty peaches, To
make vinegar without wine.
and upon them pearched barley, letting them putrify all a whole day, then
strain them and use the liquor: or else take old figs and burnt barley,
together with the inner parts of orenges, put all these into a vessel, and
stir them up very well and often, and whenas they are become putrified and
resolved, strain them out and use the liquor.

To make sweet Vinegar, Sweet vinegar.
take five pints of strong Vinegar, and with as much new wine reserved upon the
treading out of the grapes, add some quantity of pitch, and and put
altogether in a vessel which you must stop very carefully: and after that all
these have continued together for the space of some thirty days, you may use
thereof for Vinegar: otherwise, take a vessel of new wine, and mingle it with
two vessels of Vinegar, and boil them together till the third part be
consumed. Some do add three vessels of spring water unto two of new wine and
one of Vinegar, boiling them all together until the third part be consumed.

To make mighty strong Vinegar, Mighty strong vinegar.
dry the gross of grapes two whole days, then put it in new wine, put
thereto some of the unripe juice of corn, and you shall make a strong Vinegar,
whereof you may have the use within seven days after: or otherwise, put
pellitorie of Spain into Vinegar and it will make it strong. Furthermore, if
you boil the fourth or fifth part of Vinegar upon the fire, and put it unto
that which is before prescribed, putting it after all this in the Sun some
eight days, you shall have a pleasant and strong vinegar. The roots of
couch-grasse when they are old, boiled grapes, the leaves of the wild pear
tree stamped, the roots of brambles and whay, the quick coals of burned
acornes, and boiled ciche pease and hot tiles, even every one of these by
themselves being cast into Vinegar do make the same strong.

Pepper vinegar Pepper vinegar
is made by casting into vinegar or hanging therein whole pepper made up in a
linen cloth, for the space of eight days,

You shall know if there be any water in the vinegar, Water in vinegar.
if you put into it any Salnitrum, for then if it swell up as though it would
boil, you may boldly say that there is water in it.

To make vinegar good to help digestion, and for your health, take eight drams
of the sea onion, and two pints of vinegar, put them together into a vessel,
and with them as much of pepper, mints, and juniper berries, then use it
afterward.

To make vinegar of sea onions, Vinegar of sea onions.
you must put ten such onions salted into fifty quartes of sweet new wine,
and four pints and a half of strong vinegar, and if it be not sharp enough,
then twice so much, in a pot holding fifty four quarts, and boil them till
the fourth part be consumed: or if the wine be sweet, it must be boiled to
the spending of the third part, but such wine may be of his own distilling out
of the grapes before they be trodden and very clear: otherwise, put into a
vessel thirty pints of strong vinegar, wherein let steep for the space of
twelve days, the inward part of a white sea onion which has been in the
Sun thirty days: after that, take the vinegar and let it settle and abide
in some place where you will to use it afterward. Dioscorides in his one and
twentieth chapter of his fourth book discribeth another manner of it.

It is to observed and noted that all sorts of vinegar are best helped to keep
their tartness, by putting into their vessels at the bung hole a stick of red
withie.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the manner of making of Veriuice.
THe most common manner of making of Veriuice in this country, is to gather
the green grapes from of the vine frames, or the grapes which are not yet
ripe, and are left upon the vines after vintage, and having gathered them, to
tread and press them afterward, after the manner of ripe grapes, putting the
liquor or juice thereof into vessels, and salting the same by and by, after
that it has purged out all its scum and filth, by boiling as new wine does. In
the Northern countries they do also make Veriuice of crabs mingling a little
salt therewithal. Some make a dry Veriuice after this manner: they take the
greenest that they can get, pressing the juice thereout, which afterward they
boil in a brazen vessel until it become thick, and as it were congealed,
then they dry it in the Sun, and keep it for their use: othersome boil it
not at all, but dry it in the Sun, till it come to the thickness of honey.

To make your Veriuice look more green, and to be better, and to prevent that
it may not turn and become mouldie or hoarie, you must the day after it is
turned up into its vessel, pluck a bunch or two of black grapes, and cast
them into the vessel at the bung-hole, even in whole clusters, and then to
salt it after that it has been boiled.

CHAP. XXII.
Containing certain discourses by the way of invention, nature, faculties,
differences, and necessity of Wine.
AS we have in the former book at large entreated of bread, and of the
differences thereof, according to the use wherein it is employed, namely, the
nourishment of man's body; so now after the manner of ordering and husbanding
of the vine, and so of the fruit which comes of such husbanding thereof,
which is Wine, it shall not seem unreasonable, if summarily, we discourse and
stand upon the necessity, nature, faculties, and differences of Wine, whereof
we make so great account ordinarily in our drinking thereof.

And to the end that we may now come to the matter: The necessity of drink.
Seeing not only the substance of man's body, but of all other living creatures
is subject, (through vital heat continually working in them) unto a
perpetual wast, and expending of it self: nature being provident over her
own works, has given unto and put in all sorts of living creatures, an
incredible desire of eating and drinking, to the end that this waste and loss
of substance might be repaired and restored by the well bounded increase
coming of eating and drinking; for otherwise, natural heat destitute of such
her food and nourishment, would quickly be choked and quenched. Now the
substance of every living body is threefold: the first is, and consists of
spirits: the second of humors: the third of solid parts: all which three
substances may possibly be repaired by a solid substance, if so be that such
solid nourishment could easily be digested and distributed, throughout the
whole habit and universal mass of the body. But seeing that such is the
solidnesse, hardness, and grosenesse thereof, as that it cannot, it was
needful that it should be accompanied with some floting and fluide liquor,
which might stand in steed of a wagon or chariot to conueigh and carry it up
and down the body. Join also thereunto, that this fluent liquor has without
comparison a greater power than the solid nourishment to let and hinder the
drying up of the solid parts, and to temper all such heat, as otherwise, upon
every light motion, might at every moment offend and hurt them. This loss
and continual expense of this threefold substance (which in the end does first
bring old age; and afterward death) does grow through that jar and
disagreement which is in the four elements, vvhereupon the whole body is
compounded and framed: which elements also, notwithstanding that they may
seem united and joined together in a certain kind of harmony, consent,
amity, and inviolable bond, yet by reason of secret rancour and mutual
disagreement happening through their contrary qualities, they do so war one
upon another, as that by little and little they do procure the ruin,
dissolution, and utter overthrow of that body which before they had consented
to frame and compose. Physicians over and besides this, do acknowledge another
cause of this expense of nature, and bringing in of old age, and lastly death,
which is fore-slowed and kept off by eating and drinking; and that is natural
heat, which feeds upon the radical moisture, seated in the substance of the
solid parts: which moisture, the sooner that it is dried up, wasted, and
consumed by the foresaid heat, so much the shorter is the course of life. But
this radical moisture, and the continual loss of spirits, it repaired by the
addition of eating and drinking, and so the life drawn forth to a longer
term. Wherefore, Nature being careful of the preservation and long
continuance of the bodies of living creatures, which otherwise, for the
occasions above named, would grow old and perish in a few hours, takes not
any other course for the same but by eating and drinking, which are the two
means to sustain and preserve (so much as is possible) the lives of all
living things. And as for eating, let us leave off to have any thing to do
with it, as having spoken thereof in the former book, and let us come to the
second, which is drinking.

The common drink of all living creatures is water.
OLd and ancient Histories do sufficiently testify, that water was the first
drink which men used generally throughout the world, and wherewith they
contented themselves a long time, to use it only for the quenching of their
thirst: but afterward, when voluptuousness seized upon men's appetite, they
invented and set before them diverse sorts of drinks. Wherefore having rejected
water as a tastlesse and unsavory thing, they have in place thereof (in all
such Coasts and Countries as where the heat of the Sun might bring forth and
lead along the grape unto his full ripeness) chosen Wine for the most
excellent and delightsome drink of all others: as in other cold Countries, and
such whereas the Vine could not grow, they have either still continued their
drinking of water, or fetched and procured wine from other places, or else
have prepared some other kind of drink coming near in some measure unto
wine, which by the delicateness thereof might rejoice the heart, and
gratify the taste. Whereupon, some in stead of water have taken up the use of
Wine, and others of Beer and Ale: some of Cider and Perrie, and others, of all
sorts: some of honied water, or water sweetened with sugar: and others, of
other drinks pressed and strained out from fruits, or the decoctions of
roots. All France, Italy, Sicilie, Spain, and all other Countries which are
far off from the North, do content themselves with wine, the Nation of the
Turks excepted: who, being incensed either by the superstition of Mahumet, or
stirred up thereunto by the ancient custom of Turks, do utterly abhor wine,
and use in stead thereof honied water. England, Scotland, Dalmatia, Polonia,
Sarmatia, and other Northren Countries do use partly wine, as procuring the
same from other places, and partly Beer, in such sort, as that by how much the
Countries are the colder, by so much the more they are given and addicted to
wine and drunkenness: witness hereof is not only Germany, but also
Frizeland, Dalmatia, and Flanders, the inhabitants of which countries do not
only strive who shall drink most, and extol drunkenness unto the skies, but
also do scoff at sobriety, and so highly disdain such people as strive to
live soberly and temperately, as that they think them the most unworthy of
their alliance and company. And yet (notwithstanding that so many sorts of
drinks be grown in request in stead of water in many countries) wine seems
to me to bear the bell, as being the most pleasant, delightsome, and excellent
drink that can be found or thought upon.

What is meant by wines.
THe juice then of the grape, which either runs from the grape being full
ripe, or is pressed out with feet, or the press, before it be boiled, is
called new or sweet wine, but after that it has boiled, and thereby cast forth
all his scumme and dregs, it is properly called wine. Wherefore this boiling
or working, by which in fine it is fined and settled from all his excrements, is
not any manner of putrefaction, but rather an effect of natural heat engendered
and naturally rooted in the same: for whereas the juice newly drawn out of the
grape, does contain in it many excrements, and those diverse in nature, which
the natural heat thereof cannot (without great strife, enforcement, and
contending) concoct and overcome: it is necessary, that in this contention it
should work out a heat, boiling, and very great perturbation, by reason of
the struglings of the two contrary heats: that is to say, the natural, which
does concoct the crude and raw matter of the new wine, and by that means
separateth the excrementous parts from it: and on the other side, the strange
and accidental heat which is kindled and raised in the crude and raw parts of
the new wine, which encountering the natural heat no otherwise than is done in
the crises of sharp sicknesses, at such time as natural heat does concoct the
crude and raw matter of the disease, and attempteth to make separation of the
noisome and annoying matter, many disturbances, shakings, heats, and other
grievous symptoms do fiercely assail the party, until such time as
natural heat (having overcome) proceed to the separating of the good and
natural humors from the excrementous ones, and expel those which were the
cause of the malady. And even so it falls out in the boiling or working of
new wines, wherein the accidental heat is overcome by the heat of nature,
without any work of putrifacation: the heterogene and unnatural matter being
separated from the homogene and natural: the unprofitable and excrementous
humor consumed, and the flatulent or windy parts thereof discussed: and to be
brief, all the profitable juice is in such sort concocted and digested, as
that that which before was crude, flatulent, and hard to be digested, is become
gentle, tractable, favorable, and very agreeable for men's use, as though it
were quite changed and altered from his nature. Of new pressed wine is made the
wine called Cute, in Latin Sapa: Sapa.
and it is by boiling the new pressed wine so long, as till that there remain
but one of three parts. Of new pressed wine is also made another Cute, called
of the Latins Defrutum: Defrutum.
and this is by boiling of the new wine only so long, as till the half part
be consumed, and the rest become of the thickness of honey. Sometimes there is
a wine made called Passum, Passum.
and it is when the grapes have endured the heat a long time upon the Vine.

The inuenters and first finders out of wine.
SVch as have written in Hebrew, as also the Scripture it self, does testify,
that Noe Noe.
was the first author of wine. Nicander Colophonius says in his verses, that
wine was called (...) in Greek, Why wine is called (...) in Greek.
of the name of a man which was called Oenus, and first pressed out the new
liquor out of the grape into his drinking cup. Others write, that Icarus Icarus.
was the first inuenter thereof: and that very shortly after his invention he
had condign punishment therefore, as being slain of the dressers of his
vineyards, they being drunk. Whereupon Propertius says, O Icarus, th'Athenian
clown
Deservedly thy life throws down.
Athenaeus says, That the Vine was first found near unto the Mount Etna, and
that a dog passing that way, plucked up a little branch of a Vine tree out of
the earth, and that Oresteus, son of Deucalion, which reigned in that
Country, caused the same branch to be planted again, vvhereout there sprang
many shoots of Vines, which he called Oenus, of the name of the dog which
had plucked the same branch out of the ground: vvhereupon also the ancient
Greeks called Vines Oenas. The Latins say, That the Vine is called Vitis,
quasi vita, because that wine does quickly restore the vital spirits being
wasted and spent, and does comfort, repair, increase, and strengthen the
natural heat that is weakened, which is the principal instrument of life,
insomuch, as that by the use of wine it is made more freely disposed than it
was before to perform all manner of actions requisite for the life of man. Old
Writers are not of one mind concerning the first original and invention of the
Vine, for every one of them almost has his several opinion. But as
concerning my self, I think that the Vine was brought forth of the earth, as
other grass, hea^bes, and trees were from the beginning of the world, and that
it brought forth grapes of it self without any tilling or dressing, and those
like unto them which the wild Vine (called of us Labrusca) does now bring
forth, but that the first fathers did not so quickly know the use and profit of
the Vine. For in America, Florida, and the new-^ound Countries, there are great
store of Vines growing plentifully, and in great abundance, without any art or
industry of men, although the use of wine be as yet unknown to the
inhabitants of those Countries. Plato in his C^atylus says, That wine is
called in Greek (...) quasi (...), that is to say, judgment,
consideratenesse, and aduisednesse, because it furnishes the intellectual
part with judgment and advise, because by his quickness it restores the
spirits, whereby it strengthens the mind as well as the body, as Mnestheus
has very well reported of it. Some likewise say, That the Greeks call (...)
quasi (...), that is to say, profit and utility, because it is infinitely
profitable. Why it is called Vinum.
The Latins call it Vinum ^ vi, by reason of the violence it offers to the
spirit of man, when it is taken out of measure. The cause likewise why the old
Writers called it Temetum, was because the immoderate use thereof holds
captive and corrupts the mind, Why Temetum.
that is to say, the understanding. We will define wine to be a juice extracted
and pressed out of ripe grapes, purified and fined, contained in vessels sit
for the receiving of the same, convenient and agreeable unto man's life, and
therefore the liquors of the grape newly pressed out, is not to be called wine,
because it is not fined, The definition of wine.
neither yet does veriuice deserve the name of wine, because it is pressed out
of grapes as yet not ripe.

The temperature of Wine, and of the liquor newly pressed out of the grapes.
THe new pressed juice of the grape is of temperature hot in the first degree,
but wine is hot in the second degree, yea in the third, if it be old: it is
likewise of dryness proportionable to his heat. It is true, that according to
the regions, grounds, inclination, and disposition of the year, and such other
differences, which do alter and change his temperature very much, it falls
out to be sometimes more, sometimes less, hot. The wines that Spain, Italy,
Langu^doc, the Country of Narbone in France, Gascoigne, and other hot
Countries do bring forth, prove hot and dry in the end of the second, yea in
the beginning of the third degree, especially when the constitution of the
year falls out to be hot and dry, and when they are of a middle age. But
such wines as grow in grounds about Paris, or other Countries which draw
toward the Western or Northern quarter, do scarcely fall out to prove hot in
the beginning of the second degree, no not in a hot and dry year, and though
they be grown to a middle age, as not having passed the age of the first
year. For when the years fall out cold and moist, all these kinds of wines
for the most part growing in these Countries, become green and raw, and for
the same cause called green wines, and those so weak, that hardly may they be
judged to be hot in the first degree, and the year expired and gone about,
their heat being likewise expired and spent, they either become altogether
sower, or having lost their smell and taste prove to be naught and corrupted.
Old wines are hotes than the new.
Whereupon that which the old writers have delivered concerning the
temperatures and qualities of old Wines cannot be proved true of such Wines as
grow in these countries, wherein the greatest part of French Wines within three
or six months, or at the furthest by the end of the year, grow to the ^ull
top and perfection of their goodness: whereas on the contrary, such as grow
in hot countries, and become themselves more hot, will not be at the best,
before the fifth, sixth, yea before the tenth year; which if it be so, you
must think that the sinews and other senses of the body, do receive most
harm by old Wines which grow in hot and dry countries: and that they are the
less offended and hurt of the old Wines which grow in this our French soil
which is more cold. In this country new Wine being sufficiently boiled up and
fined, as it is more pleasant to the taste, New wine (...) in France.
so it is more hot, clean contrary to that which grows in hot countries.
Dioscorides writes that old wine, for as much as it is hotter, does hurt them
very much which feel some weakness in some of their inward parts; but we
cannot say the like of our wine when it is old, but rather of our wine when
it is new, for the same reasons. Wherefore it follows, that the opinion of
Dioscorides and diverse other Physicians, touching the heat and temperature of
old wines, is to be understood of vvines that grow in countries that are more
hot, and not of such vvines as (if they be dainty and delicate vvines) will
attain the height of their goodness, and sum of their perfection in six or
eight months, or at the furthest by the end of the year, in such sort, as
that the same being ended, they wax sower: yea, if they be right noble vvines,
they be well forward upon and toward their perfection in the beginning of the
second year, or somewhat after. The force and natural heat of the dilicatest
French vvines is gone after the first year is once past: but in a noble wine
it fades and falls away by little and little, not before the second year be
past. The vvines of Gascoigne and Aniou, growing in a hot and dry season, draw
very near unto the nature and temperature of the vvines, whereof old vvriters
have spoken: because the greatest part of them may be kept unto the the third
year. The vvines of Orleance are at the best the second year, and it stays
with them to the end, but when the second year ends, they begin to loose
their goodness.

Now if the case stand thus in hot countries, it is better to abstain from old
vvines, than from new which are altogether fined: for their old vvines do heat
out of measure; but the new vvines stir not up any heat that may molest and
trouble, and yet they also be very hurtful, because they digest very hardly,
and beget many obstructions. Wherefore in countries that are more hot, new
vvines may be drunk without any prejudice to the health, being of a thin
substance and well fined, because they have but a weak heat. But in these our
countries which are cold and moist, old wines may be used, as also the new
which are of a thin substance, well purged and fined. Notwithstanding our
country old vvines, in as much as after some long time they loose their heat,
and thereby heat the less, are not so hurtful* unto the head as the new, or
those which are of a middle age.

The juice thereof newly pressed from the grape (in as much as it is raw, The
juice of the grapes not (...) wrought.
windy, and of hard digestion, if therewithal it do not ouerturne the
stomach, and provoke flux of the belly) does stay a long time in the stomach
and places thereabout, swelling and blowing up the same, and therein begetting
rebellious obstructions hardly taken away and removed, as also it causes
troublesome dreams, and cold and durable diseases.

New wines which are not as yet thoroughly digested, New wines or the juice of
grapes which have ^ately wrought up.
are in temperature and faculty very like unto the new pressed liquor of
grapes, for even they are so far off from perfection, as that they also become
of hard digestion, and which is more, do not easily pass through the bowels
and veins, or provoke urine any thing at all, being the great and sovereign
helps which are to be looked for to come from wine. Yea Yea furthermore, they
oftentimes hang and lie long in the body, and become very subject to sour in
the stomach, if there be but some small quantity thereof taken more than is
convenient.

Wine which is well and sufficiently digested and wrought, The benefit of wine.
and thereby purified and fined from all such excrements and lees, as either
the new pressed liquor is wont to cast up, or the same after further digestion
is wont to settle down to the bottom, has its virtues and properties all
quite contrary, unto the vices and inconueniencies which accompany the raw
liquor and newly concocted wines: for it is concocted easily, and carried
through the bowels and veins quickly, it brings down and asswageth the
fullness and swellings rising about the principal parts of windy or
distending causes, as crudities and such like: it delivers the womb or
matrix from such obstructions, as the natural excrements thereof are wont to
breed therein: it increases the strength of all the isntrumental parts: it
makes way for the euacuation of all manner of excrements, and so provoke
sweat, but principally urine: it causes sleep, and cures cold poisons: it
strengthens the stomach more than all the rest of the parts of the body, as
being first received and entertained into the same, and hereupon in becomes a
great friend to digestion, provoke appetite succoureth and relieueth the
heart by special property, thereby speedily repairing such natural and
vital spirits, as have been wasted by sudden euacuation, wastings, or other
occasions: it nourishes also, preserves, sustaineth and strengthens natural
heat, whereas it begins to fail. Hereby it works upon the understanding
awaking, and raising it up, cheereth, and encourages the faint and
languishing, and recreateth and reioiceth the spirits, in regard whereof,
Homer says, that the Gods have given wine to men, for the driving away of
their cares and troubles. And Socrates a guest at Platoes feast, praises the
moderate use of wines in feasts and banquets, because (as he says) it
quickneth a man to that which is good, and makes the mind more ready to
execute his offices and duties. Lastly, wine makes the color more lively and
cherri-like and is found a most excellent, speedy, and singular remedy
against all sownings and faintings which happen through excessive euacuation,
or crudities molesting and troubling the upper mouth of the stomach. And in as
much as it attenuateth, concocteth, and discusseth crud and cold humors, and
flatuosities abounding in flegmaticke and melancholicke persons, it becomes a
most excellent drink, not only for flegmaticke and melancholicke ones, but
also for all such as are of a cold and moist disposition of body, but
especially for old folks, and principally in Summer, in such countries as are
given to be cold.

The annoiances, hurts, and discommodities of wine.
ANd yet notwithstanding that wine surpass in excellency and goodness all
other sorts of drinks, it works many annoiances by reason of its quantity,
quality, or vaporousnesse. The hurts and inconueniencies that wine works.
The most notorious and common annoiance that the vaporousnesse of the wine
does cause, is drunkenness, Drunkenness.
which as Athenaeus records, makes men sots and senseless, and yet so
talkatiue and prattling, as that they cannot hold their peace, neither yet
conceal any thing they know: whereupon the proverb grows, that wine goes
barefoot, Wine goes barefoot.
because the drunkard lies open and naked on every side, and covers or
hides things no more than the steele-glasse, for which cause the Poet
Aeschilus has written, that the pictures of men's bodies are commonly to be
seen in brass: but the shape and fashion of the mind in wine; And Plato
affirms, that the manners and disposition of every man is known by wine.
The Poet Theognis does likewise advertise us, that as gold is proved in the
fire, so the understanding part of man by wine, in these verses: Quale sit
admotis explorant ignibus aurum:
Men's hominis vinum, sana sit anne probat.


Notwithstanding, when the brain is full of phlegm, the immoderate use of wine
does not so much make such men to be given to much talk, as to feel great
heaviness in their heads, and to fall into deep and sound sleep. Ancient
writers, as says Plutarch, consecrated the disease called the Lethargy, unto
Dionysius, because that such as spoil themselves with drinking of wine, for
the most part fall into such kind of blockishnesse, feeling such a drowsy
heaviness in the head, forgetting to remember what they should do, and
suffering themselves to fall right down like dead men: For wine (as Aristotle
observes) fitteth the several natures of diverse humors, (...) fills the
d^spositions of the d^^nkers.
and applies it self thereunto, howsoever that when it makes drunken, it
drives the understanding from her accustomed estate, corrupts the memory,
and disturbeth all the senses. Notwithstanding, it makes not all drunkards in
all points alike, for some it makes lumpish and drowsy, as such (as I have
said before) as have their brains replea^e with ^legme: other merry and
iocund, and those which are sanguine^: many to be given to contentions, and
much prattle, as such as are subject to yellow choler: othersome be given to
pick quarrels, do wrongs, and work much harm, and those are such as are
subject to black choler: and again, other some mute and dreaming, as those
which are subject to a cold melancholicke humor. Furthermore, such as become
foolish and senseless by having drunk too much wine, their brain being
silled with great quantity of blood and spirit, do^ feel a heat throughout
their whole body, but chiefly in their head, except they be such as wax cold
and benumbed through their folly, as in whom the natural heat is not quickened
and kindled, but rather smoothered and choked by reason of the excessive
quantity of wine which they have taken: no otherwise than the fire is quenched
when there is too much wood heaped upon it, and the flame of the lamp put out
when there is too much oil in the lamp. For as a little deal of fire is
choked through a great heap of wood: even so natural heat is oftentimes
strangled upon the sudden, by the excessive and immoderate drinking of wine.
But and if it be yet so drunk immoderately, as that it cannot extinguish and
suddenly destroy the natural heat, at the least by snubbing and checking of
natural heat, hurting and infeebling his actions, as also in diminishing the
strength of the body by surcharging of it with heavy loades of superfluities:
accidently it cools in such sort, as that it brings to nothing and quite
undoes the prouocations and acts of lust, which of it self and by its own
nature it might otherwise maruellously provoke. That drunkards their seed and
nature is not apt for generation.
And hereupon it is that Aristotle says, That the seed of drunkards becomes
dead and fruitlesle, and their children blocke-headed groutndles. Wherefore
even as wine (when as by its fervent vapors it assaileth the head, and ^illeth
the brain) provoke drunkenness and foolishness: so when the said vapors
are thick^ed somewhat and congealed into a serous and waterish substance, by
the coldness of the head, if they be not discussed and spent by the power and
force of nature, the excrement which shall be thereby engendered (although that
the drunken sit being passed over, the party come again to the enjoying of
his former estate, and seem to be well) if it remain long time in the
brain, and being fast settled therein, grow further and gather more unto it,
does in the end stir up many diseases of the head, as hardness of hearing,
deafness, noyses in the ears, blindness, the falling sickness,
conuulsions, palsi^s, apoplexies, and many other such like, of all which, it is
not otherwise to be accounted the cause and original, than by way of accident,
as also of that sudden strangling disease, which it causes not but very
seldom. On the other side, if this excrement gathered in the brain by the
immoderate use of wine, happen to fall down upon the inferior parts, it will
breed many distillations, and catarrhes, hoarsnes, rheumes, coughs, gouts,
difficulty of breathing* and many other symptoms, very hard to be cured: yea
and by its vaporoushes, how soberly, and in how moderate quantity soever it be
drunk, it becomes noisome and hurtful to such as have a weak brain, and
their sinews and ioin^s infirm and feeble; for unto such people it becomes
so egregious an adversary, as that if one troubled with the gout, should at
the same time that this pain is upon him, taste but some few drops thereof
washing his mouth only therewithal, he shall presently feel his pain
increased, and falling into a far greater rage. Yea which is more, such
excrement engendered in the head, gets there such a kind of enimitie and
adverse quality, and that so at jar and maliciously bent against the ioints,
as that it rusheth it self in its distillations, rather upon the ioints than
upon any other parts, and so causes gouts and joint aches. Finally, this
excrement being of a subtle and sharp substance, falls and penetrat^h easily
into the lungs, as also corrupts and exulcerateth them. There are also other
most dangerous annoy^nces which wine of it self and by its very nature
causes. For in as much as it is of a hot and dry temperature, if it be not
drunk moderately and well delaied, by the long use thereof in hot and dry
bodies, it is woot to over heat and dry their noble parts, to engender great
of choleric humors, which standing without remove and motion, must needs
breed many maladies and diseases.

From hence spring out agues both continual and intermittent, inflammations of
the inward parts, as the liver, spleen, and lungs, the plurifie, passion of
the reins, and such other inflammations of many other parts, which have not as
yet any proper name assigned them. Hence likewise grow all itches, tetters,
wild fires, flying fires, cankers, and all sorts of ulcers. Those therefore
that are prone and apt to fall into such inconueniencies of diseases, or which
are already through the ill ordering of their life fallen into the same, must
altogether abstain the drinking of wine, or at the least drink but a very
little, yea though it should be very weak and well delaied with water. The old
writers, and amongst others, Cicero in his third book of the nature of the
gods, thought it good, that seeing wine does seldom profit, and hurt very
often, that it were better not to permit it at all to be used of those which
are sick, rather than under a conceited hope of some doubtful health, to
expose and lay them open to manifest danger by the use thereof.
Notwithstanding we daily find, that the use of wine is very commodious and
profitable for cold and moist complexions being such as are troubled with cold
and moist diseases. Wherefore the wise and well advised Physician may tolerate
the use thereof, when he knows that there is need for the concoction of some
cold diseases: yea and oftentimes also in cold diseases, as in such whose
conjoined and next cause, he finds to be nourished and maintained by some
primitive and antecedent cause that is hot.

That it is not good for such as are in health to use pure and unmixed wine.
THe learned of ancient time have always permitted the moderate use of wine
being delayed with water, That vndelaied wine is not wholesome for such as be
in health.
when it should be used of them which were whole, but have always rejected and
disallowed pure and vndelayed wine, as also surfeiting, and that in their
feasts and bankets. For Hesiodus commands that there should be three thirds
of water mixed with one fourth part of wine, and this not to be used commonly,
but at some solemn feasts and bankets. Athenaeus writes, that the Grecians
used to drink two glasses of wine, delaied with five glasses of water, or one
glass of wine delaied with three glasses of water. What qu^ntitie of water is
to be put to ^^ine.
And in very truth, our ancient predecessors did put and mingle wine amongst
water, and not water amongst wine: for they put but a very little quantity of
wine into their water, as Theophrastus reports. Which custom and use of
sobriety must be followed and immitated by the decrees and appointment of
Physicians. And as for the quantity of wine to be drunken, the poet Eb^lus
brings in Dionysius speaking to that end in this sort.

Tres tantum pater as, quibus est men's sana propin^:
Quarum quae fuerit prima, salubris erit.
Proxima delicias factura est, tertia somnnm:
Luxus erit positum transiliisse modum.
This decree and ordinance has bin approved by them which have forbidden by
their laws, that the Roman priests should not drink any more than three
glasses at a meal.

And as concerning age, wine is hurtful unto young children, as also unto
them which are grown up to greater years, For what ages wine is m^st fit.
because that wine by his very much dryness destroys and overthrows their
hot and moist constitution, which Hippocrates commands to be maintained by
things that are moist. And that it is so, we see, that such children as use to
drink wine, howsoever it be dilayed (their liver being dried and ouer-heated
by the conti^all use of the said wine) do fall, for the most part, into a
long and lasting flux of the belly, and in the end into an irrecouerable
hectic fever, which the common people call a withering and pining away, and
out of which there is not one of a hundred that escapes. For this cause Galen
was altogether against the giving of children any taste of wine, as also any
others, who like children are of a hot and moist temperature and constitution,
because that by his vaporousnesse it fills the brain, and does infinite hurt
and mischief. Plato in his precepts of ordering a Commonwealth, commands
children to be kept from wine till they be fifteen years old, and his reason
is, for that fire must not be added unto fire: from fifteen unto forty he
permits the moderate use thereof: and after this age he advises to drink
much, and that very good, for the mitigating and qualifying of the
discommodious, troublesome, and noisome occurrences which may happen in the
life of man. And this his opinion is not altogether to be rejected: for as
wine is altogether enemy unto children, so it makes recompense in the good
it does unto old persons. Pliny says, That wine hinders those which
prepare themselves to do, speak, or enterprise any good thing: and this was
the cause why Plato forbad the use of wine to sage and learned men, except it
were in their feasts or sacrifices. The Romans for sundry reasons did likewise
forbid the use of wine to women and servants. We read in histories, That the
virtues of many famous and great personages, have been obscured and eclipsed
by the use of wine. Of this, we have Lysander, Captain of the Lacedaemonians,
for a witness, who was a prudent, wise, and good disposer of all his matters
and affairs, save that of the use of wine; Antioch^^ the great, Demetrius
lying for a pledge and hostage at Rome, Alexander of Macedonie, Dionysius the
younger, the tyrant, Zenocrates the Philosopher, Anacreon and Alcaeus the
Lyricke Poets, and Aristophanes the Comedian, Ennius, Marcus Antonius Triumuir,
Cato Vticensis, and such others. For this cause the Locri inhabiting the
Promontorie Zephirium in Greece (as Athenaeus records) thought it to be an
offense worthy death for to drink wine. Of the same opinion at this day are
the Sarazins, moved thereto as well by Mahomets law, as also by the imitating
of the ancient custom of the Gentiles and Arabians. Let us then conclude, that
wine, not only in excessive quantity, That wine is hurtful unto hat and
dry natures, and good unto moist ones.
and by reason of his vaporousnesse, does cause all the annoyances already set
down, but that also in respect of his heat and dryness it is most pernicious
unto hot and dry natures, as also unto hot and moist ones, if it be not well
dilayed, especially if it be continually used, though it be taken in never so
moderate a quantity: And yet notwithstanding more or less, according to age,
custom, and manner of living, the season of the year, and constitution of the
air: because that in old folk, and all such as in whom crude phlegm and
melancholic juice does abound, his heat and dryness is in such sort rebated,
that for the most part it is used of them very safely and securely, both as a
well nourishing, and likewise as a good Physical help, especially in Winter
and cold Countries. You must therefore, in all sorts of natures, so temper all
his noisome qualities by the mingling of water, as that it may be taken with
the least hurt that possibly may be. When as therefore the wine is mixed with
the water, the parts both of the one and the other are broken and parted (as it
were) into small invisible portions, vvhereupon there arises betwixt them both
a mutual doing and suffering, and their qualities so confounded and becoming
one (notwithstanding their former contrariety) as that into how much the less
parts the division is made, by so much the more apt and easy they prove to be
mingled and made one. Whosoever therefore shall mingle wine with water, or
water with wine, must first stir them a long time, and then before he
drink them, let them settle and rest a while: because for certainetie, the
contrary qualities of the wine and water will be so much the more repressed,
corrected, rebated and united, by how much they are the longer time and the
more exactly mingled together. Although that (if we will examine the things a
little near) we shall ^ind that even wine delayed, cease no^ to offend and
do harm, if it be taken in over great quantity, or at unseasonable times,
especially of such as are of a hot and dry disposition, as we shall declare
hereafter. But this is enough which has been said of wine in general: now
let us examine all the particular differences of the same.

The differences of Wine.
IN wine we are to consider the color, The differences of Wine.
relish, smell, faculty, and consistence, for from these are taken and
gathered the principal differences of Wine. As concerning the color, some is
white, some of a light, some of a sad yellow, some betwixt red and white, like
to the color of honey, other some of a deep red, and others of a pleasanter
red, black, or dark shadowed.

White wine generally is of a thinner s^bstance than the red, it is easily
concocted and digested, it pierseth speedily through the whole body, works
more upon the veins, but no^risheth less. That sort of white Wine which is
thin, hot and full of Wine, is concocted and distributed more speedily than
any of the rest, purging the blood by urine: but it offends the head most of
all, especially French white Wine. Water by reason of its coldnesses, and red
or dark shadowed Wine by reason of its thickness do slowly pass away by
urine. The contrary is found in white Wine, especially such as is of a thin
substance, and which is hot. That which is of a deep yellow, or somewhat
inclining to a yellow, has his virtues, approaching very near to those of the
white Wine.

Red Wine is wont to be more slow of concoction than all the rest, as also to
be distributed throughout the whole body, Red Wine or dark colored.
or carried away by urine, because it is of a grosser substance than any of the
rest; but yet to recompense these discommodities withal, it nourishes more,
and offends the head less. The lighter red Wine holds the mean and middle
catch of all the rest. White Wine which is of a thin and waterie substance
without any verdure or sharpnes of taste, such as we have great store of here in
our country, is likewise of an easy digestion, and quickly passing and
distributed through the body, and yet notwithstanding hurts not the head,
neither increases any great store of heat, in so much as that this kind of
white Wine is more wholesome and safe both for the sound and sick, than the
white Wine which is thin and full of Wine in taste, especially in persons
that are fat and full bodied, because it nourishes less than all the rest.
Galen is of judgment, that red and thick Wines are turned without any great
pain into blood, and so next unto them the black or deep red and gross
wines, if so be they be accompainied with some small smatch of sweetness: and
next unto these which are of a light red, those which are of a deep red,
thick substance, and astringent faculty, nor for that they can be digested
more easily, or distributed more speedily, than white or yellow Wines, but
because that being once concocted in the stomach, and sent unto the liver, they
are easily changed and turned into blood, notwithstanding they seem not the
least removed and differing from the nature of the same: for white and yellow
Wines of all other are wont to be the speediliest concocted in the stomach,
and to be conveyed unto the liver: but they yield less store of blood then
those which are thick and red, and so do fat less. Wherefore yellow Wine, or
the redlike Wine being of a thin and pearsing substance, by how much it
approaches the nearer unto the faculties of thin white Wine, by so much it
begets the thinner and more fluent blood, and therewithal hot if it be hot,
or temperate if it be waterish and weak, such as the Grecians use to call
Oligophorum, which signifies a Wine admitting but small quantity of water to
be mixed therewith: yea a reasonable cold blood, if it be yet somewhat green
and unripe. But the deep red Wine which is harsh and rough, whereas for its
thickenesse it is profitable to comfort the loose and wearish stomach, but
nourishes not much: so in like manner it increases and redoubleth the
obstructions of the liver, spleen, and reins, as also it makes a thick,
(...), and melancholic blood, and so withal begets many melancholic
diseases. The red wine that is somewhat clear and thin, seems to hold of
both, and so stands as a mean betwixt them both. Wherefore Dioscorides
following the opinion of Hippocrates has rightly said, that deep red wines
were thick, and of hard concoction and digestion: for all thick wines,
whether they be of a deep or light red, do nourish (to speak the truth)
abundantly, and fat the body, but they put the stomach to more pain in
concocting of them, than those which are somewhat clear and of a thin
substance. Furthermore, they being of hard digestion and distribution, and not
easily passing away by urine, through the long and continual use of them, they
engender flatuous swelling, and windieneffe in the belly and bowels. Wherefore
yellow and white wines, that are of a subtle substance and very ripe, are to
be better accounted of, and esteemed as more wholesome for all such as have
need, or desire to be heated, as old folks, flegmaticke, and melancholic
persons that be cold of nature, as also for them that lead their lives in
idleness, in cold co^^tries and cold seasons, as in Winter, heapinging up
great store of sup^rfluities and raw humors in the veins: for they are
likewise more profitable for the furt^^rance of concoction to be made in the
stomach, liver, and veins, than those which are waterish and sweet; but very
many times they offend and hurt the head and sinews, and make a full brain:
for this cause they are enemies and contrary to such as are hot by nature, or
have a moist brain, or their sinews and ioin^^ weak and subject to
distillations: for unto such bodies, the wines that are a littlered and
somewhat astringent, are far more meet and convenient, because they be not
so fuming, and therefore do not charge the head so heavily. But as for deep
red wines, they are most fit and convenient for diggers and deluers,
husbandmen, dressers of vines, and others which live a toilesome and painful
life. Wherefore white wines, yellow, red, or claret, and of those only such as
are of a subtle substance, delicate and wat^ie, (called of the Greeks (...)
which is to say, admitting but small store of water to be mingled with them)
are harmless to all, and to be used with all safety and security.

The white and yellow, or redlike wines which are of a thin and subtle
substance, together with the claret, weak, waterie, raw, and greenish, being
of a cold and moist temperature, (such as are very usual and common in the
grounds about Paris) do nourish the body very little, and are harder to be
digested, than those which will bear but a little water, but they cool and
moisten more than the ^est, and where as they nourish but a little, they are
said on the other side to make the body lean. They bring not any detriment or
harm unto the head, liver, reins, or bladder, but being long used, they hurt
the stomach, bowels, matrix, and spleen very much: and which is more, are
professed enemies to all such as are cold and moist by nature, and especially
unto old folks. Contrariwise, they are somewhat profitable for hot and dry
natures, and if natural heat be strong, they pass away, and are euacuated
easily by urine, and this is a thing that is common to all green wines which
are of a subtle substance. The like judgment is to be had of diseases, for
as they are tolerated with all security in hot natures, so in like manner they
prolong and increase cold diseases. And thus sufficiently as it seems unto
me, concerning the nature, quality, and use of wine, gathered from the color
thereof.

As concerning the relish: some wines are sweet: some sharp: some bitter: some
rough and harsh: some sower and tart, and both of them astringent: others of a
mixed nature, betwixt sweet and rough; others green or greenish, and these are
very common and usual in the grounds about and belonging to Paris.

In general, all sweet wines, Sweet wines.
whether they be white or red, do nourish more than other, heat indifferently,
provoke thirst, swell and stop through the much use thereof the prnicipall
parts, but the liver and the spleen more than all the rest, especially if they
be gross and thick, for look how much the thicker they be, so much the more
unwholesome they are. Sweet wine (says Hippocrates) does less burden and
charge the head, then that which is strong and full of wine, it less offends
the understanding also, yea it loses the belly, but it is not good for such
as abound with colericke humors, for that it provoke thirst and windiness.
True it is that it is good for such as are much troubled with the cough,
because it raises up phlegm the more easily in all such, except they be
subject to thirst and dryness.

Sweet white wine Sweet white wine.
is of a thinner substance, than sweet red wine. It helps spitting more than
any other, so that it be not too gross and thick, for it concocteth raw
phlegm in the breast, it smootheth and makes plain the roughness of the
inward parts, and in that respect is profitable for the l^ngs, reins, or
bladder being rugged or rough: but in the mean time it hurts the liver,
because that as I have here while said, it swells and puffs it up, and
causes obstructions therein. It causes thirst likewise in hot and dry
natures, because it makes obstructions, and is easily turned into choleticke
matter, as all other things are which are sweet. Notwithstanding, it procures
drunkenness less than any other, in as much as it offends the head but a
little. Dioscorides has spoken very rightly thereof, saying, that such sweet
wine is of thick substance, that it passes not so easily through the body,
and that therefore it nourishet^ more than that which is of a thin
consistence and substance. He says further, that it swells up the stomach,
and like the liquor of grapes before it has wrought, it loses and troubles
the belly and inward parts. And this must be understood of sweet wine, which
is not come yet to his full ripeness, and not of that which is thin, clear,
ripe, and already thoroughly concocted. Which kind of sweet white wines are
sent hither in great abundance from the country of Aniou, and they hold their
sweetness two or three years.

Such sweet white wines are not so hurtful as those which are not ripe, or
which are thick: they provoke urine sufficiently, loosen the belly, and
moisten. Wherefore you must diligently and wisely discern and distinguish the
sweet wine which is crud and vnconcted, from that which is already ripe, and
fit for to be used.

All sweet white wines do nourish abundantly, but yet more or less, according
to the proportion of their thickness and grosnesse, and for this cause such as
have need of restoratiues must use sweet wines, especially if their reins
liver, and spleen stand sound and free from all infermitie: for when the
principal parts be obstructed, and the veins full of gross blood, then wine
that is of subtle substance is most needful and profitable. When the veins
are replete with cold and gross blood, then sharp, strong, and mighty wines
are more convenient. If the veins be full of hot and thick blood, the wine
that is sharp and old is not good, but rather a claret or white wine that is
very watrie, yea, and somewhat greenish, if the stomach will bear it, and the
soil of the country permit it.

Galen affirms that no white wine heateth greatly, Galens judgment of white
wine.
and that such as heateth much, cannot be sweet. And yet notwithstanding,
there are brought unto us out of hot countries many white wines that are very
hot. And we have likewise sweet vvines partly growing in our own country of
France, as at Longiumeau, and Tonnerrois, called white beaten wine: partly
brought from the country of Anjou, excellent good, and very hot, which in
taste resemble the savor and relish of a Hippocras made of white wine, and
will hold and continue sound and perfect good, three, four, yea six years.
In Greece their white vvines are not found to be very pleasant and sweet, as
in this our country there are not to be found any red wines very pleasant,
except upon their new pressing out. Notwithstanding the country of Bordelois
does furnish us with sufficient quantity of red wines, that are very sweet,
but they are all of them of a thick substance, and their juice or liquor
breeds very many obstructions.

Harsh and course vvines do procure urine more than the sweet, Rough and harsh
wines.
but less than such as are of a middle kind betwixt both, and yet again,
those which are tart and sower, do also provoke urine more weakly than those
which are of a middle temper. The rough and course wine does corroborate the
stomach and principal parts by his astringent faculty, provided that the
stomach be furnished with sufficient strength and force of heat, for otherwise
in a cold and weak stomach it proves, for the most part, to be hardly
concocted and digested. Of all other vvines, it least hurts the head, but
therewithal it proves to be the slowest in distributing it self abroad into
the veins and substance of the body: for which reasons, it falls out to be
unfit to be used in swownings, sudden faintings, and all other feebleness,
looseness, and languishing of the strength, as also where there are any
notorious obstructions in the principal parts. But which more is, it binds
the belly, or else loses it not sufficiently.

We have spoken of greenish white wines, Green wines.
whereunto the reddish green wine has like qualities, especially if it be of
a thin substance and waterie, and yet more, if it be thin, waterie, and
pale.

Generally, the green or raspe wine, in as much as it contains more water
than wine, nourishes the body but a little, is of hard digestion, and so it
moves windiness and wringings in the belly, because it is of a cold
temperature. Hence it comes, that old folks, cold and moist natures, and
such as have weak stomachs, receive damage by it: and next unto these, such
women as have not their terms aright, and are subject to pale and swarth
colors. Notwithstanding it passes away speedily by urine, because it is
thin, and annoyeth not the head: and for this reason it is very profitable
for all hot and moist natures, as for young folks, which have a boiling and
burning blood in them, if their stomach be in good state, especially in Summer
time: for which respect, being dilayed with a sufficient quantity of water,
it will serve very fitly (in like manner as the wine called of the Greeks
Oligophorum) in all such agues as wherein wine may be permitted, save only
that it is somewhat hard of digestion, and causes many obstructions. Such
green vvines, as together with their greenenesse are astringent or sour, are
without comparison more hurtful than any other every way, and in all respects,
because they hardly ripen, and concoct, engender obstructions, and pass very
slowly either by urine or stool. Notwithstanding, they become ripe in time, if
they be let alone in cellars till the raw and crude parts thereof be overcome
by their own proper and natural heat. But it shall not seem to exceed the
bounds of reason, if we discourse somewhat more freely of the verdure of our
vvines, to the end we may be able to discern and find out that which is in
vvines by way of purchase, from that which is naturally in them. Galen writes,
That the astringent quality in vvines is separated and remaining apart from
their verdure, as their goodness is from their badnesse: besides, it is very
likely, that in hot and dry Countries there are not any green vvines growing
naturally: but in this our Country of France there are many greenish vvines
pressed out from grapes that are not yet ripe: but especially in cold and moist
years, some which are very thin and waterie: others more thick and gross,
and by that means either astringent, or else rough and harsh: strong and
mighty vvines, if they be never so little tainted with greenenesse, presently
they become sour, and altogether unmeet to be drunk. But such as being
pressed out from grapes, scarce half ripe, differ not much from the
greenenesse or sharpness of common veriuice, if they be not concocted by
little and little through a strong and forcible heat contained in their crude
and raw matter, and so in the end become ripe, their greenenesse being by
little and little diminished: and such are not passing of a years continuance;
serving rather for the rude and homely people, than for dainty and delicate
personages. For certain, all greenenesse in wine is a fault in those vvines
wherein it is: but yet that is the worst of all the rest which happens unto
vvines sometimes good and commendable, either by being kept too long, or else
by having been ill kept, or otherwise by some other occasion: less
dispraiseable and hurtful, without comparison, is that which happens in our
French wines, which by the weakness of the heat of the Sun, coming short
of their sufficient concoction, become green from their first original and
growth, as they which are green, by reason of the green and unripe grapes,
from whence they are pressed. For such greenenesse as happens unto vvines
once good and commendable, is hurtful unto all men, and cannot be redressed,
thereby making such vvines unfit to be employed about any other use than either
for medicine or sawces: whereas that which is borne and ingrafted into such
green vvines, if it be not suppressed and digested by natural heat, becomes
only hurtful to cold and moist constitutions and old folks, but not unto
strong, Iustie, and hot natures, neither unto them which are accustomed to
travail, and to avoid idleness. You shall find many harsh, rough, and sour
vvines, which are also green: and in like manner, you shall find some that
are green, and yet not rough and course. Such as are rough and green, through
their vehement astringencie, do close, shut up, dry, and dull the throat,
tongue, and other parts of the mouth: whereas such as are simply green, do
not the like, but cool them only. The rough and harsh vvines, in as much as
they are raw and crude, and cannot be concocted and digested of their natural
heat that is but weak; yet they close and bind the stomach, and by such
occasion stay the ^lux of the belly. Wines that are simply green, do not the
like, if they be not harsh, rough, and astringent withal: and they do rather
annoy the stomach and all the membranous and neruous parts by reason of their
cooling property and quality: which being situate in a thin and subtle
matter, and therefore apt to pierce deeply into the parts, and by their
qualities provoking and disquieting the substance of the said parts, does
corrupt and dissolve the laudable temperature, force, and constitution of the
said stomach, and of the said membranous and sinewie parts. Whereupon it
ensues, that such green vvines do for the most part cause crudities,
wringings, and the flux of the belly, manifold obstructions of the liver and
spleen, besides the disease called the Hypochondriake melancholy. Galen
denies, that vvines which are hard and green, do heat at all, and that the
sour, rough, and harsh relish does actually consist in a mean matter,
participating both of the waterie and earthie elements: but that the hard,
green, and sour relish does consist in an earthie and dry substance, which
does not manifestly participate of the water, or any moisture. Whereby it may
manifestly appear, that neither the one nor the other relish has any heat
ruling in it, but cold, and that in the tart, harsh, and rough relish
accompanied with moisture, but in the sour with dryness. But for as much as
vvines are seldom consisting of one only simple and pure relish, and that all
vvines (of what taste or relish soever they be) are in temperature hot and dry,
you must understand, that sour and harsh vvines are accounted cold, or else
not hot, not simply, but by comparison, because indeed they heat less than
other vvines, and that not quickly, and so soon as they be drunk, but in the
end, and aftersome continuance of time: for otherwise the opinion of Galen were
not to be received, seeing that we observe and see every day, that all sorts
of vvines, of what taste or relish soever they be, be they hard or harsh, do
heat manifestly, and make men drunk sooner or later, if they be received into
a hot and strong stomach: for their heat, as a thing buried in crude and raw
matter, although it be a long time first, and with great difficulty, breaks
forth at the last, manifesting it self in the end, and bringing forth the
fruits of his maturitie: and this we may find in our French vvines, which
nourish, maintain, recreate, yea, and make drunk the Husbandmen,
Vine-dressers, and other persons of poor handicrafts using to drink the same.
But let this suffice which has been said of the natural taste and relish of
vvines: and now let us search out the causes of the sowrenesse or tartness,
incident to good and commendable vvines. The cause of sowrenesse in wines.
Some think, that vvines grow sour through heat, because that dainty, weak,
and feeble vvines are changed and turn sour in the Spring time and Summer,
and in Winter retain their natural qualities entire and sound. This opinion
is confirmed, because that weak vvines being stirred and tumbled in forcible
sort, or carried far, or laid in cellars that are open upon the South or
Eastern quarter, do quickly become sour. And contrarily, such as are not
tossed to and fro, or removed, but kept in cellars lying upon the North, do
not sour at all: as if it were by the cold, that their virtues and good
qualities were preserved, and by the heat, that they were changed and
corrupted. So as the like in all points does befall vvines which are weak and
waterish, to that which happens unto a burning candle, and to small and weak
sparks of fire, which if you lay open in the hot Sun, or before any great
and vehement flame, you shall see them languish, yea wax dark, and altogether
to fade away and go out. It is then through heat, that all the weakest vvines
turn sour, and that by having their weak heat spent and overcome by an
outward and accidental heat, which is more strong, causing the same to fade,
and for the most part vanish quite away: For a weak nature cannot endure
either any strong heat, or vehement motion, but fainting under them, it
becomes wasted and spent, and in fine perishes. But contrariwise, wines
which have their heat strong, and consist of such matter as is not easy or apt
to be wasted and spent, being removed, rolled, transported, or else laid open
to the South Sun, or kept in any hot place, do not only not sour quickly,
and in a short time, but rather become a great deal the more ripe, and are
made more ready and better to be drunk. For that which befalls through long
continuance of time to strong, mighty, and noble vvines, which are shut up
and laid in cold ca^es under the earth, by the means, power, virtue, and
^fficacie of their own and natural heat, which concocteth, digesteth* and
ripeneth by little and little their crude and raw matter: the same is effected
and wrought in a short time in vvines which are heated by art, that is to say,
by stirring and rolling, and by the heat of the Sun, or of some fine subtle
fire, which does concoct and digest the most crude and raw matter that they
can be found to have. For as the enduring of the heat of the Sun, and the
vnder-going of vehement exercises, makes stronger and more able the bodies of
men that are hot and lusty, but on the contrary, does overthrow, weaken,
dissolve, and cool weak bodies: even so, hot vvines are sooner ripe,
concocted, and digested, by heat, or moving either of the Sun, or of some hot
fire made near unto them: but those which are more weak and waterie, if you
heat them overmuch, do take great damage and harm, and are weakened more by
the working of such vehement heat, either of the Sun, stirring, or fire,
which corrupts and spends at once, and in a moment, some part and portion
of their weak and feeble heat, which afterward, in like manner, by little and
little, will be overcome and wasted, and thereupon such vvines weakened and
made unsavory. It is the mean and middle heat therefore that all things
receive profit by: seeing the immoderate and extreme is no less harmefull
than cold. Wherefore, after that the weak heat of wine shall, for the most
part, become wasted and spent, by the outward heat of the air compassing it
round about, it grows sour: and so likewise it is wont to fall out by the
maliciousness of strong and piercing cold, breaking the heart of the weak
heat in the wine, and thereby killing the same. For when the said heat is
quite overcome and banished, so as that the wine loses his fragrant odor
and pleasant sent of wine, it is not said to sour, and therefore not called
vinegar, but indeed is called by the name, not of wine, but of decayed and
spent wine, which the Latins call Vappa. Furthermore, whereas amongst
waterie, weak, and feeble vvines, there are some raw and greenish ones, which
we have declared already to be enemies unto cold and moist natures: and
other, which are neither raw, not greenish, but delicate ones, and thoroughly
ripe, but therewithal of a thin and subtle substance, and which for their
easiness to be concocted, and speediness in being distributed, become very
good and profitable both for sound and sick, and are called of the Greeks
Oligophora, because they will not admit the mingling of any great quantity of
water with them: The first may, without any injury offered unto their
strength, abide to be stirred and carried to and fro, especially if with this
natural greenenesse there be joined some harshnesse and roughness. But the
second cannot endure to be removed or carried to and fro: the reason is, the
heat of the first is hid, and lies in a crude and raw matter, whereof it
stands it upon, as much as lies in it, to acquit and rid it self: a ready
help whereunto, is the moving and stirring of the same, because hereby it is
enabled the sooner to show forth it self, and to manifest his force in more
powerful and cheerful manner than before, because the crude and raw matter
wherein it lay, as it were covered and hid, is become refi^ed and concocted in
process of time. Contrariwise, the weak heat of the second sort, which
consists in a thin matter or substance, and that already concocted, is
spent and overthrown with the least motion and hea^, and therefore does very
easily euaporate and breath out all his force and strength. It seems that the
opinion of Galen and other ancient Writers, affirming that no green wine does
heat, must be understood of this second sort of wine, called of the Grecians
Oligophora, for that it is possible, that the old Writers never knew, neither
ever heard tell, that any greenish vvines were naturally growing in places and
countries that are hot and scorching. That there is great difference betwixt
sowrenesse and greenness in wines.
Certainly, there is great difference betwixt that tartness or sowrenesse,
which is an accidental vice or fault in vvines, and that greenenesse or
sharpness, which is a natural taste and relish in them, pressed out either
from grapes naturally green, or else from grapes which have not as yet grown
to their full maturitie and ripeness. For the tartness of vvines, besides the
great sharpness and acrimonie therein, being such as is in vinegar, whereby
it disquie^eth and offends the stomach, membranes, and all the sinews, is
likewise of that nature, as that it cannot by any skill or cunning be subdued
and corrected in such manner, as that the wine once tainted therewith, can at
any time be restored unto his former goodness, and made such as may be drunk
without the prejudice and hazard of man's health. But on the contrary, the
greenenesse which continues in vvines, as bred in them, besides that it is
always free from the foresaid sharpness and acrimonie, is found not to
continue any long time, in as much as the raw and cold matter, wherein the
heat of green wine consists, is concocted by little and little, and
thereupon this heat (thus as it were buried in this crude matter) does by
little and little grow strong, and shows ^orth his force more effectually: so
that the said greenenesse is by degrees diminished and wrought out, and the
wine made a convenient and profitable drink for the use of men: yea, and that
also even where this greenenesse, through the weakness and imbecilitie of
heat, cannot any whit be wrought out and taken away: for so we find it,
seeing that green vvines are not refrained, but ordinarily drunk, and used.

Dioscorides was of judgment, That sour and rough vvines caused headache and
drunkenness, whereas our harsh and rough vvines, the rougher they are, do
offend and annoy the head so much the less. And for a certainty, all manner
of drink, by how much it is the more odoriferous, and of a thin and subtle
substance, so much the more it disquieteth and disturbeth the brain with his
vapors, and ministers larger matter for the nourishment of rhewmes and
distillations. Notwithstanding, if sour and rough vvines do happen once to
cause drunkenness, then such drunkenness fall^th out to be of the worst sort,
and most rebellious and hard to be overcome. So then, all our sowrish, harsh,
and rough vvines, such as are those of Burgundy, as they are nothing so
odoriferous, so neither do they cause any whit like so many exhalations and
vapors, and therefore also do they less offend the head, and procure
drunkenness, than any others: And so as that Galen has therefore restified of
them, that they ought to be well accounted of and esteemed profitable and fit
to be used of such as have the gowt, as also of all others which are subject to
the distillations of the brain.

Such vvines are called mungrell or bastard vvines, What wines are to be called
bastards.
which (betwixt the sweet and astringent ones) have neither manifest
sweetness, nor manifest astriction, but indeed participate and contain in
them both the qualities.

Of the consistence of Wine.
AS concerning the consistence of wine, some is of a thin, subtle, and
clear substance, The consistence of wine.
and othersome of a thick and gross, and some of a mean and middle
consistence betwixt both. Of those which are of a thin and subtle substance,
some are weak and waterish, which the Grecians call (...), that is to say, not
admitting the mixture of any quantity of water, of which we will speak more
amply hereafter, being (as it were) like unto water in thinness and color,
and having little or no sent in them, neither yet any manifest heat. They
nourish but very little, for there is is but a very little of their substance
turned into blood: but they cause great store of urine, and agree better than
any other wines, with all sorts of natures, if we may believe Gal^n. There are
other weak, waterish, and greenish wines, very ordinary in this country,
which are hurtful unto old men, and all other cold constitutions, as having in
them very small store of heat: and yet sometime profitable unto hot
constitutions, as in Summer, according to our former advertisement. There are
others that are very good, but hot and strong, of an easy concoction, and
speedily distributed, but nothing less vapourous than white wines, whereupon
they trouble the brain, and make men drunken, and so prove hurtful to such as
are rheumatike and subject to distillations. Such wines are brought hither out
of Gascoigne, very well pleasing princes, and men of great estate, all of them
being of a yellow color, either deeper or lighter. The wines of Ay, as they
are inferior to them of Gascoigne in strength, so they are better, and without
comparison more wholesome.

The gross and thick wines, some of them are simply such, and consist in
mediocriti^, and othersome are very gross and thick. We have heretofore
declared that gross wines are of a more hard concoction, and slow digestion
than other wines are; but being once concocted and digested, they yield a more
firm and solid nourishment unto the body. And of them more than the rest,
such as are very gross and thick, which for certain are hardest to be
concocted and digested of all others. These sorts of wine, for that they
engender many rebellious and obstinate obstructions, are not fit to be used but
of dressers of vineyards, and such other as lead a toilesome life, as we have
declared before. Such wines as are indifferent thin, and indifferent thick,
are profitable for many purposes, and the rather in that they charge not the
head as the strong wines do, and those which are of subtle substance: neither
yet engender obstructions, as those which are thick and gross do. The wine
called of the Grecians Oligophorum, is the holesomest of all others.

Wine smells well, The (...) or smell of wine.
or else nothing at all. The odoriferous wines are very apt and commodious for
the begetting of good humors, and to recreat and fetch again the powers of
the body, but they assail and charge the head, especially, if it be of a
subtle substance, and of a reddish or yellowish color, or of a deep yellow:
they are also more hot than the other sorts of wines. For that which is such,
does help very much for the making of concoction easy, and for the begetting
of fine and subtle blood, but it fills the head full of vapors and heat,
and greatly offends the sinews and understanding: whereupon it proves very
apt to cause headache and a world of rheum. The wine that has small or no
smell, no not any more than water, is called waterish. Such utter deprivation
or want of smell in wine, is a mighty note, and most certain mark that the
same is but a weak and cold wine: as the strong and mighty smell of the same,
is a very notable sign of his force and strength. Such wine as is neither of
an ill smell, neither yet without smell, but has a certain s^inging and
unpleasant sent, which it has gotten either of the soil, or of the vessel,
or by some other occasion, is not good for any body. For as nothing (as
Columella testifies) draws to it strange and unnatural sents more speedily
than wise. In like sort nothing impaireth or communicates his hurtful
qualities sooner to the heart and noble parts, than wine when it is drunk.

Amongst wines, The virtues of wine.
some are generous and noble wines, and therefore said to be full of wine,
contrary to those which are waterish, and admitting the mixture of much water.
These heat much, hurt the sinews, make a full brain, stir up frensies,
mightily increases the heat of agues, and to be brief, they are not delayed
with a great quantity of water, and do good but to a few. There are other
which are weak, and for this cause called Oligophora and waterie. W^ake wines.
These wines are of two sorts, some greenish which have a sensible cooling
faculty, fitting choleric stomaches and hot countries, if so be that a
strong stomach can bear them, and of these we have spoken before: others
which are waterie, and of a thin substance, not retaining any smell, but
agreeing with all natures, be the stomach never so weak, and especially with
those which are often tormented with the megrim or long continued headache:
they comfort concoction, provoke urine and sweat, and offend the head nothing
at all: more harmless than any other sort of wine: they may be permitted to
such as are sick of agues, for that they cannot be said to be of any manifest
quality, as other vvines may: for they are neither sour, nor astringent,
neither yet sweet or sharp, nor yielding any kind of smell. Of these kinds of
wine, some (as Galen says) grow in every country and coast, but much more in
this of France than in any other, the greatest part whereof do participate a
certain greenenesse, especially when the years fall out cold and moist. Such
vvines are called of the Grecians (...). They are not any way noisome or
hurtful to the head, but very profitable, because (as Galen says) they
assuage and take away headache, rising of the cruditie of the stomach: that is
to say, when the stomach being weakened, and (as it were) relaxed by the
eating of some hurtful victuals, or by the drinking of some such like water,
is made the receptacle of some offending humor, ^lowing thither from the whole
body. Which offensive humor so contained in the stomach, becomes corrupt,
and from that corruption sends up burn and adust fumes unto the brain,
which cause like pain in the head to that which comes of fasting: and from
these annoyances the head is delivered by the use of this wine* which by and
by tempereth these putrified ^umes, especially if the wine have any
astringencie in it, whereby the stomach may be fortified and strengthened. For
such vvines do by and by drive downward that which is hurtful in the
stomach, carrying it along with it self, and casting it forth: and therefore
very available for such as live a loitering and sitting life, and apply
themselves wholly unto the reading and studying of good Authors.

The differences of Wines, according to the properties of the Countries.
IT remains now, that we briefly discourse of the wines which we use in
Paris, and those such as are either grown there, or brought thither out of
other Countries and Regions. The French wines offer themselves in the first
rank, which growing in the grounds and borders near about Paris, and the
whole Isle of France, and other places adjoining thereunto, are amongst all
others, and above all others, best agreeing with students, Citizens of Towns:
and to be brief, with all such as live a quiet, idle, and restfull life,
especially those which are made in well seasoned years, or such as show forth
their several qualities, every one in his proper and due season. For such
wines do not heat, burn, and dry the inward parts of the body, as the wines
do which are brought us from Gascoignie, Spain, and other countries more hot,
which by reason of excessive heat, and too great dryness, do burn the liver
and spleen in such as drink them: Such wines do not make a replete, heavy,
or offended head with multitude of vapors, as other vvines of Orleance do. In
like manner, such wines do not load the body with superfluousnesse of serous
excrements, as do the crude and greenish wines, which grow in these grounds in
cold and moist years, or which are brought us hither from other cold Regions
and Countries. Such wines likewise engender no obstructions, neither do they
gather any quantity of melancholic humor, as do the thick and red vvines,
which are sent us by sea from Bordeaux. These vvines, when they be through
ripe, they are of a very p^easant taste, especially such as are yellow, clarert,
and white, which are of a hot and dry temperature, as other wines, but not
above the first degree, or the beginning of the second: on the contrary, the
wines of Spain, Gascoigne, and others such like, are hot and dry in the end
of the third degree. Wherefore these our French and native wines ought to be
preferred before all strange and foreign ones, seeing they burn and heat the
bowels and inward parts overmuch, and that as well for the use of such as are
in health, as of those that being sick, are yet permitted their wine. Amongst
these our French vvines, some are white, othersome are of a deep yellow,
commonly called clarets, or reddish vvines, which are the most wholesome of
all, so that they be not accompanied with any sowrenesse and harshnesse: for
rough and harsh vvines, and others which are green, if they become not ripe
and mellow in time, by the concocting of their cruditie and greenenesse, they
stand for things not fit to be used of any but rude and rusticall fellows,
which live by toyling their bodies with great labor and travel. The rest
are all red, more or less. But of all other French vvines, there is very small
store of sad and light red colored ones.

White claret vvines being bright, clear, and through ripe or mellow, in as
much as they are of a subtle substance, are easily concocted, digested, and
distributed: they provoke urine, nourish the body but a little, but they
rejoice the spirit, and are for the same cause taken, longed after, and desired
of all. Some of them are ready to be drunk the second or third month:
othersome not before the seventh or eight month. All of them begin to fade and
loose their goodness in the beginning of the second year. The red, although
they be bright and clear, are not of so subtle a substance as the former, and
therefore they nourish more, and are more fit for such as live hardly, than for
such as live delicately and nicely: and what although they cannot be so easily
concocted and digested, nor so speedily distributed, neither yet cause such
abundance of urine, as those which are yellow, claret or white: yet travel,
often exercises and labor does overcome all these inconueniencies, yea, and
whatsoever greater that such red wines may engender and breed. Amongst them,
those which participate and have any sourenes or astriction, become not mellow
before the Summer heat, whereupon it follows, that the second year, their
crud and raw parts being concocted and digested, they grow to be more
excellent than they were in the first.

The deep red and vermillion colored are for the most part harsh and rough,
and so the most unpleasant and unwholesome of all other: for that they are
wont to be ill concocted and digested, and slowly distributed, as also to
engender many obstructions, and beget a gross and melancholicke blood. And for
these causes are not convenient but for such as labor and lead a very
toilesome life, in whose bodies they being once concocted and digested, do
nourish very much, and make them more strong and lusty to go about and finish
their work, and therewithal corroborate their stomach.

Of white French wines, those are most accounted of, which are clear and
bright as rock water, of a subtle substance, neither sweet nor green: such
do nourish the body a great deal less than the yellow and claret wines; but
in recompense thereof, they are more easily concocted, digested, distributed,
and carried more speedily and readily through all the veins. True it is, that
they are accompanied with this inconvenience, namely, that they do more assault
the head, (and therefore are to be accounted greater enemies unto gourie
persons, such as have weak brains, and are subject to rheumes and diseases of
the ionts, and such likewise as have weak ioinus) than the red which are not
yet come to their liuelyhood and maturitie, which strengthen and corroborate
the mo^th of the stomach, by reason of some easy astringencie that is in
them. Such as in the first months become somewhat sweet, if they be kept any
time, in the end grow so concocted and rip^, that having le^t their sweetness,
they prove strong, mighty, and most excellent wines.

Green wines whether they be white or red, (such as we oftentimes see in these
countries, especially in cold and moist years) if they contain any strong
heat, as it were buried in their crud and raw parts, if they be kept any time,
are wont to concoct themselves, and attain to such a degree of ripeness, as
that they are ^ound good, well contenting the taste, and pleasant upon the
tongue: such as those are which are not simply green, but together with their
greenenesse do taste somewhat rough and sower: the other become spent, faded,
and decayed in the beginning of Summer, by reason of the said euaporating and
wast of their weak and feeble hea^e. Wherefore you must drink such vvines as
are greenish and waterie, not having any sharpness or sowrenesse in them, in
the beginning of Summer, that so you may be sure, that the great Summer heat
shall not cause them to fade utterly, and quite fall away, by the spending of
their feeble heat, caused through the vehemency of the Summer heat: but those
which are green, rough, and harsh, having a strong heat couched and lying in
gross and thick matter, may be kept very securely unto Autumn or Harvest
time. Such as are only and simply green, are good and fit for servants
drink, and other such folk as live hardly and in great labor, as also for
all such as feel a fire and extreme heat in the liver and other inward parts:
for such vvines in idle and delicate persons, as also all such as are of a cold
temperature, or are grown into old age, do not only not become well
concocted and digested, but withal engender a mass of many crudities, and
much flatuousnesse, become slowly distributed, procure many obstructions,
offend the stomach, entrails, and matrix: notwithstanding, they sometimes
appease the pains of the reins, and become sovereign for the weak head. And
thus much in general, and summarily, of the nature, temperature, qualities,
and differences of French vvines. For the diversity which is found in them, by
reason of several Soiles, Towns, Villages, and great or small Boroughs, where
they grow, does in such sort alter and change yearly, through the variableness
of the constitutions of the years, as that it would be hard, yea impossible,
to lay them down in a certain and assured description. Notwithstanding, the
most excellent of and over all the rest, are the French vvines of Cous^ye,
appointed and ordinarily taken for the Kings use. Then those of Seure, both of
them being red or claret, noble, strong, and mighty vvines, most proper and
sit for such as are altogether cast down, and in whom nature is (as it were)
wholly spent, falling thereby into many faintings and swounes, whether they be
fallen hereinto by excessive and insatiable use of women, or through any other
notable and immoderate euacuation. The vvines of Vanues, Argentoile, and
Montmatre, and all other vvines which grow in grauelly or sandy grounds about
Paris, are the more healthful. For all these wines, in as much as they are of
a thin and subtle substance, without all green or manifest harsh taste
(especially in hot and well tempered years) keeping their proper and natural
temperature, are easily concocted and digested, and speedily and quickly
distributed through the veins: and which yet notwithstanding do not much
pester the head, and that because they are not very strong, and therefore do
not heat much.

The vvines of Burgundy, which are sent us from Sens, Auxerres, Tonnerre,
Ioigny, and Chablie, are generally all of them red: many of them, yea the
greatest part of them, are in their first months astringent and somewhat
rough, and thereby do make more solid, bind, comfort, and corroborate a lanke
and loose stomach, and so they nothing annoy the brain by any great store of
vapors or fumes carried up from them: by which reason they prove the most
wholesome and convenient of all other for such as have the gout, and are
subject to have the distillations of the head falling upon the inferior parts.
Notwithstanding if you drink them before they be come to their full and
perfect ripeness, you shall well perceive them somewhat the harder to be
digested, and to be more slowly distributed than the French claret wines are.

Wherefore I would advise men, not to use them in the beginning of the year,
but rather in the latter end, if so be they be subject to the obstructions of
the liver, spleen, and Mesenterium, or such as li^e idly, or yet such as are
dilicately given, and have but little natural heat within them, as forsooth
being the time wherein they abound with much harshnesse and astringencie: which
yet may even then be very well used of them which are accustomed to travel,
and have a strong and good stomach. Likewise if you let them ripen and loose by
little and little their astringencie and harshnesse, you shall find them as
good and pleasant as the French wines. This is the cause why good householders
do lay them in cellars, and reserve them diligently to the end of the first
year, or to the beginning of the second to send them in^o foreign countries
by sea: which being so transported prove better and more excellent than they
did in France, or whiles they lay couched upon their cantling, as men call it,
because the carrying and transporting of them, increases their natural heat,
as we have before declared, and causes it by such motion to grow more ripe
and concocted. Notwithstanding, very many of these Burgundian wines in hot and
d^ie years, are in some countries found good the first year.

Amongst the Burgundian wines, those of Beaune are most highly commended, for
they are so good as that I dare be bold to prefer them before the wines of
Orleance and Ay, which are so much esteemed of in Paris, because they are of a
subtle substance, of the color of a partridges eye, not given to ^ume or fill
the head full of vapors, and thereby les^e as^ailing the head, and hurting the
brain, than those of Orleance. Likewise the common verse made of the wine of
Beaune, has been always received for true and current.

Vinum Belnense, super omnia vina recen^e. Such as take a very good taste of
those wines, Wines of Coussy.
do compare and match them with the wines of the Kings yard at Coussy, whose
plants when they were young, were otherwise brought from Greece, in such sort,
as that the wines of Coussy and Beaune come very near unto the goodness and
perfection of the Greekish wines. Some also do compare the wines of Beaune to
the wines that grow in the yard of the King of Navarre, Wines of Prepaton.
which is some ^iue leagues from Vendosme, called Prepaton, and this name was
given it because the plants therein were chosen and taken out of the best in
all places. The wine is a claret, of the color of a partridges eye, of a thin
substance, not fuming or being vaporous, of a pleasant taste, and delicat to
drink, if there be any wine in the world so qualified. All these three sorts
of wine, of Coussy, Beaune, and Prepaton, are the most excellent that are to
be^ound in all Fr^^ce, and that because both in good and evil years, they are
found and tried to be better than any other, and readier to be drunk upon.
Wines of Dij^n.
Amongst the wines of Beaune, the wine of Dijon must be reckoned, and they are
those which grow in the Kings vineyard at Cheno^e, Fontaine, Plombiere, and
Tolent. True it is, that before a man judge of the goodness and qualities of
wines, he must every year consider the estate and constitution of the seasons
of every year, as also take a diligent taste of the wines, thereby to give the
more assured judgment: because it falls out sometimes the French wines,
sometimes the Burgongni^ wines, and other some years the wines of Orleance do
prove most excellent, and some^imes the wines of Anjou prove better than all
the rest. Yea, and as the number, and to be reckoned up amongst the rest, are
the wines of Ay and Isancy, and d^e for the most part hold the first and
principal place for their goodness and perfection, wherein they excel all
other wines, and are in all good or evil years found better than any other,
whether they be French, Bourgongnie, or Anjou wines. The wines of Ay are claret
and yellowish, subtle, fine, and in taste very pleasing unto the pala^e, and
therefore eagerly ^ought after, for the use of Kings, Princes, and great Lords,
being yet therewithal such wines as the Greeks call Oligophora, and will not
admit the mixture of much water. The wines of Isancy are of a middle
consistence and red of color: when they are come to their ripenes, they prove
strong and noble wines, in so much as that you may justly compare them in
goodness with the wines of Nera^, notwithstanding they be so highly esteemed
of, and had in request for great personages.

The wines of Orleance are set in the first rank and chief place for
goodness and per^ection, amongst all the wines of France: Such are red, for
the most part, of a middle consistence betwixt thick and thin, of a good
taste, strong, and profitable for the stomach and inward parts. They heat more
without comparison, and more nourish the body than any French wines, as few
excepted, as the wines of Coussy, and Seure. But in the mean time they fill
the head and hurt the brain, more than any other, if you continue the use of
them any long time, especially in such as have a weak brain, and are subject
to cause many distillations, as also in those which are subject to
inflammations of the lungs, and disposed by their bodily constitution to fall
into pleurisies: yea, these vvines are worse than any other for gowtie folk,
as also for such as are troubled with agues, and others, which have their
principal and inward parts of a hot and dry constitution, and to them that
are troubled with the diseases of the skin, as the itch, leprosy,
benummednesse, tettars, wild fire, scabs, and others such like. But on the
contrary, they are most apt for, and best agreeing, with natures and diseases
that are cold, and moved of cold causes, in swounes and faintness coming of
abundant and excessive euacuation, by too much use of women, watching, or
other such like causes, and in like manner, of them which languish upon cold
and long diseases. And thus much of that which we can judge to be in the
vvines of Orleance.

For as in other Countries and Soiles, The diversities of the wines of Orleance.
so likewise in the grounds about Orleance the earth does naturally engender
diverse qualities and faculties in wine. For amongst others, such as are
yellowish, claret, and bright clear, are accounted the excellentest and best
of all: such are they which grow and are gathered near unto Orleance, in the
boroughes of Sainctay, Wines of Sainctay, S. Hillaries Chapel, S. Mesmain, and
S. de Bouc.
S. Hillaries Chapel, S. Mesmain the long, of the Loyre, or at Checy. Those
which grow at the village of S. de Bouc, are (in good sooth) all of them right
noble and excellent vvines, but somewhat of a more gros^e and r^ddish
consistence, which is the cause that they come not to their best till about
Easter. The weakest and feeblest are those of Liuet, S. Gy, and Nigray, which
yet are more healthful for such as live idly, and follow their study, than
the vvines which are stronger. At Paris we account for very precious those
which are brought us from Messay, Wines of Messay, of Orleance.
which although they be far behind in goodness and perfection unto the best
vvines of Orleance, because they are of a thick consistence, and cost not
much: notwithstanding, seeing that by transportation and carriage they become
thinner and more ripe, they are the better accounted of, of the Merchants.

Such as grow near the Abbey of Neighbors, Orleance wines of the grounds of
the Abbey of Neighbors.
are cousin germans and much alike to the vvines of Messay.

The white vvines of Orleance do surrender and partly give over the praise
unto French white vvines, White wines of Orleance.
which is the cause that they are transported but as little as may be out of
the Country.

The vvines of Lourye, which do taste somewhat sweet, are accounted the chief
of all the rest in that place, as likewise those of Rebechi. The vvines of
Aniou, such of them as are good, are (in a manner) all of them white and sweet,
and for the most part temperate, or hot and dry (when the temperature of the
year falls out hot and dry) strong, noble, and mighty; in such sort, as
that amongst all French vvines they keep the first place for goodness. All
the while they are sweet, thick, and unconcocted, they swell the stomach and
the ^lankes, stop the veins, swell the noble parts, and provoke thirst,
especially in choleric natures: and sometimes also they loosen the belly. But
when as, through their working and boiling up, they have cast out all their
dross and dregs, and that they are become sufficiently ripe, concocted, and
digested, that is to say, in their middle age (which they attain unto the
second year) as then they become fair, bright, and clear, as also very
pleasant: so, having lost their ill qualities, mentioned before, they get such
qualities, powers, and virtues, as are altogether contrary unto those which
they had, at such time as they were sweet, and of a gross consistence: for
they become easily concocted, quickly piercing, sufficiently provoking urine,
and causing to spit abundantly. When the year falls cold and rainie, the
most part of the vvines of Aniou become raw and greenish, as by experience we
plainly saw in the years 1576. and 1577.

When the year is hot and dry, the wines growing in Aniou are strong and
mighty, and keep their virtues and qualities entire and whole till they be
six or seven years old. But when the year falls out cold and moist, they
prove to be of clean contrary qualities.

The vvines of high Normandy Wines of high Normandy.
(I mean not those which are gathered and beaten down with poles) do
somewhat resemble the French vvines, when the years fall seasonable, and
keep their natural temperature: such, for the most part, are of a yellow
color: but not continuing so any long time, they by and by loose their force:
which is the cause, that they are easily digested, and quickly distributed and
carried along all the veins, without annoying the brain any whit, in as much
as they be not strong, or mighty, but oligophorous. But when the years fall
out cold and moist, the greatest part of them will not keep well, because they
be green, and that in such sort, as that their greenenesse cannot be concocted
and digested by reason of the weakness of their heat, and therefore it
behooves to drink them in the beginning of the first year. Wines of Compeigne.
The vvines which grow in Compiegne, and other parts of Picardie, are of the
same consistence, quality, and virtue that those of Normandy are, and
therefore deserve not to be much set by, or desired, but when others are
wasting.

The Countries of Guyenne send us variety of vvines. Wines of Nerac.
The best of them, are those which grow about Nerac, which come very near
unto the goodness of the French vvines of Cous^y, which, by reason of their
russet color, are called in the Country Rus^e^ vvines: in the number whereof,
are contained the red vvines, or sad, and light red. They nourish sufficient
abundantly: but in that they make obstructions, and increase great masses of
melancholic humors (especially those which are sweet) they must not be used
but of them which live in toil and travail. Those which are of a thin and
subtle substance, whether they be white, claret, or of a light yellow, for as
much as they have a very pleasant taste, and are easily concocted, and quickly
distributed, they are desired and much required at the Tables of great men.

Let us conclude then, that amongst all the vvines which we use at Paris, as
concerning the red, the best are those of Cous^y, Seu^e, Vanues, and Meudon:
and as concerning the white, those of Argente^ell: and then those of Ay,
Isancy, and Beaune in Bourgongnie, being well ripened: next, those of Orleance.
As concerning white, the wines of Longiumeau, Palesiau, Massy, Pont d' Anthony:
then those of Bar^urabe, Aniou, and others, which are brought us from Arbois,
Gascoigny, and Languedoc. The wines of the grounds near unto Paris, as of
Villeiui^ue, Vitry, and Jury, which are white; of Fontenay and Montreuill,
which are reddish; are not to be much set by, because they are greenish, and of
an unpleasant taste. The vvines of Gascoignie are without comparison more hot
and dry than the vvines of Orleance, and yet they be not so vaporous, neither
yet assail the head so mightily, as I have proved that the vvines of Orleance
do.

The vvines which Greece, Languedoc, and Spain do send us, or rather, which
the delicacie and voluptuousness of our French throats cause to be fe^ched
from beyond the Sea, such as are Sacks, Muscadels of Frontignan, Malmesies,
Bastards (which seem to me to be so called, because they are oftentimes
adulterated and falsified with honey, as we see wine Hydromell to be prepared)
and Corsick vvines, so much used of the Romans, are very pernicious unto us,
if we use them as our common drink. Notwithstanding, we prove them very
singular good in cold diseases, caused of cold humors, without the hot
dist^mperature of the liver, or of any other noble part: but chiefly and
principally Malme^ey, which we daily note and observe to be very sovereign in
the crudities of the stomach, and collickes, by reason of the singular force
and virtue it has in concocting of crude and raw matter, and in dissoluing of
vvinde and flatuousnesse. But howsoever ^orraine vvines, which are fetched
from far Countries, may seem pleasant unto our taste, yet indeed the truth
is, that we are not to use them, except it be with as great advise and
judgment as may be, because that besides their manifest outward qualities,
they have also close and hidden ones, which indeed may become familiar and
well agreeing, through some* sympathy, with the inhabitants of those
Countries where the said vvines grow: but unto us they are enemies, by an
antipathie or contrarie^ie which is betwixt them and us, which are of a soil
and country far unlike. Which point if we regard not, we cannot but for the
most part offend against the rules of art, and commit infinite faults in
prescribing and laying down such diet, and order of government, as shall be
for the direction of other men's lives.

Some do make and compound spiced wines which somewhat resemble the foresaid
foreign wines, and that not so much for the necessity of life or health, as
for pleasure, and the deligthing of the swallow: of which sort are the claret,
the preparing whereof we have set down before, and hipocras, so called, not
that Hipocrates did ever invent it or use it, but (of the mixture and
temperature according whereunto the said wine is compounded and made) it is so
called of the Greek verb (...), which signifies to temper. Men ought seldom
to temper these wines, because that by their unwonted heat and great
vaporousnesse, they procure many troublesome diseases, as the squinancie,
strangurie, apoplexy, pallie, and other such like: notwithstanding such as
feel a certain coldenesse and weakness in their stomach, may use them, not as
their common drink, but sometimes only as remedy or medicine.

And thus in brief you have what I thought good to deliver concerning the
qualities and virtues as well of such wines as grow in France, as also of them
which are brought us from strange countries. By the reading of this slight
discourse, the Reader which is careful of his health, may learn to make
choice of such wine as is fittest for his own drinking, as he shall perceive
to be agreeable and profitable, not only for his nature and disposition, but
also for his health. As for example, he that has a very hot and dry liver,
his lungs subject to inflammation, and ready to receive sharp distillations
from the brain, and his brain very moist, shall not use hot and dry wines,
such as are those of Languedoc, Gascoignie, and Orleance: but he shall content
himself with some small French wine, somewhat greenish, and which bears but
small store of water. He likewise which has a cold stomach, and is subject to
cold and windy diseases, shall use the wine that is good, and have nothing to
do with the small and green wines, and for this purpose shall make his
advantage of this our discourse, which will instruct and teach him the
diversity and qualities of wines.

The end of the sixth Book.
THE SEVENTH BOOK OF THE COVNTRIE FARM.
The Warren.
CHAP. I.
Of the situation of the Warren.
HItherto we have as briefly as possibly we could run through whatsoever thing
belonging to the tilling and dressing of the earth, as gardens, meadows,
arable grounds and vines: now it is requisite, that following the order before
propounded, we speak of the Warren, of wood, timber trees, parks for wild
beasts, breeding of herons, and of hunting.

We will begin therefore to describe the Warren, The profit of the Warren.
the profit whereof is not inferior to that of the pullaine, pigeons, and
other small cattle, which are bred and fed about our country farm, but
chiefly in respect of the selling of conies, which the good householder may do
yearly, and that some years betwixt four score a hundred dosen, beside all
those which the Lord of the farm shall stand in need daily to use, either for
eating in his house, or for to give away and gratify his friends withal.
Again the endeavor, care, and pain about a Warren is nothing so great, as
that which is required in the ordering of other small cattle; for conies stand
not in to have a special and set governor, to take care continually of house,
handle, make clean, heal them when they are sick, or to dress them their
meat, because that of of themselves they build earthes and little holes to
hide and repose themselves in: and feeding, they look not for any thing but
that which the earth of its own accord, without any tilling does bear and
bring forth for them.

Wherefore for the most profit of your country farm, you must provide and
prepare a Warren in such a place, as has before been spoken of, that is to
say, betwixt your corn fields, vineyards, and grounds bearing timber trees, if
peradventure you have not the b^nefit of some under wood near unto your house,
where the conies may settle themselves and make their abode. Notwithstanding in
as much as the hunting and taking of conies, which have their couer^s and
boroughs in such under woods, is some what more hard and difficult than that of
the Warren: and because also that conies living in small woods multiply nothing
so much as those in the Warren, and that especially by reason of foxes,
woolues, and other field beasts, whereunto they are oftentimes made a pray by
being devoured of them: it will be better, and for your further both ease and
profit, to make a Warren apart by it self.

You must then for the making thereof, reserve some five or six acres of fine
dusti^, or sandy ground, such as is not fat, strong or close, in a high place
lying open upon the Sun, and not in a ^arish or waterie ground: for together
with that, the ^onie hates above all things, moisture and cold; yet for the
conueniencie of her making of here earthes, it is requisite that she be in a
place, where she may dig with ease for the making of her bed and covert. This
piece of ground shall be compassed and be set about after the manner of a
park, with reasonable high walls to keep out fox^s, woolues, and other wild
beasts, that they may not injury or make war upon this little beast. Within
this conigrie, you must plant great store of brambles, mulberri^ trees, and
^loe trees, strawberrie plants, wild pine trees, hurtle berrie bushes, goose
berrie bushes, m^rtle trees, and great store of juniper, for the conie loves
the juniper berrie above all other things. And as concerning herbs, you must
sow (if so be the earth bring not forth someof itself) great ^tore of
sowthistle, groundswell, succorie, coleworts, lettuces, clarie, taragon,
thistles, turnips, cich ^ease, and other such like for the feeding of these
little beasts. As for the drawing of some small brook, or bestowing of any
water conduit upon them, you need not trouble your self, seeing the coni^ has
moisture more than any thing else. Neither yet do you trouble your self to
prepare them any other lodging, than the holes which they shall dig and work
out for themselves.

And those buroughs or clappers which shall be meet for them to work in,
which borrough would (if the nature of the ground do not allow it) be cast up
somewhat high and s^^ape wise, so as the water may by all means dessend, and
pass from the same without soaking into it, or drawing it upon any flux of
rain whatsoever: upon the tops of these buroughs or clappers, for the better
strengthening of them, and holding the loose mould together, you shall plant
good store of alders and other rough bushes which are quick of grows, whose
roots once entering into the earth and twinding about the mould, will keep any
from falling, more than that which the conie of her own self diggeth: and
although out of the preciseness of choice we desire a special place for the
conie Warren; yet you shall understand that the most barren^est ground
whatsoever (so it lie dry) will serve for the conie Warren, as namely the most
dryest heath or downs, or those earths which are over run with linge, gorse,
whynnes, braken, broom, fern, and such like, for a conie feeds as a sheep
does, close and near to the ground, and will gather up the smallest chi^e of
grass that may be, and also delights to crop upon weeds or any other tender
bud that grows within the compasle of her feeding: the snow is her greatest
enemy, ^et not so much for the want of food, as for the over moistning of ^er
food, and so bringing rottenness: therefore it is mere to have every Winter
in your Warren a little cob or stacke of hay, wherewith in those extreme times
you may fodder your conies, pricking up little (...) thereof in cloven sticks
close by the ground, which they will eat with all greediness, for it is a
meat at those times which they love exceedingly: for proof whereof do but
fodder sheep near unto a connie Warren, and you shall see how evening and
morning the conies will swarm unto the same, eating up whatsoever the sheep
shall leave, which is not too hard or rough for their eating.

CHAP. II.
That there must a Clapper be made for the better storing and planting of your
Warren.
ANd yet it is not enough to have made and finished the things that are to be
done round about the Warren, as to have fenced it, with whatsoever is
necessary for the preserving and nourishing of conies; but you must also store
and plant it: for no more than arable ground bears fruit, except there be
seed cast into in: nor the vine any grapes, except it be diligently planted
and dressed: so neither think you that your Warren, be it never so nea^ly and
necessarily appointed and trimmed up, can breed and feed conies, except you
first put them there. Wherefore for your storing of your Warren, it is
requisite that you cast up a clapper, wherein you may put your males and
females to kindle every month: for to buy so many as should be needful would
be too costly and chargeable for the farmer or householder. Seeing also that it
comes to pass oftentimes, that after he has sold many unto the vitailers,
or for that the foxes have eaten up some great number, the Warren remains
quite spoiled, and destitute of conies, in so much as that he must be compelled
to store it again. It is better therefore, in respect of the greater
commodity and less charges, to make a clapper in some corner of your court,
kitching, or garden, which may be four square, narrow, and fenced in with
bords, or plaistered walls: indeed it were better to be provided in the Warren,
for so the young ones might more commodiously out of the clapper pass into the
Warren at some one side of the clapper, which should be cross wrought with
lattise work, and should have the holes thereof left so wide, as that the
young ones might pass out and in unto their dams.

Whether therefore the clapper be provided in the Warren, or elsewhere, you
must build certain small lodgings paued with boords, and these must have holes
in them like to those which the conies make themselves in the earth, and every
one several from another, for the conies to betake themselves into: and it
will be enough for to allow in such places one male to eight or ten females;
and yet therewithal to keep the bucke close shut up in his lodging, for fear
he should hurt and wrong the young ones, for the male conie (contrary to the
nature of all other manner of buckes) deuoureth the young ones. It is very
true, that so soon as it is espied, that the Do has kindled, she must
incontinently be put into some other hole with the male, that so he may Bucke
her: for this is a most certain thing, that so soon as the Do is empty and
delivered of her young ones, even so soon she is full again of young, in such
sort, as that she brings forth young every month in the year: yea, and
being great with young, she lets not to take the Bucke, and to continue a
second burden, which she brings forth afterward in due time. So as that this
fruitfulness in conies has become so admirable unto many, as that some have
upon too slender grounds thought and believed that the Bucke shoold conceive
and become great with young as well as the Do, which is very false and
altogether contrary to all natural course in the action of generation, seeing
that by natures course, it is ordained that the female only amongst beasts
should conceive and ing^nder, and not the male.

After that the young ones are grown somewhat great, and become able to leave
their dams, you shall carry them into the Warren for to store it therewith,
and so let them grow wild: otherwise if you keep them shut up, and fast
enclosed in the clapper with their dams, they will become tame, and always
continue as it were slumbring and heavy, like unto those which are continually
shut up in clappers made for the purpose; and so will have a grosser and more
unpleasant flesh.

And yet notwithstanding, you must beware not to put abroad into your Warren,
the old clapper conies, either males or females: for seeing they have not had
their free swing to run abroad as those of the Warren, and have not learned to
save themselves from dangers and violences offered them by foxes and other such
wild beasts, they would be by and by devoured; so that thereupon it seems
better to contain and continue them still in their accustomed clapper.

Conies in the clapper are to be sed with col^worts, lettuses, groundsell,
clarie, succorie, sowthistle, ^arragon, thistles, cich pease, oats, barely and
bran mingled together, and other such like things, as we have spoken of
heretofore. In some countries they feed them with man's blood, such as is to be
come by when sick persons are let blood: but such manner of feeding of them is
stark naught, and makes their flesh unsavory in eating, and very
prejudicial unto health.

And surely to speak the truth there is no food that a man can bind a conie to
(...) which is wholesome for them, because they are beasts which above all
other desire freedom of feeding, and to make choice of their own meat. Whence
it comes, that the tame conie is nothing so pleasant to eat as the wild, but is
of a much ranker taste, and most easy to be discerned.

CHAP. III.
How the Conies in a Warren ought to be handled and ordered.
ALthough the having of a clapper be very necessary for the storing of a
warren, again and again (as we have said before) notwithstanding, for need,
one may leave off all use of the clapper, and so, without any further charge or
expenses, content himself with putting a certain number of conies, both males
and females, into his warren, of them to have sufficient store by increase of
young ones. True it is, that they are not so fruitful, nor of such plentiful
increase, and therefore the warren will not be so soon stored by them: for
they being accustomed to the warren, become more savage and strange, but less
given to engender: and thereupon it comes, that the Does of the warren bring
forth young ones only thrice or four times a year, and those that are kept
in house-clappers, once every month: But howsoever it be, if you find it more
for your profit to furnish your warren with store after this later manner, it
will be sufficient, for six dozen of Does, to put in nine Bucks, having more
regard and consideration still unto the Does than to the Bucks, to spare them,
if at any time you would take any.

Their feeding shall be no otherwise than has already been mentioned: and
yet notwithstanding, besides that manner of feeding, if you would have great
store of conies in your warren, and that they should be to sufficiently fed,
as that they should become fat, it will be good to sow an acre of ground, or
two, with Barley or Oats, not for to make any further harvest of them, than that
which they shall leave uneaten. You must have a special care, that they feed
upon good nourishment, because their flesh (in like manner as the flesh of
Partridges) does retain the smell and savor of that whereupon they feed: as
for example, of Juniper, if their vvaren be full of Juniper, and so semblably
of other things.

If you see any conie-hole stopped with hay, or straw, or such other like thing,
do not unstop it, but content your self only to observe it, and to guess
that there are young ones within, which the dam nourishes: for this is the
manner of the Do, that from the time that she has kindled, whether it be in
a house, clapper, or in a warren, she shuts and stops up her hole with
hay, straw, or some other grass, such as she can gather together, and to no
other end, but that the Bucke may not find her young ones, or go into her hole,
where if he should once come, he would eat up all her young ones: this thing
being assuredly and undoubtedly conceived of the Do, whether she be in her
hole, or else go forth to feed, she stops her earth: and if so be that at
her return she find the mouth of her hole never so little vnstopt, she her
self will by and by kill her young ones, having taken opinion, that the Bucke
is gone in thither. And this is the cause why good hunters will never put their
ferret into any earth, whose mouth they see stopped, for fear of disquieting
the dam, and causing of her to kill her young ones. True it is, that she does
not keep her hole evermore shut: for at such time as she knows her young
ones to be grown great, and become strong enough to seek their meat, and to
run with others, she begins to make a little hole for them to issue and
go out at.

Furthermore, you must not think, that conies, either males or females, do at
any time forget their earth, be it never so far off: for howsoever some say,
that comes have no memory, notwithstanding they are always mindful of their
hole, be they strayed or wandered never so far from the same. And this is the
reason likewise why some say that a good conie will never die out of her earth.
A good conie dies always in her earth.
You must likewise conjecture, that the conie is taught by nature to be afraid
of the fox, as the sheep of the woolfe, which is another case besides his wild
and strange nature, why, when he goes out of his hole, his mind runs upon
nothing but running, thereby forgetting to think upon other conies holes, and
so of the Does, and of the eating of her young ones: for although he be
mindful of his own earth, yet he takes no care, neither casts any whit
about, how he may find out of fall upon that which belongs to another:
likewise the Do to take from him all occasion of any whi^ regarding hers: is
wont to stop the mouth thereof as has been said.

Furthermore, you must be careful round about the verdge of your conie Warren
in the most secret and obscure places, and where you shall find the greatest
suspicion of the trackt of vermin, to place trappes and ginnes which may take
and devour them, neither shall your trappes be made all of one fashion, but
of diverse fashions, as some of them must be hollow and passable both ways,
the which are called coffer trappes or hutches: some frall-traps, which are to
crush and kill suddenly: some spring-trappes, to snickle or halter either bird
or beast, as also pit-falls, and other ginnes: all which the Warrenner shall
diligently and carefully look unto, and bait with the livers of conies, or
some other such beasts: and in the highest part of the Warren, the Warrenner
shall place a pair of gallows made of cross poales, on which he shall hang
all the vermin which he shall kill, as Foxes, Faulmars, Cats of all kinds,
Buzards, Crows and such like, (all which breed great destruction in the
Warren) as well to scar away other from hunting thereabouts, as also to give
testimony to the owner of his care and diligence in preserving his ground from
such like encumbrances.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the difference betwixt the Warren and clapper conie.
THe Warren conie has a redder and thinner hair, a swi^ter and slenderer
body, she is also more watchful and wild, having a pleasanter flesh, and
less ingendring melancholy than the clapper conie: for the clapper conie
lacking liberty, cannot run not exercise her body, and so becomes more
familiar and tame, more gross, fuller of hair, more heavy and drowsy, and
therefore less pleasant: again, if it happen by chance that she come into
the Warren amongst wild ones, she is by and by devoured of Foxes or other
beasts, enemy unto her, having never been acquainted with the the assaults
and enimities of the said beasts before. As concerning other matters, The
virtues and special properties of conies.
both of them are better to be eaten young and small, than when they are great.
Their brain is good to assuage the pain that young children do endure in the
breeding of their teeth: notwithstanding, such as would preserve their memory
must beware and e^te as little thereof as they can possibly, because it
furthereth forgetfulness. The fat of conies is much more to be commended than
any other part, because it is better than any other helps to make liniments of
for the reins which are grieved with the gravel or the stone.

Of Wood.
CHAP. V.
What is to be considered before a man go about to plant wood.
TO order and cause a new wood to be planted, you must know the ground wherein
you would plant any thing, as whether it be fat or lean, whether it be of a
reasonable depth of earth or no: and likewise if it be subject to waters;
because that some trees by nature love the water, as the aller The aller.
an dothers of the same nature: and according to the nature and property of
the ground, you must apply your self to fit it with such, as it may nourish
most, both for your profit and pleasure.

You must see and set down first and before all other things, that the ground
be of such goodness as is requisite: and you must likewise understand that
two of the noblest trees and esteemed worth most silver, are the oak The oak.
and the chestnut tree, The chestnut tree.
and that for two principal reasons: the one because they bear such fruits as
whereof mixed with a little barley or oats, one may make bread in the time of
famine: the other, because it is not in the nature of any tree to afford so
good timber as the said two, the oak and chestnut tree do, being either of them
considered in its proper quality.

The third excellent sort of trees is the elm: The elm.
and notwithstanding it be inferior to the other, because it bears no fruit,
E^me^ are barren an^ b^are no fruit.
and for that the lease thereof is nothing so pleasant, in respect of the
leaves of the oak and the chestnut tree: yet ^he tree is worth the having, even
for that it may be headded after the manner of willowes, and cut every four
years to make props and fagots: but the chestnut tree Chestnut trees.
is a great deal better, more neat and fine, and bearing more fruit than
other trees which are of its nature: neither does it stand in need of so good
and fat a gr^und as does the oak, and again the Caterpillars and such other
vermin do not h^^nt and fall upon it, as they do upon the oak and elm. And
further when the locusts come, which is every three years, Locusts every
three years.
as I my self have seen, they eat not the leaves of the chestnut trees,
because they find leaves upon the oaks: for the year of the locusts does
hinder some wood more than of a years growth, whereas besides that privilege,
the chestnut tree does ordinarily grow more in one year than the oak does in two.

Yet is the oak accounted the King of the forest, both in respect of his
largeness and hudgenesse, as also for his hardness and long indurance; for of
all timbers not any is i^ so long lasting, or fit for building either upon the
land or water, as oak is: it is also the most principal timber that may be
either for boordes, plankes, wainscot, or any other ^eeling whatsoever, and of
all manner of oaks, those are preserved and kept as the best and principal
which grow upon the clay grounds, as being the finest, hardest, ^oundest, and
most durable timber: those oaks which grow upon the sandy grounds being much
more brickle, falser hearted, and much less able to endure the violence of the
weather, or the continual beati^g of the wet, when it must necessarily fall
upon the same: whence it comes that the Ship-wright or the Mill-wright ever
make choice of the strong clay oak, and the Ioyner of the sand oak, which
though it be less durable, yet it is fairest and whitest to look on. The
elm besides the benefit of his head (which is commonly for the fire) is a most
excellent timber for the ground work of any thing, or to be lodged in the
ground for any necessary purpose, especially to make pipes for the conueyance
of water; for it is a wood of that infinite toughness, that if it lie close and
well hid in the earth, it seldom or never consumes in the same: it is also
rarely good to make bow-staues withal, and excepting the yew is the principal
best for that purpose: it is no less good to make axel-trees either for
Wagons, Carts, or Waines, being neither so brickle, nor apt to heat and break
as the ash is: the young plants are good to make beeles for yoakes, by which
oxen draw either in waines or ploughes: and lastly, is an excellent tree to
plant in alleyes or walks, or about houses for shade, bearing a large head
like the Cicamore, and fully as round, and as much extended: and the leaf
naturally of it self being broad, and growing so thick, that hardly neither
the Sun nor the rain can possibly pass through the same, neither is it
tender but very apt to grow, and may be removed at any time or age, as long as
it is portable and meet to be wi^lded by the strength of any one man.

It is very true, that the elm grows easily and plentifully, after that it
has taken with the ground. And who so would for variety sake mingle diverse
sorts of trees of diverse natures, as maple, beech, aspe, and such other kinds
of wood, may do it, but the more oaks and chestnut trees a man grows, the
better he does.

CHAP. VI.
Of the seating and disposing of a wood for growing of high and great timber
trees.
WHo soever has a fair plot of eight or ten acres of ground, and would make
it show fair and beautiful the first year, and that by bringing the wood
into some shape and commendable form, with hope of further delight and
pleasure from the same in time to come, must for the first year wall it about
or else ditch it so well, and plant it with hedges of quickset, as that no
cattle may possibly be able to enter thereinto. And if the said plot should
come to be ditched, then I am freely contented to utter my opinion at some
other time, concerning the fashion that they are to be made after, as also
how, when they are made they must be planted or set with quickset.

But presuppose that the said square plot is enclosed with a wall, and that the
said square has four sides, that is to say, two of length and two of breadth,
mine advise is that all the sides of the said wall should be covered and clothed
with greenenesse, and with four sorts of trees, and six foot thick and large,
seeing that nature reioiceth in variety, that so both the walls may be kept
from being seen, and there may be a walk betwixt two greenes.

The said couerts shall be made according to the good liking of the Lord, as
for example, one of the sides if it should so seem good unto him, even the
South side with hasell and white hawthorne, because these are the first leaves
that do first put forth in the spring time, as those also wherein the
nightingale does make her neast: another of the sides with barberrie trees,
which are beautiful and serve for very many uses, spreading themselves in
comely sort, when they meet with a good ground: The third side being that
whereupon the Sun beats at his rising, with ^ame osiers, which may serve in
husbandry, and therewithal also make a fair show: and the fourth side with
young peare-tree plants, with some white thorn plants amongst, as at the end of
every four foot square, which are more green than any other sorts of trees,
and they will be of use for to graft many fair grafts upon, and good store of
great medlars.

The alleyes Alleyes.
about the said wood must be twelve foot broad, and upon the edges of all the
said alleyes, as well on those that are toward the wall, as on the other, there
must be planted elmes every one four fadome from another, having their heads
cut off, and their bodies remaining a seven foot high or thereabout, to give
some grace and comeliness unto the said alleyes: because that if a man should
walk in the fairest place in the world, if there be no sweetness to be found
in it, it proves tedious and irksome. For this cause, if it please the Lord
of the farm to plant along the said alleyes certain fruit trees, Fruit Trees*
as also wallnut-trees, and those such as may suit every season of the year,
he may do it.

Further, it may seem that all the said trees should be set from four feet to
four feet, and that by the level of a line every way, as well to please the
sight of the eye, as also for that sometimes men are desirous to make alleyes
within the wood, and then if the draughts be straight, it is more easy for to
make them.

CHAP. VII.
Of the manner of planting trees in woods of high and tall growth.
IF you purpose to plant these trees well, you must presently make dithes in
manner of furrows, as you are wont to do in the planting of vines, wherein
they must be planted, to the end the earth may feed it self in air, and that
it may battle and grow fat, with the rain and snow which shall fall during
Winter upon them unto the end of December, or unto the beginning of January.

These trenches are not to be made above two foot deep; but they must be well
handled in the bottom, and that by laying the good earth upon one side of the
furrow, and that which is less worth upon the other, and not to cast it
abroad, to the end that if the bottom should prove bad ground, or otherwise to
be over deep, then there might be cast into the said furrow or trench some of
that good earth which shall be on the side, to the end that the roots of the
tree may not busy themselves in searching a bad bottom, in steed of
stretching forth themselves, in largeness, and you must so leave the trenches
and furrows all Winter long, for the receiving of the rain water when it
comes: and they must be so wide, as that one may turn a yard every way round
within.

The said trees must be planted in December, if it be possible, and that the
times be favorable, The time to plant trees.
as when it freezeth not: for great frosts are great enemies to the good
proceeding of this work.

You should rather cast to plant trees that are already grown up, than to
deal with the sowing of acornes or chestnuts, because it requires great care
and industry to make the said seed to grow: and as concerning the seed it
self, that of the chestnut grows sooner than that of the acorne. And whenas
you go about to sow them, it must be done with leaving a foot distance betwixt
one and another with the largest, and in the end of great frosts: because that
during the said frosts, the mowles do eat the chestnuts in the ground.

As concerning the planting of trees already grown, they must be taken up
with as many roots as they can possibly, and after they be taken up, if there
by any of their roots broken, to cut the same: and those which are not broken,
to cut their ends for to refresh them, the length of three or four fingers,
more or less, as the roots may bear it. You must make choice of a young
plant, that has a lively and clean bark, not rough and ouergrowne with
moss, a good and handsome root, a straight shanke, and long without scares or
frets: and before you plant it, it will be good to cast into the furrow some
good earth, taken from the side of the same trench, to the thickness of a
finger or two, and upon that, to set the tree which you are to plant, then
covering the roots with earth, to sway upon them gently with your hands, that
so there may not any air stay about them, and in filling up the said furrows,
you must provide that they have some sloping of earth, both on the one side and
on the other, in manner of a gutter, to the end that if it rain, the rain and
moisture may run away the more easily.

And to the end that the planted trees may grow the better, you must lay their
longest roots all along the trench, on the one side, and on the other: and if
by hap it fall out that there be long ones on every side; so as that they
cannot easily be laid along in the furrow, you must enlarge the furrow a
little in the place where such roots require it to be enlarged, to the end that
the said roots may not touch the firm and fast earth, but may be buried and
wrapped in soft earth that has been moved and stirred.

You must likewise cut off by the top of the shanke all the trees which you
plant, that is to say, such as you plant to make high and tall timber trees, or
which you mind to set along by the sides of the alleyes, till you have not left
above the length of five or six foot to stand out of the earth, to the end
that they may the sooner bear a great quantity of wood: but the trees which
you are purposed to plant for low and small wood, must be cut, that there be
not left above a foot and a half, for it will be sufficient if they have the
length of four inches out of the ground: neither is there any danger in
mingling chestnut trees with oaks, except a man be purposed to plant one wood
with oaks only, and another with chestnut trees: and as concerning the
thickenesse of the said trees, it needs no deep advice, for they may be
either of the thickenesse of a chestnut, tennise-ball, or some other such like:
but rather the care is, that they be well and newly taken up, and planted the
same day they be taken up, or at the farthest the day following.

Neither is it doubtful, but if they be of much larger and bigger compass,
as seven or eight foot in length, (above the ground) and twenty inches in
compass: yet they will grow as well and as fast as the younger, especially,
the ^lme above all other trees: nor would I wish you, if you can get them, to
choose plants of any less bigness. And howbeit that some Woodwards are of
opinion, that the ash would be planted but of a mean length, because say
they, look how much it is above the earth, so much it will shoot out in root
under the earth, before it begin to prosper above: yet it is but a false
conjecture, and if you intend to have a fair and a large tree, you must choose
the fairest and largest plants that you can get, and then planting them in a
convenient and due time, and in a fit earth, they will in one Winter recover
that root which shall preserve them from perishing ever after: again you must
remember that as soon as you have fixed your plants in the earth, and covered
them well and close, which is a principal care, you must then forthwith cover
the top of the head all over, and at least half a foot downward with clay
and moss st^sly well tempered together, and if the clay be apt to chap or
riue, then you shall mingle a few ashes therewith, and so keep it closse
covered till the new branches spread forth and cover the head all over, then
when those branches are put out, and are tender, you shall plash and order them
at your pleasure, whether it be to make a tree for timber, or for shade, for
special mark, or for any other device whatsoeue.

The wood thus planted, must be twice labored and tilled, once in the end of
April, and the second time at the end of Iulie, after the fall of some great
rain upon thunder: and if the caterpiller shall fall upon it within the year,
it must be cleansed and freed from them.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the time when wood is to be tilled and husbanded.
IT is here to be noted that the chief and principal furtherance and comfort
that can be given to trees, either reclaimed or wild, is the labor bestowed
upon them in due and convenient time, for the more they are husbanded and
tilled, so much the more do they grow and prosper in greatness: wherefore
dressing and labor is necessary for young plants That dressing of the earth is
necessar^^ for young plants.
of all sorts of trees, as well small as great, and especially the four first
years, they must be husbanded thoroughly, and plied with two several dressings
every year as vines are, that is to say, toward the midst of April, when
they begin to put forth their buds, and toward the end of June, and this must
be done in moist and rainie weather, and not when drying winds or heat does
reign, because the ground then stirred would do nothing but turn to dust, Such
dressing of the earth in d^y weather in not good.
which would destroy the young springs, and cause them die: again the said
earth dressed at such time does more easily conueigh the drienesse of the dry
earth turned down, unto the roots of the trees, which is very contrary unto
them; seeing that moisture is the thing that is required for the nourishment of
plants: and again if the ground be moist, it ioineth it self close unto the
roots, and lends unto them of his moisture. The other reason is, for that the
earth being newly opened, by its lying open, gives pas^age for the water,
rain, or dew, to enter more easily unto the said roots.

The principal labor to be made about all trees, is to root out all weeds, To
pull up weeds by the root.
seeing they are given to grow every where in all grounds, and which, if they
be suffered to grow up, suck, purloine, and carry away the sap and substance
of the earth in such sort, as that there is not left sufficient virtue and
power to nourish the roots of the late planted trees well and in good order,
and this is perceived by the labor made in dressing of the vine and gardens,
the which the more they are husbanded and tilled, so much the more fruit, and
young springs they put forth, and become so much the more beautiful and fair.
So it will be the chief work after you have planted trees, to cause them to
be so dressed in seasons that are moist, and that twice at the least: and that
will cause them to grow greater of wood, greater of boughs, and to yield
double profit.

And if extraordinarily the Summer prove rainie, so as that your plants become
ouergrowne with much weeds, it shall be left to the discretion of the
husbandman, if he see that his plants be not clean, to bestow a third dressing
The third dressing of trees.
upon them, to the end that the weeds may not smother the bud, and devour the
substance of the earth: for all plants come of heat and moisture; The growth
of plants comes by heat and moisture.
and if they be suffered to be entangled with weeds, they will be smothered
and in danger to be lost.

CHAP. IX.
That wood diligently dressed and husbanded, does profit more than that which
is not so dressed and husbanded.
I Know that there are many trees which are daily seen to grow without such
great pains taking and industry, freely receiving their natural nourishment
without aid or assistance, and that by reason of the fruitfulness either of
the ground, or of the country; and yet if some one do so escape, a hundred die
for it: and this I say for their sakes, who having once planted would be loath
to loose their pains, and do conceive that all or the greatest part do thrive
and prosper: which conceat is notwithstanding like to deceive them, if they
proceed not to dress and husband them in convenient sort, after they have
been well planted, as is above declared.

Wherefore I have applied my self to try the issue of tilling of them
according to art and knowledge, The experience of dressing trees and of letting
of them go undress.
as also of leaving them untilled: and I find that although the tree which
grows in the desert do grow up sometimes upon a perfect growth,
notwithstanding it grows not in so short time, and the greatest part of it
dies: and that which is well tilled and planted, does grow twice so much, and
that not one of ten of them is lost, but that all prosper, of what sort of wild
trees soever they by.

But some may reply, that labor is chargeable and costeth much, but in as
much as it lasts not always, being to continue not past four or five years
at the most, much like unto the young plant of a vine, it will be found that
the cost will not be great, seeing especially that after such cost, it is
freed from any more for ever. For after that wood is once grown up to such
height, as that weeds cannot over grow nor ouercrow it, (which will be in four
or five years if it be husbanded) then it smothereth the weeds that grow under
it, and keeps away from them both the Sun and the air with its shawdow, in
such sort as that they die, and are not able to ouershadow or do any hurt unto
the wood.

CHAP. X.
Of removing, lopping, pruning, and making clean of wood.
THat your plant may grow the better, it is likewise requisite ^o remove trees
from a high, dry, and bad soil, into another ground that is more moist and
fat, if it may be: by this means, in finding a better soil, the tree will
take more easily: and there is no doubt, but the better the ground is, and the
better that the plant is ordered, the sooner it will grow, become bigger, bear
greater boughs and leaves rather than less, as may be seen in old forests
which are situated in fertile and fat countries, or in those which grow in
sandy and bad grounds, as in Solonge, Wood of Solonge.
where woods continue very small and untimely.

Woods planted and ordered (as is abouesaid) the first, second, and third
year, must not be touched with any edge tool: and yet notwithstanding
toward the third and fourth years and those that follow, if you perceive your
wood so thick set and spread, as that it rises not, neither grows high as it
ought, you may cull out and cut away the small sprigs and little boughs as you
shall find them, seeing they are good for nothing, and leave behind you some
three or four of the principal branches so stripped of their small twigs as
your own discretion will best direct you. This pruning of them would be
toward the month of March, after that the cold is passed and gone, that so
the frost may not hurt the boughs that are cut and newly lopped, and you may
continue thus to prune them unto the middeh of April, at what time they begin
to bud and put forth, but then it must be done gently, holding the shanke of
the tree fast and firm without moving or shaking of the roots* And this
pruning may be done every year, if you will, and by this means, you may cause
a new spring of small woods to grow, and to put forth eight or ten branches,
fit for to be plants for high and tall trees, by cutting away the side ones,
and leaving three or four of the fairest branches growing from the foot of the
said small wood, so cut down, according as you shall think good, so that you
make choice of such as grow up high and straight: and if they be not altogether
strong enough to hold up themselves, you may help them with some pretty small
props and sticks, the better to hold them up.

CHAP. XI.
Of the manner of sowing acornes for the growing of oaks
ALl sorts of wild trees grow Whereof wild trees (...) grow.
of removed plants, having good roots, or of branches, or of the seeds and
fruits which they bear, and whereby they renew themselves. Of the removed
plant, there has already enough been said, as that it is more profitable,
and of a more speedy and certain growth: and therefore the sooner able to
bestow pastime upon his master.

The second way to grow trees, is to grow them of branches writhen and buried
in the earth, gathered in such sort as that they may put forth roots, and take
again, as Columella has very well set down at large: notwithstanding, this
way is long in taking root, and putting forth; and not to be practiced, but
where there are no plants to be come by. Wherefore I will not meddle with it in
this place, because it is not done without difficulty and uncertainty, and
for that the pleasure thereof is long bebefore it is reaped: as also for that
in this our country of France, there are many underwoods and strong hedges,
where are to be gathered very easily, and that in great quantity, plants of all
sorts of wild trees.

The third way is to sow them of seed, as of acornes, beech maste, and of the
seed that is in the leaves of elmes, for they bring forth such trees as those
whereupon they themselves did grow: and such seeds may be sown in little
furrows made with a hacke or grubbing axe, and those not above four or five
fingers deep, and therein to cover them again very lightly with broken mould:
or else they may be sown with the plough, as beans and all other kinds of
grain are: or with a debbell, by which name they call a little stick of half
a foot long, and a finger or inch thick. And of the three ways, the best is
to plant or sow the acorne or other seed with the dibble, every one half a
foot from another, or one foot every one from another, by a straight line, or
after the manner used in grounds broken up with the hacke, making a small open
place in the earth, and therein putting the acorne in the like distance of
half a foot all along the furrowe: notwithstanding, it is not needful to
plant them so near every manner of way; for the earth would not be able to
bear so much fruit as would grow, and so it must either be transplanted, or
else it would prove out of course like a misborne thing. Wherefore you may
leave betwixt every two furrows and plants, four, five, or six foot distance
sidewaies: and again, if all prosper not, the worst and most ill fauouredly
grown may be pulled up.

And even as small and great wood is to be dressed and husbanded, so also must
their seed be ordered, but not after the like sort: for the mattocke would pull
up the seed, and therefore they must be vnderdigd very deftly, and the weeds
weeded out all along the furrows where the seeds are set, to the end that the
weeds do not smother them, and that they do not blind them, taking away their
air, Sun, and substance of the earth, whereof every young seed and plant
stands greatly in need, as to be helped thereby to gather root and life,
which is as yet in them very young and tender. By which means, you see that
pains and labor taken about acornes and other seeds of trees, causes them
to grow and prosper so, as that they get the better of other plants, which in
continuance might ouergrow them: b^t if they remain as forsaken things without
husbanding, they will be choked up with vveedes, and the greatest part of
them die: and those which shall escape, will be but of low growth, and
appear like an untimely birth, lacking help and dressing, except through long
continuance of time they prevail, and then they which planted or sowed, shall
not reap any pleasure by them, but their heirs only.

And in all such sorts of planting and sowing of vvild seeds, it is necessary
to fence a place sowed or planted, so well and sufficiantly with ditches,
hedges, or walls, as that no beast, horse, or other may enter or get in: as
also that thereby the vvood may be kept from being handled or cut down by
passengers: for if the sprig be bruised or broken, the tree remains all
parched and ready to dry.

According to this manner of planting of acornes, or chestnuts, they may very
well and conveniently be set and planted amongst the plants of trees, and
roots that are planted far enough off one from another, for so they may have
room betwixt two plants, being distant the quantity of nine or ten foot, or
thereabout, seeing it is meet and convenient to nourish trees, and to destroy
vveedes. By this means the acornes and chestnuts, or any other thing planted
with the dibble, or sown in furrows, is dressed amongst the rest, and made
to enjoy sufficient scope betwixt two plants, there to take their full growth,
until they become like high, or very near with the trees planted or cut,
neither do they cost extraordinarily for their dressing, because the whole
ground is to be dressed, because of the other plants that are in it. And in as
much as it is oftentimes found in countries that there are neither underwoods,
woods, bushes, nor hedges whereout any may get a plant growing from roots, I
have thought good to entreat a little of the means of making it grow of seed.
Like as is wont to be done with fruit trees, and those which are taken from
their nurceries, to be transplanted into gardens: so may you do with wild
trees, which after that they are grown to a sufficient thickenesse, and come
to bear seed, may be otherwhere either grafted or planted, as you shall wish
or desire. For which cause here shall be put down a treatise and chapter
thereof, seeing the former entreats of the intermingling of seed with plants,
for to help out the storing of woods which are always to continue.

CHAP. XII.
Of the way to make wild trees grow of seed, to be removed afterward into some
other place.
Certain it is (as has been said before) that every tree grows either of a
plant, or of some great fruit, or of a writhen branch: and for that there are
many places where one cannot come by plants easily, it is to be attempted to
make the said plant to grow of seed, as is practiced in the nurceries of tame
and garden trees, by dressing and dunging some half acre of good ground, and
then to sow it with such good seed as that the trees bear, whereof you would
have plants.

That is to say, with acornes, if you would store your self with oaks: or
with chestnuts, if you desue chestnut trees: or with the grain and seed which
grows in elm trees, if you would have elm plants. The said grains and seeds
must be sown in a fat, fertile, well dunged, and somewhat moist ground, and
that reasonably thick, therein covering the said seeds two fingers thick, and
causing them to be well watered afterward, and covered with bright straw, to
the end that this fruit of young trees sprouting out of the seed, be not eaten
and broken by birds: but when they begin to grow, the straw must be taken away,
and the weeds growing amongst them weeded out with the hand.

For which cause the quarters wherein the said seeds are to be sown, must be
made long and narrow, that so the weeds may easily be pulled up out of every
place, without treading upon the quarters, and that the said weeds may be
gathered gently, to avoid the doing of hurt unto the roots of the young trees:
and oftentimes they must be watered at night after Sun set, and in the
morning before Sun rise.

And after they be grown three foot high, you must remove them into some other
ground before they take any stronger root, and set them good two foot distant
one from another, till they have got a competent thickness, such as is before
described, and dress and cleanse them from all weeds, and water them in the
time of drought. Thus you shall rear plants of all sorts, and of all manner of
wild trees, to remove afterward into such places as you will, and such trees
will grow very well being transplanted, as are of like age and sort: for so the
one of them cannot hurt or injury another.

This is to be practiced in places where no plants of trees can be found in
sufficient store: for otherwise in countries furnished with underwoods, and
woods, there ar^ enough to be found without taking this plant, and tedious
protract of time: wherefore this article will be of use, where there is neither
underwood, wood, nor plant to become by in hedges or bushes, and not in this
country, where there are many to be gotten, and those very good.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the pleasure that comes of the planting of wild woods, as also of the
profit coming of the same.
AMongst the things required for the making of a place of perfect beauty, Cato
in his book of Husbandry says, That it is needful to have nine principal
things: Nine things requ^site for the ma^ing of a beautiful place
The first, is a Vine, yielding great quantity of wine: the second, a Garden,
full of little rivers: the third, a Willow grove, and Oziar plot: the fourth, a
great River: the fifth, a Meadow: the sixth, a great champion ground: the
seventh, Coppies of underwood: the eight, plenty of Bushes, and a Warren: and
the ninth, a forest of great Trees or Oaks to bear Acornes. Now amongst all
these several points of perfect beauty, we may see, that the principal is
water and vvood: because that having water, one may easily make Meadows,
Garden plots, Oziar yards, and Willow plots all along the waters and rivers:
and having vvoods, one may make Underwoods, Warrens, Bushes, and high great
trees also, if it be lopt and pruned underneath to make it shoot up and grow on
high. And he must not leave above three or four branches at the most, and then
they will become tall and high by and by, because that the root is disburdened
of all, the rest of his boughs* by having them cut down: in like sort, the
ground sends all such nourishment unto these three or four branches, as it
had employed in the nourishment of many branches of small vvood, and affoordeth
growth unto the straightest and fairest branches, which are left behind to come
to perfection: thus in a small time they become tall and great trees, and bear
acornes. So, in like manner, there is not that vvood of high and great growth
cut down in good and seasonable time, which puts not forth small vvood and
bushes, if cattle and beasts be carefully, kept out.

Whereupon I will conclude that in planting of woods, there are three things
principally requisite to the making of a beautiful place, Woods have in t^^m
three commodities.
that is to say, little wood, great wood, bushes and a warren: for it is the
like reason to plant the one and the other; for of the one the other is made:
wherefore in respect of the pleasure, profit, and beauty of the place, it is
meet and convenient to plant woods.

But the chief pleasure and pastime which comes by wild woods, is, that
being joined to your house and champion habitation, The pleasures and past^mes
that the wild woods a^^ord.
(which is the place, where it must be seated or planted) it is pleasant to the
sight: for by its diversity of greenenesse, it maruellously delights, and
with great contentment recreateth the sight.

The second pleasure or pastime is, that the woods (being near unto your
lodging) are always full of all sorts of pretty birds, which sing Summer and
Winter all the day long, and most part of the night, as nightingales, and such
other like, whereby their songs become joyful and delightsome to the ear, and
so there is a pleasure and great contentment to the ear even to them in the
house if it be near unto.

Another pleasure is, that in the said woods there are always great store of
wood coists, popingaies, stares, cranes, and other sorts of birds, which make
you pastime to see them fly: and there may also pleasure be reaped in taking
of them with little engines, as, with a call, nets, the tonnell, or other such
like.

The fourth is, that in the woods there are to be had conies, hares,
squirrels, and other sorts of small beasts pleasant to behold, and of great
service for provision of vitaile.

The fifth is, that in hot seasons you may purchase a cool air within the
said woods, as those which will cover and defend you from the injury and
vexation of the Sun, and contrariwise, cooling you, whether the heat will or
no: and therein you have also to behold a comfortable greenenesse, both upon
the boughs and ground, which keeps his grass green through the coolness
and shadow of the trees.

The sixth is, that in Winter being in the said vvoods, you are out of the
injury and force of the winds and great cold, because they break them off:
and further, in these vvoods you are solitary, and may use your leisure, in
reading, writing or meditating upon your affairs, without being disquieted or
distracted, or drawn to cast your sight abroad over any far distant place or
country, in as much as the sight cannot pierce through the boughs or bushes.

Besides the said pleasures, The profit of woods.
there comes much profit thereof, as well for the feeding of cattle, and
that in the shadow, and with store of grass at commandment at all times, as
also in respect of the Oak mast, Beech mast, Chestnuts, and other fruits which
the trees bear, which serve for the fatting of hogs, and are very
necessary for other beasts: and for that also you may, upon certain years,
make fall of your vvoods, to make faggots, fire vvood, stakes to hedge in
garden plots, and other enclosures, as also rods for Vines to run upon: and
if there be cut down any Chesnut-trees, or Hasels, you may (besides the things
already named) make your profit of hoopes and boords for vvine-vessels, in
such sort, as that these your vvoods shall not only do you pleasure, but
profit also, if so be you be so disposed to make your use of it.

By this means you may conjecture, that the ground which is employed in
bearing of vvood, The profit of ground employed about the bearing of wood.
is not any thing inferior in profit unto others which are employed in bearing
of Corn and Vines.

It is very true, that the commandment, or use and profit of it, are longer
time in purchasing, and more hardly come by, than that of Corn and Vines, but
it recompenceth it with the double in the end: for the first charges once
defrayed, nature brings forth both the greater and the smaller vvood without
the help of man, and without any labor: which happens not in
Corne-grounds and Vineyards, seeing they bear not, except they be continually
husbanded and tilled. Wherefore, the ground employed in Beech mast, and vvood,
yields as much profit as any other, and will stand the house in as great
stead, seeing it cannot be any way held or inhabited without vvood.

I have here been the more vvilling to declare and lay down in brief the
pleasure and profit that comes of vvoods, to the end, that they which take
pains in those courses, may not think that they have lost their time and cost
bestowed thereupon, and that they may not be ashamed at the first blow of their
travail and long attendance, seeing that afterward both the pleasure and the
profit does abide and continue without any further cost, and that unto them
and their posterity.

Wherefore, my counsel and advise unto the good husband and master of the
family, is, that he apply himself to such planting of vvoods betimes, that so
he may the sooner enjoy the pleasures thereof: and that in so doing, he cast
them so, as that they may grow as near unto his lodging and house where he
means to dwell, as possibly may be, for his further both profit and pleasure:
for if no good else should come thereof, yet they would serve to break the
raging and blustering vvindes annoying the house, if they be well placed, and
so conveniently, as a man may be able to dispose them.

CHAP. XIIII.
A treatise of the nature, properties, and differences of wild trees, and what
ground they delight most in.
SEeing it has been delivered and laid down here above, what time and manner
is to be observed in the planting of all wild trees, and in giving them such
tillage, as may easily, and in short time, procure their growth; it has seemed
good unto me, to write some little thing of the nature and sorts of trees which
are planted and found ordinarily in the vvoods and forests of France, and to
declare briefly what manner of ground they delight in, and in what soil they
prove greatest and most profitable: to the end, that the planters of them be
not frustrated of their pains and purpose, and that that which requires a
dry and hot soil, be not planted in a moist and low soil: as also, that the
trees which delight in a moist and low country, be not planted in mountains
and dry countries: for this falls out oftentimes to be the cause, that such
as bestow their cost in planting, do miss of their intent, and that the plant
being in a ground clean contrary unto it, does not come to any profit. For
which cause, I will here in a word express my mind concerning that point, not
with any purpose to describe or comprise all the natures, virtues, and
properties of trees, neither yet to speak of all kinds of trees, but only to
describe and declare the places and grounds wherein they prosper and grow most,
as also to make known the diversity that is amongst trees of one and the same
sort, and of one and the same name: as which are most fit to be planted, and
best for to make shadows to walk or sit in.

I know, that there are diverse sorts of trees that grow both in the Eastern,
Northern, and Southern parts of the world, whereof we are almost altogether
ignorant, and which, in respect of the diversity of the regions, do not grow
at all in this climate: and of these I mind not to speak at all, because my
purpose is only in brief to lay down that which is necessary to be known
about the planting of common trees, such as are ordinarily to be found in our
own forests, and not of strange and foreign ones, the trouble about which
would be more than the pleasure. And as for such as are desirous to attain the
perfect knowledge of all manner of trees growing in any part of the world, and
their virtues, properties, natures, and seeds, they may see the same at large
in Theophrastus, in his fourth book of the history of Plants, and in the
third book, where he particularly entreats of the kinds of wild and savage
trees: for he particularly runs through the nature, force, virtue, seed, and
manner of planting of every wild tree, as well those of the East, North, and
South, as those of the West: but it shall be sufficient for us at this time to
declare the nature of five or six sorts of trees which commonly grow in the
countries hereby, and of their kinds, and what ground every one delights in.

Now therefore to begin, there are two sorts of trees in general: the one is
called vvater-trees, or trees delighting to grow in or near unto the brinkes
of waters, Trees loving to live near the water.
in meadows, and in low and watrie places: the other land trees, or trees
delighting to grow upon the firm and solid land, and where the waters by
inundations or ouerflowings use not to come. But first we will speak of the
trees living in or about water.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Aller, Poplar, Birch, Willow, and other trees haunting the water.
YOu shall understand, that there are four or five sorts of trees, which of
their own nature grow near unto waters, and which, except they have great
store of moisture do hardly prosper or grow at all: of which, amongst the
rest, the Aller is one that most coueteth the water: for the Aller is of that
nature, as that it would be half covered in water, and at the least, the most
part of the roots must of necessity be within, and stand lower than the
water, for otherwise they would not take, insomuch, as that trees of such
nature ought to be planted in moist meadows, and near unto the brooks running
along by the said meadows, or in marshes, for in such grounds they take and
grow exceeding well. This tree is apt to take in moist places, because it is a
white vvood, containing much pith, and putting forth great store of boughs in
a short time, by reason of the moistness of the waters wherewith it is
nourished and fed.

The said Aller trees may be planted two manner of ways, as namely, either of
branches gathered from great Allers, or of live roots dug up in most places,
together with the earth, and set again in the like ground, and that in such
sort, as that the half of the said roots be lower than the water, and the
upper part covered with earth the depth of one finger: and in the mean time,
before they be planted, they must have all their branches cut off too, within a
fingers length of the root, and it will put forth again many young shoots,
after the manner of Hasel trees. You may read more of the Aller tree in the
fourth book.

There is another sort of vvater-wood, which hereabout is commonly called white
wood: White wood.
of this kind, are the Poplar, Birch, and other sorts of wood, which grow close
by the water side, and upon the banks of ditches, springs, and little brooks:
and it is a common practice in Italy, to lay their conueyances and pipes to
carry their water from rivers throughout their grounds, of those woods. And
these kinds of trees may be easily planted of young roots along by the water
and river side, both most conveniently and profitably, especially the white
Poplar, otherwise called the Aspe tree, whose leaves are apt to shake with
every small wind. Where roots cannot be got, there may, in their stead, be
taken fair and strong plants, such as are used in the planting of Willowes.
The Birch does somewhat resemble the white Poplar in his bark, and the Beech
tree in his leaf, but it craves a colder and moister soil than the Poplar.
And this is the cause why it grows so plentifully in cold countries.

The other sort of vvater-wood is the Willow: which, as we find by proof,
grows nothing well, except it be in a moist and warrie country, and near
joining to waters. The manner of planting of Willowes, is commonly, by setting
of Willow plants, and those such as are of a good thickness and strength, as
namely as great as one may gripe: for look how much the stronger and thicker
they be, so much the more shoots will they put forth, and so much the stronger.
This tree differs much from the Aller: for the Aller will have his roots all
within water, but the Willow would stand higher, and spread his roots along
into the ground that is wet and moist, and near unto water, without having
his roots altogether in the water: according whereunto, it is continually
seen, that Willowes planted upon causeyes and banks, having some ditch of
water joining thereunto, and that in such sort, as that their roots may reach
but to the brinks and edges of the water, prove fairer, taller, and more
plentiful than those which grow in waterish medows, because that for the ^^st
part their roots stand moist in water. You may read of the Holme tree in the
fourth book.

I say not that Willowes, Allers, Poplars, and such white wood will not grow in
high places, notwithstanding that it is their nature to grow near to water,
and do prosper best in such places: and if they be planted in high places, and
far from water, they are hardly nourished, and put forth very little in
growth: insomuch, as that a hundred such trees as are planted in waterie
countries, will yield more vvood than a thousand planted in a dry country,
notwithstanding all the endeavor and husbandry that can be used, yea, and they
will perish and die a great deal sooner.

This I say, because it is easy to make them grow, and to husband them in a
high or hilly place, by watering and dressing of them in convenient sort:
which labors, as they are not performed without great cost, so if they happen
to be neglected, it proves to be the loss and spoil of the trees: whereas
if they be planted in some place that is fit for them, and near unto water,
according as their nature requires, they will prosper without the toil or
industry of man used therein. Notwithstanding, for as much as the first years
after they be planted they have much to do to shoot and nourish their roots
and such branches as are already put forth, it will be best to free them of all
such twigs as they shall put forth the first year, to the end they may more
easily seed their roots, as also that thereby the force of winds, which would
take such hold of offall, may not shake and loosen those which are already
fast, for upon such causes trees do many times die, be they never so well
planted.

I know that it is not always required, that such pains should be taken
(especially about those which are orderly and conveniently planted) in planting
or p^uning of them: notwithstanding, I say thus much for them which go about
the making of close alleyes for walks and shades, that they may cause them to
grow much in a short time, for this they shall effect by planting of them in
furrows, and not one of them perish: and as for their pain and labor, they
shall have the pleasure thereof in shorter time and larger manner.

Herewithall it must be noted, Trees must be well and surely planted at the
first.
that whenever you set or plant any such trees, you must so do it, as that
it need not a second doing: for if any of them should die, it would be the
harder to set others in their places, so as that they would thrive, because the
shadow of the other which live, would cause the same to die, seeing it is
usually seen, that the elder and stronger ones do oppress the weaker,
keeping them under, and causing them to miscarrie. Wherefore the greater care
is to be used in the first planting of them, and the more pain to be taken
with them, seeing the sequel is a thin^ that is so hard to be redressed.

The time to plant Willowes, The time to plant Willowes, Allers, etc.
Allers, Poplars, and other such vvoods, is always found best in the beginning
of February, or at the later end of January, when the great cold is past,
being otherwise apt to hurt such plants as are new set, as has already been
said.

As concerning the properties of these trees thus delighting in watrie grounds:
the leaves and flowers of the white Poplar, although they be a little hot, do
notwithstanding make a very cooling ointment called Populeum, good to take away
the heat of inflammations, as also the milk out of women's breasts that are
newly delivered.

Birch-tree yields twigs, which serve to make rods for the punishing of
thieves withal, as also to make baskets, little maunds, beesomes, and
couerings for earthen bottles. Of the stock is made charcoale, serving for the
melting of metal: And of the rind are made links to give light in the night
season: for to such end do country people use them. The juice of the leaves
mixed amongst the runnet of a Calfe, does keep cheese from worms and
rottenness. If you pierce the stock of the Birch-tree, there will come forth a
water, which being drunk a long time, is of power to break the stone of the
reins and bladder: being taken in a gargarisme, it dries the ulcers of the
mouth: and being used in lotions, it cleanses and takes away the filthiness
and infections of the skin.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Ashes, Elmes, and Maple-trees.
THe Ash does naturally crave a low and waterish country, Ash-(...).
and therefore does grow more plentifully in such places than in high grounds:
and therefore, for the most part, they must be planted in such low and waterie
grounds, though not altogether so low and waterie as the Willow, Poplar, and
Aller do crave: howbeit notwithstanding they may be planted in indifferent
grounds, and Elmes will grow well therein. Their proper nature is to delight in
moist valleys, for therein they prosper well, and grow up to a great height,
with straitness and beautifulness of Timber: Notwithstanding, this is a
common vvood, which may be planted in all sorts of grounds, howsoever that it
like better in fat and moist grounds, than in those which are but indifferent:
but they much dislike the dry, rough, stiff, and grauellie grounds, if they
be not mingled with moisture. The ancient Woodwards used to plant them most in
hedge-rowes, and on the tops of great banks or ditches, where they might have
dry standing, yet be continually fed at the root with a little moisture:
which sure was a very good and husbandly manner of planting the Ash, neither
shall you at any time see it prosper better, than when it is planted in such
places. It is naturally of it self ^ little more tender than other wild trees,
and desires a more gentle and loose mould, which makes them prosper the best
in mixed hasell grounds, or in moist sandy ground: yet if they do take in clay
grounds, as doubtless with a very little care they will do, one Ash so
growing, is better, tougher, and more serviceable than any three which are
taken from the sandy or mixed earths. It is a timber of no less precious use
than any other whatsoever: for of it are made all your best Pykes, Byll-shafts,
Halberd-shafts, and diverse other engines for the vvarres: of it also is made
all manner of Plow and Carttimber whatsoever, as Beams, Heads, Skeathes,
Hales, Spyndles, Shelboords, Cart or Wayne bodies, rings for Wheels, Naues,
Harrow-buls, Harrow-teeth, Axle-trees, and any other instrument or engine
which desires a firm, gentle yet a very tough vvood: a timber that must
bend before it break, and not by any means be too extreme portable or heavy
in the carriage, but both light for the hand of him that shall use it, and also
strong enough to endure the stresse or labor it shall be put unto; also it
must be gentle and soft to cut: all which the Ash is, more than any other tree
whatsoever.

There are three sorts of Elmes: Elmes of three sorts.
The one is, of those which have a small little leaf, and a black stalk:
The second has a large leaf, and a reasonable white stalk: The third of
them has a very large leaf, and the stalk as it were all white. Those
which are to be chosen for planting, are those two later, for they are of
greater growth, and are wont to prosper better: besides that, they are
fairer, and put forth more boughs, making thereby a greater shadow.

Of these three sorts, there are both males and females: Male and female Elmes.
we call those females, which bear most fruit, and the thicker seed; and
the males we call those which are lesser, and bear their fruit of seed, in
the midst of the leaves, and that in such sort, as that they seem to bear
neither fruit nor seed. And for this cause there are many that write of
Husbandry, affirming the said tree to bear no fruit or seed, and that it
grows either of a plant or shoot. And of this opinion was Trem^lius.
Notwithstanding, it is certain, that every leaf bears his fruit contained
within the midst thereof, and thereof will Elmes grow, being sown in due
time. And of this opinion is Columella; Columella.
and experience it self does show the same: he making two differing sorts of
Elmes, calling the one sort, the fairest and tallest Elmes of France: and the
other sort, Italian Elmes. And as concerning those fairest Elmes, if they be to
be found, they must be planted, because they grow up the sooner that way, and
put forth much larger boughs. Theophrastus Theophr^stus.
and some other vvriters do make them less differing, according to the
country wherein they grow. I have been the more willing to describe them
according to their kind of leaf and vvood, that you may the more easily know
them. I would have you to look back into the fourth book, and there you
shall find their natures and virtues more at large described. The soiles in
which they most of all delight, is a very stiff clay: and the principal use
of them, over and above the making of Bow-staues formerly mentioned, is the
making of naues for wagon or cart-vvheeles, for which they are more
excellent than any other vvood whatsoever; and the more knottie and twound
they are, a great deal the ^itter they are for that purpose: so, that as the
clean grown, smooth, and even Elm serves for other purposes, so the knottie,
uneven, and most crooked Elm will serve for this.

Amongst these sorts of trees we may place the Maple-trees (called of the
Latins Ac^res) because in their nature they somewhat resemble the Elm: They
crave the like ground, namely, a fat and moist ground: they grow (as the Elmes
do) in all arable grounds: they put forth in a short time great branches, and
but little greenenes^e. This tree has a very white body, bears small
leaves like the leaves of three-leaued grass, and does not breed or gather any
great store of vermin. It naturally grows short^ crooked, rugged, and
bears seldom any great length of timber: yet where it grows otherwise, the
timber is very firm, white, close, and durable. It serves for diners
excellent and good purposes: as namely, it is the best of all other, by reason
of the wonderful whiteness thereof, for all manner of inlaid works, which
Ioyners use: also it is excellent for all manner of Turners vvare: as for the
making of trenchers, dishes, bowls, sewing knives, and other implements for
the Table, provided, it be evermore of at least a year or more seasoning: for
if it be wrought green, it will warpe, ryue, and be indeed for no purpose.
Many use to season it in a dry house, but then it asks a longer time, and
the sap will be much longer in consuming: but the best way is to let it lie
abroad all the first Winter, and take all wet which falls, for that will drive
the natural wet of the sap soonest out of it, and then house it the Summer
following, and then after you may safely work it at your pleasure.

The Ash is contrarily inclined: The Ash.
for thereon breeds oftentimes such abundance of vermin, as that thereby
all their leaves are eaten and bored very full of little holes. Of this sort
of Trees, as well Elmes, as Ashes and Maples, the best are those which grow
the soonest, and spread out the largest boughs in a short time.

As concerning the properties of these three kinds of Trees, The virtues of the
Elm.
we have spoken in the third book, in the Chapter of Balmes, how there is
made a singular balm of the little fruit that is found enclosed in the leaves
of one of the sorts of Elmes. Furthermore, the water which is found enclosed
in this little fruit, makes the face neat and shining, if it be vvashed
therewith: again, double linen clothes being wet in this juice or water,
and applied unto children which are bursten, becomes a singular remedy for
them. The same juice also put into a glasse-bottle, and buried in the earth, or
dung, for the space of five and twenty days, being well stopped, and having
the bo^tome set upon a heap of salt, proves singular good to cure green
vvounds, if they be dressed with tents steeped in the said juice.

The Maple-tree in this country amongst other things is had in request,
Shooting ^owes.
because of the boughs thereof there are made Bows, and that because they are
stiff and hard to bend.

The Ash-tree has a singular virtue against the venime of Serpents: for it is
such an enemy, and so contrary unto them, as that they dare not draw near or
approach unto the shadow thereof: and again, as has been proved of many, if
you make (as it were) a circle of the leaves or boughs of the Ash-tree, and
put within the same a Serpent by the one side thereof, and a burning fire on
the other side, the Adder will rather adventure to pass through the fire, than
over the Ash-tree leaves. For this cause Nature, as one careful of the good of
mankind, has provided, that the Ash should flourish before that Adders and
Vipers do use to come out of their holes in the Spring time: as also, that it
should not fall his leaves in Autumn, till they have taken up their Winter
resting place. Wherefore, if it happen, that any Horse, Cow, or other beasts of
the Farmers should be bitten by some serpent or other venomous beasts, there
cannot be found a more sovereign remedy, than to stamp the tenderest leaves
that are to be found upon the Ash, and straining out the juice, to give it the
beast to drink, and afterward to lay upon the grieved part the dr^sse of the
stamped leaves: this is likewise a good remedy for men that are bitten of any
Adder or Viper. The decoction of the rind of the Ash-tree taken, is singular
good to open the obstructions of the Spleen, and to draw out great store of
water from such as have the Dropsy, as also to make fat folks lean. Also the
keys of the Ash, or that which is the seed thereof, is of most singular use
amongst Painters, and being ground, makes him diverse pretty and most useful
colors. The Ash is only an enemy unto corn, and will not suffer any to grow
by any means within the compass of the shadow thereof: and therefore it
should as seldom as might be, be planted in corne-fields, except you leave
such large space of greeneswarth betwixt it and the corne-lands, that no part
of the shadow may extend to the same.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Chesnut-trees.
THe Chesnut-tree is a strong and mighty tree, much like unto the Oak. It is
a fast wood, and good to build withal, as also to underprop Vines, and make
other works, which are made of Oak. It grows of the seed of the Chestnut,
which is sown after the manner of the Acorne, and so it grows and puts
forth his shoots both sooner and more effectually, and takes commonly in all
grounds, yea even in the sandy or grauellie grounds: but yet it shunneth the
grounds that lie open to the pearching heat of the Sun, affecting altogether
the little hills and mountains that are cold and lie upon the North. The seed
or fruit thereof (called the Chestnut) is sometimes spoiled, and that after the
same manner that the Acorne is, as by too much dryness, which makes it that
it cannot bud or blossom: or by too great store of water, putrefying both the
Chestnut and Acorne, before it can spring out of the earth: or else by cattle,
moules, field-mice, and such sorts of vermin, which eat or wound the Chestnut
and Acorne within the ground. The nature of the young plants of Chesnut-trees
and Oaks are much alike, and the manner of dressing them also: and if you
would have them to put forth store of boughs, you must cut them after they
have been planted three or four years, and not before, and that in the
beginning of the Spring time, for so you shall make them put forth twice as
much: and yet it is not without danger to use any edge-toole in cutting them,
for thereby they oftentimes die. So then, if there put forth any branches or
sprigs along the stem, in the first, second, or third year, you may at the
beginning of such their putting forth crop them off, and break them away with
your hand whiles they are young and tender, and not to take any knife unto
them, and then you shall do best.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Oak and the differences thereof, Hornebeame, Beech, Linden tree, and
others.
YOu shall understand that the oak is a tree bearing most fruit, and
affoording the most commodity of any tree in France. And for this cause it
has been accustomed to preserve and keep store of these kinds of trees in old
woods and forests, The different names of the oaks are Robur, Quercus, Ilex.
as being most necessary and profitable. Some do make three sorts of this kind
of tree, and of every sort a male and a female: for notwithstanding that the
common people call them all by the common name of oak, yet the Latins attribute
to every sort his several and proper name, calling one sort thereof Robur,
another Quercus, and the third Ilex.

The first of these sorts is a kind of oak which is very thick and strong,
having a body that is very thick below, and full of knots, and very mighty,
having great roots, and spreading far and wide in the ground: and at the top of
the body or bole which is but short, it bears many and great quantity of
boughs that are also thick, spread abroad and long, taking great room: and
for that cause are planted the one from the other a great distance, that so
they may have room for their boughs to spread. The wood growing upon this sort
of oaks is fitter to make fire wood of, than timber to build withal, because it
has but a short bole, and rises not up to any great height and squarenesse,
having his boughs therewithal crooked and writhen. There are many forests to
be seen, wherein this kind of oaks does grow, as namely those whose oaks are
thick and short, standing far a sunder, and yet spreading on a great breadth
above.

The other sort of oaks has both a reasonable thick and long body, as
namely of the height of four or five good fadomes, as also four or five
reasonable tail and straight boughs growing thereupon, but nor spread forth
into any great breadth, as neither the body is so well covered and shadowed
therewith as the former. And this sort of oaks is good for beams of houses,
and great pieces of timber, to be put in buildings, as also for to saw and
clea^e, because it is not knottie and hard as the former. And of th^s sort
there are to be seen many forests planted in France, and they are more thick
and closer grown with timber, than the others which I am about to speak of,
because the boughs of these do rise more straight up, and take not up so much
room.

The third sort of oaks has a small body, but very straight, and growing to
the height of seven or eight fadomes without any boughs, and at the top of
their said bodies, bearing, but s^al store of boughs and wood, in such sort,
as that all the wood is in the bole, seeming to be only a nosegay at the top.
And this kind of wood stands very near the foot one of another, rising up
equally and alike unto a great height and greatness, and the forests
furnished with this kind, are very profitable to make all sorts of buildings,
whether it be to make the ioyces thereof, or any of the other sorts of long and
middle timber, as those required for for walls or roofes. And of this kind of
wood there are many forests in this country.

All these three sorts of wood do bear a great leaf, and that every one like
unto another, save that they are some of them large and great, some but
indifferent and the third sort small and little. Again, they bear some of
them acornes that are more long and thick, othersome, acornes that are more
thick and short, and again other some of them, acornes that are smaller and
longer.

Furthermore, there is not any of these three sorts which consists not of
male and female. The male and female of oaks.
The female is commonly called that (as Theophrastus Theophrastus.
says) which bears the most and strongest fruit: whereupon it follows,
that if those are to be called the females which do bear most store of fruit;
we must needs call those males, which bear least fruit. When they bear
fruit, or when they bear none, the barren are called the males, The barren is
called the male, and the fruitful the female.
and the fruitful the females. Theophrastus puts another difference betwixt
those which are fruitless: but I mean not to write any thing thereof at this
present, purposing to be brief, and to refer such as are desirous to see the
same, to Theophrastus his third book of the history of Plants, under the
title of the Oak: as also in like manner for all other sorts of trees, which
I spare to speak of, that so I may not exceed my former purpose and intent.

All these sorts of Oaks are of great continuance and length of life,
insomuch, as that some allot unto them to live three hundred years: That the
life of an Oak contains 100 years of growth, 100. years of standing in a
s^ay, and 100. to per^sh and die in.
that is to say, one hundred to grow, one hundred to stand at a stay, and one
hundred to decline and fall away: which may easily be seen in the old and
ancient forests.

And whereas the Oak is long in coming to his growth, and long in dying, it
is no marvel, if the Elm, the Ash, the Maple, and other vvoods, set in the
like and no better ground, do put forth their boughs and branches more
speedily and mightily than the Oak: for the nature of those trees is to grow
up soon to their p^^fection, and so to die and fade soon; and the nature of
the Oak is to grow by leisure, to flourish a long time, and to be long before
it die. Now Nature will not be ouer-chased: as may be seen in a horse, The
horse at his full growth at five, and a man a^ five and twenty.
which comes to his growth in five years, and man not before he be five and
twenty; and so the whole continuance of the one is more durable than that of
the other. This I speak in respect of such, as by and by look to have vvood
to become grown according as they can wish: giving them to know, that to
answer their hasty desire, it will be best for them to plant Ashes, Elmes,
and Maple only, seeing they are given to spring mightily, and in a short time,
putting forth more boughs in six years, than the Oak in ten. Whereas they
which desire to have a more pleasant, profitable, and durable vvood, though it
be longer in coming to perfection, must plant Oaks, Chesnut-trees,
Horne-beames, and Beech-trees, for they are reasonably long in growing, and of
like durablenesse, and put forth but small store of shoots, like as the Oak,
in such sort, as that they become trees of one and the same sort and growth,
and to be planted after one manner, and at one time, as has been said before.
It is very true, that the Oak delights in a fat, good, and dry ground, even
as the Horne-beame and Beech-tree do: notwithstanding, the Horne-beame and
Beech will grow more easily in a stony ground or country, although that every
sort of trees whatsoever be given to grow the better, by how much the ground is
better wherein they are planted. But some do naturally delight in and crave a
good ground, as for example the Oak, if you would have it to prosper well: for
and if you plant it in an indifferent ground, it will prosper but
indifferently: and if it be set in a hard and barren soil, it hardly
prospers, and does nothing but burn away with the heat of the Sun: and yet
Horne-beames and Beeches do grow in grounds that are but indifferent: yea,
they may be seen to prosper well in hard and stony grounds.

The pits are in good season opened, and all the said trees more conveniently
planted, in the month of February, when the strength of Winter it well
broken, as always has been said.

The Horne-beame^tree Horne-beame.
(called of the Latins Carpinus) grows in the same ground, and after the
same fashion, that the Maple does. The vvood of this tree has in times past
been used to helue husbandmens tools, and to make yokes for Oxen: but now it
is made matter for the fire, being a wood that has least moisture, but more
dryness, and which makes the b^st coal. Which proceeds not from the
natural defect of the Tree, but from the ill husbanding and planting of the
same, when either it is not regarded at the first shooting up, or is cropped
by cattle when it is tender, or else planted in a stiffe-binding earth, in
which it ioyeth not at all, any of which makes it grow crooked, knottie, and
without form, and so consequently of small use: but being planted on good
ground, whose mould is loose and yielding, and husbanded and defended from
other annoyances, it will shoot forth straight and upright, and bear a very
smooth and most delicate timber: which timber is of great price and estimation
amongst Fletchers, for it makes the strongest and best arrow of any wood
whatsoever, and is preferred far before either birch or brasill, as being of
an indifferent and true poise, neither so light as the one, nor so heavy as
the other.

The beech Beech*
(called of the Latins Fagus) as it resembles the hornebeame very near, so
it craves the like soil and dressing for the making of it to thrive and grow
well: it is true, that therefore it is worthy to be had in request, because
it brings ^orth its fruit which is called beech-mast, and that of no less
profit than the acorne, at the least the squirrells, turtle doves, cranes, and
such other birds do fat themselves thereupon. The men of ancient time did
make their wine vessels, fats, and drinking vessel of the rind of this tree.

It prospers exceedingly well in grounds that are full of pyble, flint, and
other small stones, whether mixed with sand or clay it mattereth not, provided
that the mould be not too much tough and binding, neither exceeding hard and
rockie, but apt to break and yield to the root, which by reason of the
greatness of the boale or body of the tree, which may ever compaire with the
oak, ought to have both a strong and a deep hold. The timber of the beech is
good for boards or planks, or for any Io^^ers ware, as bed-steeds, tables,
stools, chaires, cubbords, chests, or any other thing, except wainscot, or
^eeling, which by reason of the softness of the timber, it is not so much
allowed therefore: it is also very good for Turners ware, and especially, for
great washing bowls, traies, and such like, or any other household necessary,
which desires a plain smooth wood, which is gentle to cut, and delicate for
the eye to look on.

The linden tree The linden tree
grows very well in hilly and high mounted places, so that they be
notwithstanding moist and somewhat waterish: the wood thereof is fit to make
coffers and boxes: and the rind to make cradles or baskets to lay young
children in.

The corke-tree The corke-tree.
craves the like soil with the ash and oak: it is no where to be found in
all the forests of France, but in great store in the country of Bearne and
Foix. This is a thing worth the noting in this tree, namely, that it may have
its bark pilled off without doing of any injury unto the same: and this is
ordinarily employed about the making of hiues for bees, and for the soles of
slipper and panto^^es, usually worn during the cold time of Winter.

The yew-tree (which the Latins call Taxus) is very common in our forests:
The yew-tree.
it grows well upon mountains or rocks. The wood thereof is good to make
coffers, foote-stooles, bows, arrows, darts, and other such like stately
Ioyners works of, because it has diverse veins, and is not subject to be eaten
of worms. Some there are which report, that it is deadly either to eat or
sleep under the shadow of it, and that if a man eat of the fruit thereof, it
casts him into an ague and bloody ^luxe.

And seeing I have resolved to be brief, and not to pass beyond my bounds, it
shall be sufficient to have made this short rehearsal, commending such as are
desirous to see further into this skill and knowledge, to such books of
husbandry as thoroughly entreat of all the parts of the same, seeing they are
to be had every where, and seeing that in them such things are to be attained
to the ^ull, as I for brevity sake have omitted and left vnt^ucht.

As concerning the virtues and properties of the foresaid trees, the oak has
many things, and those of great commendation. The leaves, his nuts (which are
called gals) his messeltoe (as being called the messeltoe of the oak.) The
tender leaves thereof which are but as yet budding and putting forth may be
distilled, and the water thereof is singular against the fluxes of the liver,
to break the stone, The stone.
and to stay the whites of women. The whites o^ wom^n.
The greater sort of gals or apples have this property in them, namely to
presage presages.
and foretell three things, that is to say, war, dearth, pestilence: for if you
open them which are whole, you shall find therein either a little ^lie, or a
little spider, or a little worm: if the fly fly away, it betokens that
there will be war: if the little worm do creep, it is a sign of dearth
that year: and if the spider do run to and fro, it prognosticateth an
infinite number of pestilent diseases. The oak apples dried and made into
powder, do speedily stay all manner of flux in the belly. The misseltoe of the
oak taken inwardly, does greatly assuage the torments of such as are taken
with the falling sickness. Falling sickness.


The beech-tree is much used to make baskets and maunds of for to gather grapes
in. And hereof likewise men in old time were wont to make vessels to sacrifice
unto their gods. The leaves of the beech-tree chawed, do heal the chaps of the
lips, Chaps of the lips.
and the frettings of the gums. The fruit of the beech-tree, which is called
beech-mast, dried and made into ashes, being mixed with liniments, is of great
force and power against the stone The stone.
and gravel. The gravel.


Of the Park for the keeping of wild beasts.
CHAP. XIX.
Of the situation of the Parkes, and of the manner of ordering the wild beasts
therein.
TO the end we may not leave any thing out of this description of a country
farm, whereof the Farmer or Lord of the soil may make any profit, or else
take any pleasure, my advice and counsel is, that according as the places and
grounds may conveniently afford, there be parkes made near unto the farm,
therein to breed and keep hares, wild goats, or fallow dear, wild swine, and
such other like wild beasts, to the end that the Lord and Master of the place
may now and then recreate himself therewith, and take his sport in seeing the
said wild beasts hunted; as also that if he be disposed to make any great
feast or banquet, The profit of the park.
he may therein be sure to find as in his kitching of larder house for to make
ready meat of, besides the benefit which the good husband may make yearly
thereof by selling of them.

The park would be seated (if it be possible) within a wood of high and tall
timber trees, The situation of the park.
in a place compassed about, and well fenced with walls made of rough stone and
lime, or else of brickes and earth-lome, or else with pales made of oak
plankes. You must foresee that there be some little brook of spring water
running along by the place, or for want of spring water and natural streams,
you must prepare ditches and pooles walled and daubed in such sort as that they
may receive and keep the raine-water.

Nor ought the park to consist of one kind of ground only, as all wood, all
grass, or all coppise, but of diverse, as part high wood, part grass or
champion, and part coppise, or underwood, or thick spring: nor must these
several grounds lie open, or as it were in common one with another; but they
must be separated one from the other by a strong rale, through which dear or
sheep (but no greater cattle) may pass, for they must have the full liberty
of every place: neither must the park be situated upon any one entire hill,
plain, or else valley, but it must consist of diverse hills, diverse plains,
and diverse valleys: the hills which are commonly called the viewes or
discoueries of parkes would be all goodly high woods of tall timber, as well
for the beauty and gracefulness of the park, as also for the ecchoe and
sound which will rebound from the same, when in the times of hunting, either
the cries of the hounds, the winding of horns, or the gibbetting of the
huntsmen passes through the same, doubling the music, and making it ten
times more delightful: the plains, which are called in parkes the launds,
would be very champion and fruitful, as well for the breeding of great store
of grass and hay for the feeding and nourishi^g of his dear or other wild
beasts, as also for the pleasure of coursing with greyhounds, when at any
time the owner shall be disposed to hunt in that manner; for when the hounds
shall have hunted the game from the thicks unto the launds, then the
greyhounds being placed thereupon, may in the view of the beholders course
upon the same, and beget a delight past equal. The valleys which are called
the couerts or places of leare for wild beasts, would be all very thick
sprung or underwood, as well for the concealing of them from potchers and
purloyners, as for giving them rest and shadow in the day time, who cannot
endure to lie open to the view of passengers, or undefended by darkness and
obscurity: also these thick couerts are defenses for the wild beasts to save
them from the cunning sents or noses of hounds when they pursue them, making
their doubles and windings therein so intricate and cunningly, that they escape
many times their most mortallest mischief: also in these thick couerts, the
hunted dear finding an vnhunted dear where he lodges, will forthwith beat
him up and lie down himself in his place, making the hounds undertake the
fresh dear, and so escape his own danger, which in the open places he cannot
do: and the park is a place that must contain all things for the good and
safety of the game it keeps. Thus you see the park must consist of view,
laund, and covert, and the situation of ^ill valley, and plain. Now for the
water of which formerly we spoake you shall know it is very right necessary in
parkes, as well for the relief and sustenance of wild beasts, as for the
watering, washing, and moistning of the grounds to make them fruitful. Besides
whenever your gain is extremely hunted, and brought to the pinch of
extremity, then he will fly to the water, which is called the soil, and
there find relief and rescue: for according to the saying of the profit David,
As the Heart desires the water brooks etc. so a dear in his greatest
extremity finds relief and is refreshed by drinking or bathing in the
water. For a better proof whereof, I will repeat unto you a notable true and
very memorable experiment approved by a gentleman of good worship and place in
his country, who being a very good hunts-man, and very well experienced in the
nature of wild dear, It was his chance to bring up a tame Stagge, which by
the excellency of his keeping and full feeding, grew a very fair and great
dear, as soon as the dear was three years old, he caused him to be broke
to the saddle, and being himself a good horseman, and having a good horseman
then attending upon him, what through the ones instruction and the others
pain, the Stagge became so well reclaimed, that not any gelding in his stable
was more obedient to the man, better mouthed, or more tractable to carry his
rider than the Stag was; in so much that when at any time the gentleman went
forth a coursing, or to other pleasure, he would cause the Stagge to be ridden
forth with him, also when he traueild any small journey the Stagge also carried
a man with him: but the rider of the Stagge found that after he had gone three
or four miles, the Stagge did ^uer faint and grew weary, which as soon as he
imparted to his master, he presently commanded him to ride the Stagge when he
so fainted to the next water, and there cause him to drink, only calling to
mind the saying of David before rehearsed, and he found that so soon as the
Stagge had drunk, he was as fresh as at his first setting forth, and by that
observation only could make the dear travel twenty and five and twenty
miles a day without any trouble, by which it is most credibly found, that not
any thing can be more necessary in a park than store of sweet and cold water,
of which the river is best, the fountain next, and the standing pond the
worst, notwithstanding the standing pond how ever it is the worst water, yet it
is very commodious, because in it you may breed all sorts of da^^tie fresh
fish, as the carp, bream, pike, tench, and perch: also in them you may both
feed and breed all manner of wild foul, by framing little Islands in the
midst of those lakes or ponds where the swans, bussards, elkes, and other
sma^l foul may frame their nests and lay their eggs out of the danger of the
water. In the most conuenientest laund of the park, which is most spacious and
fruitful, and which has the greatest prospect into the park, and where the
dear take greatest delight to feed, there you shall build the lodge or house
for the Keeper to dwell in, and it shall by all means stand clean, and open
every way, so as there may be no secret approach made unto the same, but such
as the Keeper may easily behold from his windows: and it shall stand so fair
in the view of the laund, that from thence a man may see every way round about
the same, and some part up into the high woods, and other most secret parts of
the park, so that when the least disturbance or troble is offered unto the
dear, a man may from that lodge take notice of the same: this house must be
made like unto a little forcellet or fort strong and with diverse angles, the
windows whereof so flanking one another, that when any approach by stealers or
other malicious persons shall be made to the same, the Keeper may from thence
either with his bows or with some other engines so annoy them, that they shall
by no means besiege or coope him up in his house, (which is the practice of
many subtle knaves) but that he may dispight their force, issue forth and
defend himself and his charge against them: if there be any part of the house
which the windows cannot flanker as the doors, iaumes, or such like, then
over them shall be made little loopeholes, through which the Keeper may either
shoot, cast stones or scalding water to make them avoid from the same: close by
this lodge shall be built the kennell for the Keepers hounds, and the
cocke-house where he shall keep his fighting cocks and hens: also without
it shall be made a place for him to hang the horns which his dear shall cast
at the latter end of the Spring time: also in your park as well at both the
ends of your laund which are the next adioining to the covert, as in all other
suspicious places where any man may in the night, course your dear, you shall
place long sticks or slaves which are four or five foot in length, and two or
three inches in compa^^e, with both the ends sharpened exceeding sharp, and
stuck sloapewise into the ground, and standing not above a foot and a half or
two foot above the the ground at most, and these you shall set crossewise very
thick, that when a stealer shall come to course in the night, his gray* hound
may run and goar^ himself against the same: you shall also by no means
along your pale walk plant fruit trees, blacke-thorne, or bullies, for they
are the occasion of much hurt and destruction to your pale, under the color of
gathering the fruit, and breed a great decay to your quickset, besides many
other mischiefs which are excussed by the pretense of getting that fruit
only: yet would I not have the park unfurnished of all manner of fruit, for
besides the pleasure thereof, they are an excellent mast in which dear
infinitely delight, and are ^ed very much with the same. You shall not by any
means in one park mix the red dear and the fallow dear together, for the
red dear is a masterfull beast, and when the time of bellowing comes, he
grows fierce and outrageous, so that he will be entire Lord of the field, and
will kill the fallow dear if they but cross him in his walk: and therefore
each must be kept severally in several parkes.

Again Cranes, Ra^ens, and wild-geese are excellent things to be nourished in
a park, and will stand in steed of Keepers unto the same: for in the night
time, if any thing stir about the ground to which they are not continually
accustomed, they will with their clamours and noise not only give warning to
the Keeper, but any that shall dwell near to the ground, not ceasing their
noise till the ground be at peace and rest again.

It is meet also that there should be great store of grass ground in the
place, Provision of ^ood ^or wild beasts.
and trees bearing fruit: amongst all other trees there is special account
made of acornes, wild apples, wild pears, strawberrie trees, and other such
like, for the feeding of these wild beasts. Notwithstanding the good farmer
must not content himself with the provision which the ground brings forth of
it self: but at such times as the earth is barren, and when there is nothing
to ^eed upon in the forests, they must have given unto them of the harvest
fruits, and be fed with barley, pure wheat, beans, the dros^e of the wine
pres^e, and whatsoever else is good cheap.

And to the end that these wild cattle may the better know that there is such
provision of meat for them, there must be amongst them some tame ones, and
such as have been trained up in the house, for they will follow any whither,
and draw the other after them, and so bring them to the place of provision for
their feeding. And this order must not only be observed in Winter, but also
when they be great with young, and when they have calued, that so they may feed
them the better. And to that end there must regard be had to see when they have
fauned, that there may be corn given them.

The wild bore would not be let grow elder than the age of four years, for
he grows unto this time, but afterward paireth and becomes lean by reason
of old age: wherefore it is meet that he should be sold whiles he is in his
beauty and prime.

A Stag may be kept a long time, for he is young a great time, and lives a
great while.

But as concerning small beasts, as hares, they must not be put in a park
fenced only with posts and pales: for seeing they are small, they will easily
pass through the gaping and open spaces, and having got through, run away:
Their parkes therefore must be walled about, and their feeding of fourage or
mas^in corn, succories, lettuses, cich-pease, barley steeped in rain water;
for leuere^s are not greatly in love with dry corn. As for conies we have
spoken of them in the treatise of the Warren.

Of the Heronrie.
CHAP. XX.
Of the situation of the Heronrie, and of the ordering of the Heronshewes.
WE have entreated in the first book of certain strange and wild birds, as
peacockes, turkeies, phesants, and small hens, and have said that it is a
curious and difficult thing to breed and bring them up: and we may say as much
or more of the herne, which is called of the Latins Ardea, as a man would say
Ardua, because he is given to fly on high: for there is nothing but charges in
this bird, without any profit. True it is that princes and great states, which
love the game, may take some pleasure and delight in the f^ght of the hawk for
to take the herne, as also some good liking in swallowing the sweet morsels in
eating of the herne, but especially of the stomach and breast: in like manner
there are some that say, that a Herne is a princely dish, and meat for a king;
but all this pleasure is not come by without double costs. Let us then put
case and admit that the Lord and Master of the farm be a Prince or great
Lord, and that he bears a very good will to all manner of game, and to fare
daintily, then he may so provide, as that he may now and then have some sport
and pastime with the Herne, either in taking or eating of the same: wherefore
it shall not be a miss if we speak a word or two of the Heronrie, to the end
we may not let slip and ouerpasse any thing in general of all that which may
be necessary for the beautifying and perfecting of our farm and country
house.

To provide therefore for a Heronrie or place to breed herons in, What place is
fittest ^o a H^ronrie.
being if you mean to have it, not only for pleasure but also for profit unto
the Lord thereof, you must first consider that the herne is but a guest for a
time, affecting solitariness, and very fantastical, as not given to stay in
any place, but such as pleases him very well: and for that cause it is not to
be taken as an indifferent thing to place or bestow their provision for their
nesting and abode in any place but only where it is coniectured, that in
passing along, they have begun to rest and settle themselves, as in a place
that is most pleasant and delightsome to them. Two things giving occasion to
make choice of some certain place for a heronrie.
For the Heronrie must in providing be two manner of ways considered of: as
first there must consideration be had of their food and nourishment, that so
when it shall please the Lord of the farm to hawk the herne, or to make any
great and costly banquet, he may have them ready at his commandment. And
secondly to allure and draw herons as they fly along: for the herne that is
shut and made fast in a heronrie, calls unto him such as fly by; for they
hearing the voice of the hernshew so shut up and made fast, do thereupon stay
and make their nests upon the uppermost and higest part of the heronrie,
whereupon it comes, that having laid their eggs, by and by their young ones
are taken to be shut up and made fast in the heronrie.

Let us conclude then, that before there be any cost made in building a place
for the heronshewes to build in, there must diligent care be had in discerning
of the commodiousnesse and fitness of the place, and that is gathered by
having known the herne now and then to have contented and pleased himself
therewith: for if a man should go about to shut up a herne in such place as he
takes no delight in, he would never have young, but die out of hand.
Furthermore, it is requisite that there should pass some small stream of
water through the midst of the heronrie, for the heronshew is a water bird,
and takes delight and pleasure in water, as living altogether upon eeles, and
other such like living fishes. The building of the heronrie must be made
altogether for light, wrought with very close latises and cloven plan^^es,
about the height of six fadome from the ground, and well covered about, to the
end that the heronshewes flying by may make their nests upon the heronrie in
fit and commodiou^ sort.

Their meat must be li^e eeles, (...)
and other such like fishes, sometimes the inner parts of beasts, as also the
^lesh of wolves and dogs cut into small gobbets; and they must have given them
to eat until they be full, that so they may be fat against the time of
ha^king or banketting, and not for increase or store; for there are but a few
hernes that will lay eggs being restrained of their liberty.

And yet this I will tell you by the way, What place is best to (...) at the
(...).
that if the Lord of the farm do take any herne out of the heronrie to make
him sport by flying him with the hawk, that then he must beware not to do it
near unto the heronrie, for otherwise he should take away the good liking both
of flying and enclosed hernes from the heronrie, and so the heronshewes
haunting the same in nesting time, would forsake it, and the enclosed would grow
displeased, and fall in fear of the like danger.

Although the heronshew be a royal meat, The properties o^ the heronshew.
notwithstanding in as much as he is a water bird, his flesh is full of
excrementuous parts, hard to be digested, and that above any other foul of
the river. There is nothing more to be esteemed of in him for to be eaten, than
the flesh which is gathered about his stomach or breast. Moreover, some hold and
are of opinion that his bill being steeped for some time in wine, To pr^c^re
rest and sleep.
does make the wine forcible and able to procure sleep, and bring the body to
rest.

Of Hunting.
CHAP. XXI.
How that there are three sorts of hunting.
FOllowing our purposed determination, we will entreat a word or two of
hunting, not that we would wish our farmer otherwise to affect the game, than
by making it sometimes his recreation, and that in the time of vacation, and
surcease from his other businesses, as when he should do nothing but sleep,
or keep holiday at home.

Now there are three sorts of hunting, the one of fishes, the other of ^oules,
and the third of four footed beasts, as are the Stagge, roe Bucke, fallow
Dear, wild Bore and Hare. In all these the Lord of the country farm may find
occasion to exercise himself, but especially in the hunting of the four
footed beasts* for fishing is more fit for the farmers servants, as those whom
it best beseems to busy their brains on vacant and festival days, with
catching fish with the angle or pots made of osiers, that so they may have any
extraor dinarie fare for their afternoon drinking or supper. The catching of
birds is very pretty and pleasant, but yet if we will believe Plato, a
practice more fitting a servile estate than a Governor or Commander. The
hunting of four footed beasts, The profit of (...) ^oure footed beasts.
as an honest exercise has been received at all times, and permitted by the
laws, especially that which was not undertaken in the night, neither yet upon
slothfulness and contempt of labor: but rather for the better obtaining of a
greater readiness, nimblenesse, cheerfulness, and strength of body: but
howsoever it is, the master of our country farm, especially if he be any
great lord, may exercise himself sometimes, and take some sport in hunting
after he has given order and direction for the doing of all his business,
as well in the city, as at his champion or country house.

Of hunting or chasing of the Stag.
CHAP. XXII.
What dogs are best for the course or hunting.
THe hunting of four footed beasts, as the stag, wild bore, the roe bucke,
and the hare, is performed principally with dogs, horses, and strength of
body, sometimes with ropes and nets, and sometimes with toiles: but these two
sorts of taking of beasts are more fit for holiday men, milk sops, and
cowards, than for men of valor, which delight more in the taking of such
beasts, in respect of the exercise of their body and pleasure, than for the
filling of the belly.

Those dogs which are sit for the chase or for hunting, are most generally
but of two kinds, yet particularly of diverse. The two general sorts of dogs,
are those which are called Greyhounds, or Hounds: Greyhounds and Hounds.
Greyhounds are those which belong to the leash, and are only for the
coursing of all sorts of wild beasts by maine swiftness of foot, or by
running: they do not any thing more than their eyes govern them unto, being
led by a natural instinct or hatred which they bear to all sorts of wild
beasts, Hounds are those which by virtue of their scents, smells, or noses do
find out all manner of wild beasts, following their footsteps by a leasurely
and moderate speed, not suffering the beast to rest till they have tired him,
and made themselves Lords of the the pray: all that they do, is as it were
blindfold, their eyes seldom or never seeing the game till they come to
devour it: and as the Greyhound through his extreme swiftness and running,
shows the greedy delight which he takes in the sport, without once opening
his mouth or making the least sign of any noise, but being as it were dumb
and mute; so the hound taking a greater leisure, shows the delight and
pleasure which he takes in the game, by his continual clamours or opening,
spending his mouth in such liberal sort, that he makes the woods, valleys, and
hills resound the echo or doublings of his voice; and it is amongst hunts-men
taken for a most excellent music: yet this cry of hounds or opening of their
mouths, is in no sort allowed to the liam hound, so long as he draws in the
string, all which time he must be exceeding silent, and mute like unto the
greyhound, as well for the discovery of the game, or footsteps whatsoever he
draws after, as to hinder all preuentions that the adversary may seek when
he has a warning given him by such clamours, for this drawing in the string,
is the most sweetest discovery of all other, and must be done with the
greatest diligence and priuacie. Now to speak of greyhounds* first they are
of all dogs whatsoever the most noble and princely, strong, nimble, swift, and
valient, and though of slender and very fine proportions, yet so well knit and
coupled together, and so seconded with spirit and metal, that they are master
of all other dogs whatsoever: nay, it is most certain, that the perfect and
true Greyhound will even face to face and tooth to tooth conquer the strongest
and fiercest mastiue whatsoever: they are of all dogs the sorest bitten and
least amassed with any cruelty in their enemy, whence it comes that men
esteem them and prefer them before all other dogs for the encountering of the
woolfe, and other beasts of his equal cruelty. Now of these Greyhounds, Two
sorts of Greyhounds.
their be two kinds, the long shag-haired, and great boned Greyhound* and the
smooth, slender and sine shapt Greyhound. Now some will add a third sort
which is indifferently mixed between both: but in as much as he is a mungrell
and bast^^dly bred between the two former, we will allow him no other place
than as contained in the first: of these two sorts of Greyhounds, the first
which is the ^hag-haired dog, is held most proper for vermin or wild beasts
which are ravenous, as the Tiger, the Leopard, Woolfe, Fox, and such like: the
other which is smooth and more delicately proportioned, are best for wild
beasts of pleasure, as the Stag, the Bucke, the Roe* the Hare, and such like.
These Greyhounds are of diverse colors, as some white, some black, some
fallow, some dun, some brended and some p^ed, as having white mixed with any of
the former colors: and these colors have (as touching any particular
goodness) no pre-eminence one above another, but are all equal, Many good and
famous dogs having been of all these several colors, only the white is
esteemed the most beautiful and best for the cie, the black and fallow
hardest to ^ndure labor, and the dunne and brended best for potchers and
night-men, who deligh to have all their pleasures performed in darkness. Now
for the choice of a good Greyhound, (...)
there are but two principal things to be observed, that is to s^y, breed and
shape, Breed, which is ever as touching his (...) and generation: for if a dog
be not well descended, that is to say, begot by an ex ellent dog, or an
exc^llent bitch, there can be little hope of his goodness. Now in the breeding
of Greyhounds, there are diversities of opinions, for some gentlement of the
leash desire a ^ost principal bitch, though the dog be but indifferent, and
suppose that so they shall have the best whelps, supposing (according to an old
conjecture) that a bitch is swifter than a dog; but it is an erroneous
fancy, for the good dog will ever beat the good bitch, and the good bitch
will ever beat the bad dog: again it is most certain, that the dog
having advantage both of length, strength, and courage, he must consequently
have the advantage of speed also. I do not deny but that the bitch being much
less than the dog, (as naturally all are) may have some advantage of
nimblenesse, and so in turns, slips, and wries, may get much ground which the
dog commonly loses: but yet notwithstanding, when the full account is cast,
the good dog will equal all those advantages, and wheresoever the course
shall stand forth long will beat out the good bitch and make her give over.

There be other gentlemen of the leash, which desire a good dog, and respect
not though the bitch be but indifferent, and this is the better choice, yet
both defective; for where there is any imperfection at all, there nature can
never be fully complete. To breed then a good whelpe indeed, To breed a good
w^^lpe.
you must be sure to have both a perfect good dog and a perfect good bitch,
and as near as you can make choice of that bitch which is most large and
deepest chested, for from thence springs both strength and wind. For the true
shape of a good greyhound, because it is the very face and charracter of
goodness, you shall esteem that dog which has a fine, long, lean snakes
head, with a clear bright eye, and wide nostrells, a round bending neck like
a mollard, with a loose thropple, and a full falling at the setting on of the
shoulders, he must have a long, broad, and a square beam back, with high
round ^illets, and a broad space, he must be deep swine sided, with hollow
bended ribs, and a full breast, he mast have rush grown limbs before, and
^ickell houghes behind, a fine, round, full cats foot, with strong cleyes and
tough soles, and an even grown long rats tail, round turning at the lower end
from the leash ward, and he must be full set on between the buttockes, and
lastly he must have a very long, slender close hid pizell, and a round big
pair of stones. The food which is best for greyhounds, as touching their
diet, is chippings or household bread scalded in beef broth or other broth that
is not too salt, and after made white with milk, or else the bones of veale
which are very soft and tender, or the bones of lamb, rabits, or other scraps
coming from the Farmers table. In the time of coursing, or at other times, if
your greyhound be lean or out of heart, the best mea^e to raise him is
sheep heads boiled wool and all in water together with oatemeale and synage,
succorie, langdebeefe, and violet leaves chopped very small together, and so
boiled to pottage, until the flesh fall from the bones. The best food when a
dog is in diet for a course, is to make him bread of wheate-meale and
oate-meale mixed together, and finely bolted and knodden with a little water,
whites of eggs, barme, licoras, and anyseeds, and so bakt in good household
loaves, and given morning and night with new milk or pottage which are warm.
If the dog at any time grow costiue, you shall give him tostes which are made
of the same bread, or of manchets, and steept in sallet oil. Greyhounds when
they are for the course, must be walked forth and ayred both morning and
evening exceeding early, as before day in the morning, and ver^e late, as
about seven or eight of the clock at night: and when you bring your greyhound
home at night, you shall bring him to a fair ^ire, and there let him beak and
stretch himself, and do you ticke him at the least an hour or more before
you put him into his kennell. You must have a very great and diligent care that
when you course him he be exceeding empty, as at least of twelve hours
fasting more than for some small sop or bit or two only to cherish or
strengthen Nature. A brace of greyhounds are enough at one time to course
either Hare or Bucke withal, and two brace are sufficient to course the Stagge
or Hind. Much more might be said of the natures of greyhounds, and the manner
of ordering and dietting them for the course, but this small taste is
sufficient both for the farmers understanding, and to avoid tediousness. Now
for the hounds whose natures I have already in patt discribed, and which hunt
in great numbers, or as it were ^lockes together, you shall understand that
they are of four sorts, and dis^^inguished by four several colors belonging
to the four several sorts of hounds, that is to say, the white hound, the
fallow or taund hound, the greyhound, and the black hound.

The white are the best, for they are of quick scent, swift, hot, and such as
never give over for any continuance of heat, or breaking off, because of the
fe^ting of the horsemen, or the cries and noises of men, keeping the turns and
crossing better than any other sorts of dogs, and are more to be trusted:
notwithstanding they love to be attended with horsemen, and they do fear the
water somewhat, especially in Winter when the weather is cold. Those which are
altogether white are the best, and likewise those which are red spotted. The
other which are black and dirtie, gray spotted, drawing near unto a
changeable color, are but of small value, and whereof there are some subject
to have fat and tender feet.

The baie colored ones have the second place for goodness, The bay^^ ^al^ow
(...) dogs.
and are of great courage, ventring far, and of a quick scent, ^inding out
very well the turns and windings, almost of the nature of the white ones,
save only that they do not endure the heat so well, neither yet the
treadings of the horsemen, and yet notwithstanding they be more swift and hot,
and fear neither cold nor water: they run surely, and with great boldness,
commonly loving the Stagge more than any other beast, but they make no account
of hares. It is true, that they be more headstrong and hard to reclaim than
the white, and put men to more pain and travel about the same. The best of
the fallow sort of dogs, are those which are of a brighter hair, drawing
near unto the color of red, and having therewithal a white spot in the
forehead, or in the neck, in like manner those which are all fallow: but such
as incline to a light yellow color, being graie or black spotted, are nothing
worth: such as are trus^ed up and have dewclawes, are good to make
bloud-hounds. The white and baie dogs are not sit for any but Kings, Princes,
and great Lords, and then not for gentelmen, because they course only the heart,
and not all sorts of game.

The graie dogs do run well at all sorts of game, The gray dogs.
that a man would have them to hunt, but they are not so swift nor lusty as
the others, especially such as have their legs of a bay or fallow color,
drawing somewhat unto a white: and yet notwithstanding they are hot and stout,
not learing water of cold, running with great courage, and never giving over
the game till they have killed: but indeed they avoid and shun heat, the
footing of horses, and the noise of men, neither do they delight in the hunting
of any beasts that are given to wiles and cross windings: but in recompense
hereof, it is possible that you may see them to over run the most swift and
best dogs, especially after beasts that use to run out right.

The black dogs are strong bodied, Black dogs.
but they have low and short legs, in like manner they be nothing swift,
howsoever they may be of a quick s^ent, fearing neither cold nor waters, and
they do delight most in coursing the rammish and strong scented beasts, as
wild Bores, Foxes, and such like, because they neither have mind, nor yet
swiftness to course and take the beasts that be swift in running. But
whereas it is commonly given out and reported, that their are good dogs of
every shape, it may be so brought to pass, as that the hare may not make
much for the arguing of the goodness of the dog, and that there are found of
all colors good and fair dogs: for this cause it is both mere and
requisite that a dog (of what hair or color soever he be) to the end he
may be fair and good, The mar^e^ of a good hunting dog.
have these notes and marks following: his head must be reasonably thick,
rather long than flat nosed, his nostrells very wide and great, his ears
large, and of a mean thickenesse, his back crooked in compass wise, his
loins great and thick, his lips thick and large, his thigh round and
trussed, his houghs straight and well set together, his tail thick near unto
his back, and the rest of it small and lean even to the end, the hair under
his belly stiff, his legs great, the sole of his foot dry, and shaped like
unto the foot of a Fox, his nails thick, his hinder parts as high as his sore
parts. The male kind must be short and crooked: but the bitch or female long.

The signification and meaning of these signs is such: The reason of these
marks of a good hunting dog.
his wide nostrels do argue his quick scent: his vaulted back and straight
hams do argue his swiftnes: his tail thick above, and slender down to the
end, both signify that he has a strong back, and wind at will: the
stiffenesse of his hair underneath his belly does show that he is willing and
painful, fearing neither water nor cold: his thick leg, fox foot, and thick
nails, does signify that he has no sat or gouty foot, and that he has
strong limbs, to run long without grief or annoiance.

But for as much as it is hard to get such hunting dogs when one would, as are
both good hunters and fair withal, it will be requisite to provide a fair
bitch of a good race, strong, and of well proportioned limbs, having great and
large sides and flanks: and to procure her to be limed with a fair dog, having
the marks that we have spoken of before, and that at such time only (if it be
possible) as when the Moon is in the signs of Gemini and Aquariys, for the
dogs that are gotten at such times are not so subject to run mad, and besides,
there will be of them more dogs than bitches. When the bitch is with whelpe, and
begins to have a bagging belly, she may not be set to course, least her
young ones should be kept from ever thriuing: her walk then must not be past
the court or house, never shutting her up in any kennell, because she is
wearisome, and given to loath all meat. When she has whelped (the fittest time
for which is in March, April, and May, rather than either in Winter, or in the
time of great heat) and that the whelps begin to see, they must be ^ed with
cowes milk, sheep milk, or goats milk, unmixed and made warm, neither
must they be taken from sucking the bitch, till they be two months old, and
then feeding them with milk meats, bread, and all sorts of pottage, till they
be ten months old, and all this while thus to keep them in the kennell.

Hounds would be fed all together in one kennell, meet and convenient for
them* The kennell for hunting dogs.
to the end they may know and hear one another: because that those which are
fed together, they become the better acquainted, and agree better in hunting
than those that are of diverse kennels and places.

Their meat shall be bread made of a third part of wheat, The feeding and
keeping of hunting dogs.
a third part of barley, and a third part of rye, because that being so mixed it
keeps them fair and fat, and cures them of many maladies: for and if it
should be made of rye only, it would make them scour too much: if of pure
wheat, it would bind too much in their bellies, and therefore the one mixed with
the other. There must be given them some flesh meat in Winter, Flesh-meate.
but especially unto those that are lean, and hunt the stag: but to those that
hunt the hare you must never give any, least they sleshing themselves upon the
greater game, they make light account of hares, which thrust themselves
commonly into the midst of tame cattel^* to shift off the dogs by that
means, who upon such occasion might leave off the hare, and fall to course the
tame cattle: but the dogs which hunt the heart would never do it, because the
stag is of a more full and strong scent than the hare, as also because their
flesh is more dainty and delicate than any other. The best flesh meat that can
be given them, and which does strengthen them most, is horseflesh,
asse-flesh, and mules-flesh: but as for oxen, kine, and other such like, their
flesh is to them of too eager and sharp a substance. Their flesh meat must
first have their hide plucked off, that so they may not have any knowledge of
the beast, nor of his hair. Good huntsmen make great account of pottage made
of mutton, goats flesh, and ox heads for their lean dogs, which hunt the
hare: P^^^age.
and you must mingle sometimes amongst these pottage a little brimstone to heat
them withal.

As for your raw flesh meat (which amongst huntsmen it called ket) if you do
not eat it all at a meal, you shall preserve it in some clear running
stream by suffering it to lie hid in the water till your next occasion to use
it. Oats ground hulls and all, and so scalded in hot water, is a very good
mange or meat for hounds, and so is also your mill-dust scalded in the same
manner. But if your hounds happen to fall weak, or sick, or be over hunted,
then you shall take the bags and intrailes of sheep, having turned the filth
and excraments forth, and washed the bags well, and also the sheep pluckes
and boil them in fair water with a good quantiof ^atemeale, till the pottage
be thick, and so give it reasonably warm to the hounds: this is a sovereign
good meat, and it is very comfortable for weak and sick dogs, of what kind
soever they be, and bring them into lust and strength suddenly.

Their kennell must be made in some place standing upon the East, through the
midst whereof dot^^un some little river or spring. The place wherein the dogs
shall lie, shall be builded with very white walls, and floores of boords close
joined, for ^eare that spiders, fleas, wal-lice, and such like should breed
there. He that shall be appointed to keep them must be gentle, mild, and
courteous, loving dogs of his natural instinct, and such a one as will make
them clean, and dress them carefully with wisps of straw and little brushes:
being ready to give them some pretty dainties to ^ate, and to draw them
along the green corn and meadows, as well to give them appetite to their
meat, as also to learn them to run, and to cause them to pass through the the
flocks of sheep and other tame cattle, that so they may be accustomed unto
them, and be made to know them.

I^ the dogs be sick, The diseases of hunting dogs. For (...) and verm^^e.
you must use the remedies following: for lice, ^leas, and other vermin*
wherewith dogs are laden oftentimes, especially in the times of great heat, you
must bath them, or at the least wash them and rub them with a wispe, with a
decoction made of large quantity, with ten good handfulls of wild cresses,
wild marierome, sage, rosemarie, rue* patience, and fix handfulls of ^alt, all
being well boiled together to the consumption of the herbs.

To drive out worms, Worms.
you must soke perrosin made into powder, aloes po^dred, vnquencht lime, and
live brimstone made likewise into powder, even all these in one oxegall, and
with this liquor rub the place infected with worms.

If dogs be bitten of serpents, The ^i^ing (...) Serpents.
you must cause them to take down the juice of the leaves of ash tree
incontinently: or else a glass full of the decoction of rue, white mullein,
mints and broom, whereunto must be added the weight of a French crown of
treacle, applying treacle in like manner unto the bitten place.

When the dogs are bitten of mad dogs, (...)
they must forthwith be cast into a vessel of sea water nine times one after
another: or for lack of sea water, into common water wherein has bin
dissolved four bushels of salt; and this will preserve them from going mad.
And if it happen that you have not provided this remedy timely enough, but
that now the dog is fallen mad, to the end that you may keep the other from
the same mischief, you shall be careful, that the mad dog run not abroad, and
therefore you shall kill him by and by, for it is but all in vain and
altogether impossible to go about to cure such madness: Signs of madness.
the signs of such madness are the drawing up of of his tail at the upper
end, hanging the rest straight down, a very black mouth without any froth, a
heavy look and that aside in ou^^thwart and cross manner.

Against the scabs, tetters, itch, and gauls of dogs, you must take three
pounds of the oil of nuts, (...)
one pound and a half of the oil of oil of lees, two pounds of old swines
grease, three pounds of common honey, a pound and a half of vinegar, and make
them all boil together, to the consumption of the half of the vinegar,
putting thereto afterward of perrosin and common pitch, of each two pounds and
a half, of new wax half a pound, melt altogether, casting in thereto
afterward the pouders that follow, a pound and a half of brimstone, two pounds
of reboiled coperas, and twelve ounces of verdegrease, making them all up
together in an ointment: but they must be washed with water and salt, before
they be anointed with this ointment.

For the worms in dogs, you must make a drink of the decoction wherein have
been boiled wormwood, Worms.
southrenwood, and the shauings of harts-horne: or else cause them to swallow
down pills made of harts-horne, brimstone, aloes, and the juice of wormwood.

When the dogs are tired, rub their feet with this restrictiue, made of the
yelkes of eggs, the juice of pomegranets and soot finely poudred, all of it
being well mingled together, and left to settle one whole day.

Dogs are often hurt of wild bores in many parts of their bodies, and then
according to the places where they are hurt, Hurts given by wild bores.
they must be ordered and looked to with dressing of their wounds. If the
wound be in his belly, and that the guts comeforth unhurt, you must first put
them in again, and then afterward put into the belly in the place where the
hole is, a slice of lard, and so sow up the skin above: but the thread must be
knit of a knot and made fast at every stitch of the needle, and withal cutoff
the thread at every stitch so fastened: as much is to be performed in the
wounds that shall be made in other places, always observing to put some lard
into them.

For wounds which dogs shall receive, Wounds.
the juice of the leaves of red coleworts is a very souerainge balm (being
applied presently unto the wound) healing them up very speedily: or else take
the juice of Nicotiana, whereof we have spoken in the second book.

Against the canker breeding in the ears of dogs, taking a dram of Soap, of
oil of Tartar, Salarmoniacke, Brimstone, and Verdegrease, incorporated all
together with white vinegar and strong water, and rub the cankered ears
therewith nine mornings.

If the dogs after they have run in frost after rain, (...) of cold.
and such other bad weather, or swum the rivers and lakes, after the game, come
to take cold, presently as soon as they come to their kennell they must be
chafed and dried at a great fire, and after that their bellies rubbed and wiped
with wispes, thereby to wipe away the dirt sticking unto them.

Oftentimes in coursing over the fields and rocks dogs come to have the skin
stricken off of their feet: (...)
for the remedying whereof, it will be good first to wash their feet with
water and salt, and after to make a cataplasme of the yelkes of eggs beaten with
strong vinegar, and the juice of the herb called Pilosella.

I^ in coursing they shall have taken any thrushes upon any part of their
bodies, Knocks of thrushes.
with the the tip of the hearts horn, or with the bores tuske, you must apply
to the place a plaster of the root of great comfrey, an emplaister of melisote
and oil of roses, as much of the one as of the other: but before you apply
the plaster, you must cut the hair away from the place where the grief is.

To cause dogs to piss, make them drink the decoction of mallows,
hollihocks, Against the (...) of making water.
the roots of ^ennell and brambles made with white wine.

If dogs have gotten any disease in their ears, The disease of the ears.
drop therein veriuice mingled with the water of cheruile, continuing to do so
three or four mornings.

You shall find a larger discourse of the nature, conditions, differences and
diseases of dogs in the first Book, in the chapter of the kennell.

Yet because there is one other sort of hunting dogs, which although they are
for birds and not for wild beasts, yet in their kinds they are as noble and as
generous as any other dogs whatsoever, and as much in use amongst great
persons, and these dogs are called field or land spannels, of which since before
no Auther has fully entreated: I will here give you a little touch or taste of
the nature, disposition, and manner of go^ening them. To speak then of the
land spannell, you shall understand, that he is be nature very gentle,
courteous, and loving to the man more than any other sort of dogs whatsoever:
they also naturally love to hunt the wing of any bird whatsoever, especially
partridge, pheasant, quail, rail, poots, and such like: when you make choice
of any spannell, you shall choose him by his shape, beauty, metal, and
cunning hunting, his shape is descerned in the good composition of his body,
as when he has a round thick head, a short nose, a long, well compast and
hairie ear, broad and sydelips, a clear red eye, a thick neck, broad breast,
short and well knit ioints, round feet, strong cleys, high dewcleyd, good
round ribs, a gaunt belly, a short broad back, a thick bushie and long
haired tail, and all his body generally long and well haired: his beauty is
discerned in his color, of which the motleys or pide are the best, whether
they be black and white, red and white, or liver hued and white; for to be
all of one entire color, as all white, or all bladke, or all red, or all liver
hued without any other spot, is not so comely in the field, although the dogs
notwithstanding may be of excellent cunning: his metal is discerned in his
free and untired laboursome raunging, beating a field over and over, and not
leaving a furrow untrodden or unsearched where any haunt is likely to be
hidden, and when he does it most coragiously and swiftly, with a wanton
playing tail, and a busy laboring nose, neither desisting or showing less
delight in his labor at night than he did in the morning; and his cunning
hunting is discerned by his casting about heedfully, and running into the wind
of the pray he seeks, by his stillness and quietness in hunting without
babbling or barking, but when he is upon an assured and certain haunt, by the
manner of his raunging, as when he compasses a whole field about at the
first, and after lesneth and lesneth that circumference till he have trodden
every path, and brought the whole circuit to one point; and by his more
temperate and leasurely hunting, when he comes to the first scent of the game,
sticking upon it, and pricking it out by degrees, not opening or questing by
any means, but whimpring and whining to give his master a warning of what he
scenteth, and to prepare himself and his hawk for the pleasure he seeks,
and when he is assured of his game, then to quest out loudly and freely. Now it
is to be understood, that it is hard to have one spannell to be absolute
cunning in all the qualities of hunting, as to be an excellent raunger, an
excellent finder, and an excellent retainer, because one quality is almost in
nature clear contrary to another; for he that is a good and free raunger can
never be confined or bound into one particular small compass, but will out of
his own metal break forth into much larger compass, and so both lose time
in hunting, and also give the game more leisure to get breath, or fleit away
privately from the place where it was marked, and so deceive the hawk of her
expectation, and in like sort a good retainer which will stick upon the place
whereto he is oppointed and will beat it over and over many times, even as it
were by inchmeale, never leaving till he have sprung the game he seeks, can
never be esteemed for a good raunger, because the leisure he takes will not
give him leave to rid much ground, and so likewise of all other several
qualities: therefore every man must esteem his spannyel for the one good
quality he holds, and cannot for diverse, and so mixing his kennell of good
raungers, good noses, and retainers, he shall be sure to attain to the
uttermost height of his pleasure he wishes. There be some spannels which
delight in the plain and open field, and those are the best for the partridge,
quail, or rail: there be oath others which delight in woods, hedges, bushes,
and couerts, and those are best for the pheasant and moore poo^, and these are
commonly the best retainers, and the former the best raungers.

There is also another sort of land spannyels, which are called Setters, and
they diffor nothing from the former, but in instruction or obedience; for these
must neither hunt, raunge, nor retain more or less than as the master
appoints, taking the whole limits of whatsoever they do from the eye or hand
of their instructor: they must never at any time quest what occasion soever
shall happen, but as being dogs without voices, so they must hunt close and
mute, and when they come upon the haunt of that they hunt: they shall suddenly
stop and fall down upon their bellies, and so leasurely creep by degrees to
the game, till they come within two or three yards thereof, or so near that
they cannot press nearer without danger of retriuing, then shall your Setter
^^icke, and by no persuasion go further, till your self come in and use your
pleasure. Now the dogs which are to be made for this pleasure, should be the
most principal best and lustiest spannyell you can get, both of good scent and
good courage, yet young, and as little as may be made acquanted with much
hunting: the way to train him to his knowledge, is by all loving means, or
else awful where love takes not effect, as by fasting, threatenings, and some
stripes to make him both fear and love you far above all other persons, and to
that end you shall suffer him to receive no good thing from any man but your
self only: when you have made him thus enamoured of you, you shall (as men
teach hounds to couch with bits and blows) teach him to couch down close upon
his belly when you please, by saying Lie close, or such like word: for you are
to understand, that in this exercise, the principal thing which is to be
respected, is constancy of words, that is by no means to use many words, or
change of words, for that breeds a confusion in the dogs brains, and makes
them that they cannot understand you, and where understanding is taken away,
there never look to have your will performed: therefore you shall never use
but one word for encouragement or cherrishing, as hay good dog, or such like,
but one word for advice or threatening, as Be wise, or such like, one word for
performance of duty, as Lie close, and one word for the bettering of his
duty, as Go near, and such like, and so forth for the performance of any
other thing whatsoever. Yet I do not bind you to these words only and none
other, but to invent words, so they intend to this sense, as you please, and
having made choice of your words, not by any means to alter or change them,
but to use your dog constantly to them that he may truly understand when he is
cherisht, when chid, when taught, when forewarned or advised: for the whole art
of making these setting dogs, consists in these words only, for if one word
being used, that word known, any man may hunt with the dog as well as his
master, and so every knave greedy to steal him: but having liberty to make
choice of your own words, except you teach them, a man shall be never the
better for having of the dog. To proceed then to our purpose, as soon as you
have taught your dog to lie close upon his bell^e, you shall then make him
creep unto you upon his belly, by leasurable and slow degrees, saying unto
him go near go near or such like, and ever observing in that as in all things
else, to cherrish and reward him when he does well, and to threaten or correct
him when he does amiss: and in this matter of correction, you must also be
certain, as in your words, and not use diverse corrections, but one, as either
to bite him or nip him by the care root, or other sencible part, where you may
pain him, but not hurt or lame him. When your dog will couch and creep upon
his belly, to make him the better delight in doing it, you shall lay a piece
of bread three or four yards before him, How to teach a Spaniell to (...) well.
and then make him couch down and creep close upon his belly unto it, and
being come with his nose just over it, not to take it till you give him leave:
which obedience when he has showed, you may then give him leave to eat it,
and cherish him. When the dog is very perfect in this lesson, which is but
only to bring him to obedience, and to the true manner of carriage and
concealment of his body, you shall then take him abroad into the field, and
give him leave to raunge, yet in such manner, that he got not an ynch further
than you give him leave, but with the least hemme or threatening of your voice
to be ready to come even to your foot, although he be never so earnest upon
his game: the contrary whereof, when at any time he shows, you shall not
forget, but in the very selfsame instant beat and correct him very soundly.
Now when you have brought him unto that obedience, that he will raunge
according to your pleasure either in large or little compass, you shall then
take care, that not at any time, or upon any occasion whatsoever, that he dare
to quest or open his mouth, but that he hunt so silent and mute as is possible:
and if at any time he offer to quest, though never so little, presently you
must not forbear, but correct him, till he come to an understanding of your
will therein: and when he understands your will, yet notwithstanding does
quest, you shall not only beat him, but lead him home, and tie him up from
meat till the next day, not ceasing to hunger-starue him, till he do perform
your pleasure: which done, then reward him liberally both with good meat and
with plenty: which the dog once finding, he will both for fear, love, and
the relief of his own belly, labor his utmost to please you. Now as soon
as you find your dog is brought both unto obedience and mute hunting, you
shall then, as soon as you find him busy upon any haunt, which you shall note
by the business of his tail, and sticking long in one place, with a kind of
secret whining, to show that he is near to that which he desires: forthwith
you shall draw near unto him, and give him words both of encouragement and
advice, saying, Hay good dog, go near, or such like: and if you find him too
busy or hasty, you shall threaten and bid him be wise, and such like, till
you see him lie close upon his belly, and that he dare not go any further:
then you shall fetch a large compass round about the place where the dog
lies, and cast your eye diligently into the covert to see whether you can find
out the game, which as soon as you have done, if you find that the dog has
set too far off, that is twenty or thirty yards short, as timerousnesse and
fearfulness will make a young dog many times do: then you shall encourage
him and make him go somewhat nearer, but if he set within the compass of
three or four yards, then you shall make him lie still, until such time as
either your hawk be at her pitch, or your nets be spread, and then your
self shall go or ride into the covert and spring them, and the game being
taken, you shall not forget to reward your dog. Now if during this maine
action of setting, which is after the dog has first stuck and given you
warning of the game, if he shall upon any occasion whatsoever, either by
haste, negligence, or the frenzy of his own desire, or otherwise by a too
open carriage of his body do spring the game before you be ready for it,
you shall instantly correct him foundly, and also tie him up that night without
any meat, keeping him so fearfully in awe of the game, that if at any time he
shall, either by too hasty raunging, or any other unexpected chance, happen
upon the game unawares, yet shall his fear so govern him, that he shall upon
the very instant sight of his error not only stop suddenly, but also cast
himself top over tail backward, rather than by pressing forward an ynch
endanger the springing of the game. Which when at any time you perce^ue him to
do, you shall then immediately cherish him, notwithstanding the loss of your
game at that instant, in as much as therein he showed a willingness to have
done the contrary upon any occasion, if mischance had not been his
hinderance. Now for the food which is best for spanyels, it is that which is
before prescribed for greyhounds, as chippings, bones, and broken crusts of
bread, scalded in water and milk, or the heads, plucks, and entrails of
sheep, boiled with oatmeale: yet the setting spanyell would for the most part
be fed from the trencher with scraps of meat, bones, bread, and such like:
for by reason that he must be kept much fasting, since he cannot hunt but when
he is exceeding empty, it is very fit that he be kept with as good as
nourishing meat as can be gotten. Now to conclude this discourse of hunting
dogs, you shall understand, that there is one other sort of spanyels, and
they be called vvater-spanyels, because they delight only naturally in the
water, and are employed for the hunting of Duckes, Mallards, and all sorts of
vvater-fowle: they are much larger and bigger bodied than the land-spanyels
are, and a great deal more strong and Lyon-like made: their hair is also
very long, rough, and thick curled, which shows their hard constitution
and ability to endure the water, albeit the vveather be never so fiercely and
bitterly cold. They receive all their virtues from nature, and not from
instruction: and therefore to make any large discourse of them, were
fri^olous: only, for as much as they are very necessary to attend the
fowler, for the fetching of his foul out of the water, when they are either
lymed or stricken with the piece, it is meet that they be brought to great
obedience, that is to say, to fetch, carry, run, couch, and creep,
whensoever a man pleases, least otherwise, out of the franticknesse of their
own natures, they scarre away the game vvhilest the fowler is the most busily
employed. These dogs are less tender than any of the other, and therefore
any meat will serve them: neither would they be used to any niceness, because
their most employment is in the Winter season. And thus much touching hunting
dogs and their governments.

CHAP. XXIII.
How young hounds are to be trained up and made fit for the game.
IT is not y^o^gh to have a number of good and fair dogs, well marked with
marks, declaring both the said qualities, for they must over and above be
taught and trained up for the game. Wherefore the huntsman must first bring
them to understand the sound of the horn, to swim and haunt the water, that
so they may be the more ready and forward to pursue the beast, if so be that
he should seek to save himself by any running river or standing lake. He
must lead them also once a week into the fields, but not before the age of
sixteen or eighteen months, for before such age they are not thoroughly
grown and well knit in all their members. But especially he must well advise
to what kind of game he is purposed to use them, as whether to course the
Heart, or the Hind, the wild Bore, or the Hare: for look what beasts you
first run them at, those will they best remember always, especially if there
be care had to look any thing well unto them.

You must not course with them in the morning, if possibly you can avoid it:
for having been accustomed to the coolness of the morning, and coming
afterward to the height of the day, and feeling therein the heat of the Sun,
they will not run any more.

You must not put on young dogs the first time within a toil, because the
beast running altogether round, and therefore always in the sight of the
dogs, so when afterward they should be brought to run out of the toil,
and by that means become cast any great distance behind the beast, it would be
the cause of their giving over and forsaking of the game.

It shall be for the better (to the end they may be the better trained and
fitted) to put all the young ones together with four or five old ones, at such
time as you purpose to hunt with them. Neither shall you compel your young
hounds to make more have than their own natures leads them unto, but
encouraging them to trust to their own noses, let them take what leisure they
please, and pick out the sent of themselves, that coming truly to understand
what they hunt, they may be mo^e perfect and ready in the same: whereas on
the contrary part, being compelled to hunt up close with the older and swifter
hounds, they hunt (as it were) by rote, catching the sent here and there, and
go away with it both uncertainly and ignorantly, and so seldom or never
prove sta^^che or good hounds. It is also very meet to enter all young
hounds at the Hare first, because it is the sweetest and coolest of all sents
whatsoever, and the hound which will hunt it, must necessarily hunt any other
hoter sent with much more violence: for it is a rule, That whosoever can do
the hardest things, must forcibly do things easier with less difficulty.
Therefore first enter your hound (as before is said) at the Hare, least finding
a sweetness and easiness of hunting in the hoter sents, he never after lay
his nose to the cooler.

CHAP. XXIIII.
How that the Heart and the place where he haunteth and uses to lie, would be
known before ye course or hunt him.
KIngs, Princes, Hunting is for great states.
and great Lords (to whom, and no others, belongs the coursing of the Heart)
have not used to course the Heart, before they have learned of their hunts-man
what manner of Heart he is, young or old, and whether he be a fair and great
one, and such a one as deserves to be coursed, and then afterward where his
haunt and lodging is.

The hunts-man shall know the age and fairness of the Heart in respect of
others, The marks of distinction betwixt Heart and Heart, as also of their ago.
by judgment of the form of his foot, the largeness of his tines, his dung,
gate, beatings, breakings, and rubbings.

The sole of the foot being great and large, the heel also being thick and
large, the little cleft which is in the midst of the foot, being large and
open, a large leg, a thick bone, being also short, but nothing sharp, and
the tippes of his claws round and thick, are signs of an old Heart. The elder
Hearts in their gate do never ouer-reach the former foot with the hinder, for
they tread short of it at the least four ^ingers: but it is not so in young
Hearts, for they in their gate do ouer-reach and set the hinder foot more
forward than the fore-foot, after the manner of the ambling Mule. The Hind.
The Hind has commonly a long foot, narrow, and hollow, with small cutting
bones.

The excrement and dung of Hearts is not alike at all times: for some is
printed, othersome vvrythen round, and othersome flat and broad: and if it be
large, gross, and thick, it is a sign that they are Hearts of ten tynes,
that is to say, such (...) have shot ten small horns out of the stock. In
June and July they make their dung in thick vvreaths that are very soft: and
yet there are some of them that make it flat and broad, until mid June: And
from mid July unto the end of August, their dung is printed, gross, long, and
knottie, well hammered, anointed, or gilded: and these are the marks to know
Hearts of ten tynes from the old ones.

The cariages of a Heart are said to be, The cariages or largeness of his tines.
when a Heart passing through a thick and twiggie vvood, hitteth with his head
against the boughs of trees: for so it comes to pass, that if the Heart be
tall and large, the cariages will also be somewhat large. Now the judgment
which the hunts-man can gather of the carriages, cannot be but from after July
until March: for the other four months, that is to say, March, April, May,
The time when Hearts cast their (...).
and June, the Hearts cast their heads, that is to say, their horns. True it
is, that they begin to put forth new horns by the month of April, and as the
Sun mounteth higher, and grass grows higher also, and harder, so their
homes grow and wax greater: so that by the midst of June their heads will be
fully see and garnished with all that which they are to bear all the year
long, provided that they be in a good thriuing country, and come not by any
hurt or annoyance. You may likewise judge of their age by the tynes of their
horns: for as for the first year, they have no horns: the second year they
have their first horns, To judge of the age of the Heart by his horns.
which are called daggers: the third year, four, six, or eight tynes: the
fourth year, eight or ten tynes: the fifth year, ten or twelve: the
sixth, twelve, fourteen, or sixteen: and in the seventh, their horns put
forth the greatest number of tynes that ever they will bear, for after it they
put forth no more, but those grow greater which are put forth. Yet
notwithstanding, The horns of an old Heart.
the old Hearts will always be known, by having the whole root of their horns
large and gross, the body or stock very bright, and set with pearls, and
strait and large heads, rather open than turned compasse-wise.

By the going of the Heart, The gate or going of the Heart.
the hunts-man shall be able to judge whether the Heart be great and long, and so
likewise, if he will stand long in course before the dogs: for the Hearts
which have long paces, hold out longer in coursing, than those which have short
paces, and they are also quicker, swifter, and longer breathed.

It is known if the Heart be tall and long-legged, The beatings and (...) of
the Heart.
and likewise of what bulk or bigness his body is, by marking where he
enters into the thick amongst brakes and small wood, which he shall have let
pass betwixt his legs: for look at what height he has beaten them down
with his belly, so high must you judge him to be on his legs. The grossness
of his body is perceived by the two sides of the way which he has touched
with his body: for he will have broken off the dry boughs and branches on
both sides; so that thereby you may gather the grossness and greatness of
his body.

As concerning the rubbings of the Heart, The rubbing of the Heart.
by how much the elder they are, by so much the rather are they given to rub,
and that upon great trees: wherefore, when the huntsman shall perceive the
branches of the tree to be broken down, then he shall be able to gather the
height and largeness of the Hearts head: howbeit, this is but a dark and
obscure mark.

Thus and by these means it may come to pass, The knowledge of the Heart his
privy haunt and place of retra^^^.
that the hunts-man may collect and gather the age and largeness of the Heart,
and yet notwithstanding remain as ignorant as ever he was of the place where
he lies, and from where he may find him in his secret haunt and privy
by-walkes. And therefore to be assured thoroughly, it behooves him to have some
one or other very good bloud-hound, having a very quick and exquisite sent,
that so he may the more easily find out and follow the foot of the Heart:
besides which means, it must be provided, that the hunts-man be not ignorant
of the places in general, The Heart has a several haunt every month.
which the Heart is accustomed to resort unto, although they be diverse,
according to the months of the year; for Hearts do change their walks and
feeding every month, according as the Sun mounteth and ascends: for which
cause, in November you must look to find the Hearts amongst furze, briers, or
heath, the crops and flowers whereof they love to brouze and feed upon,
thereby to restore nature after they have been at rut. In December they haunt
the ^nner parts and heart of the forest, to purchase thereby the shield of the
vvood against cold winds, snow, and the noisomeness of frosts following
rain. In January they draw near the corners of the forests, and seek
relief amongst the green corne-fields, upon Rye, and such like. In February
and March, because they then cast their horns, they hide themselves amongst
the bushes, and so they continue likewise for all April and May. In June and
July, they apply the cut-woods and corn, at which time they are in their
prime, and fullest fatted: then also they seek after water, because of the
great heat which does alter and change them, and drink up the dew and
moistness of the wood, which then begins to wax hard. In September and
October, they forsake the bushes and go to rut, and then they keeps no certain
place, The rut of the Heart.
nor manner of feeding, because they range after the Hindes, and follow their
ways and steps, carrying their noses close by the ground to take the scent of
them, nothing regarding or careful to find out by the wind, if there be any
secretly (...) to do them harm: as thus also they pass and spend both day and
night, being so enraged and fervently carried away with the rut, as that they
think that there is not any thing that can hurt them: then also they live with
a very small, as namely of that which is within themselves (always following
the steps and footings of the Hind) and next principally the great red
mushrums, which helps to bring them to the pissing of their tallow, for which
causes; they are very easily killed at such times, if the venison were good.

Thus the hunts-man may have a general notion of the haunt of the Heart, and so
he shall not seek in any other places, then where he ordinarily makes his
abode. And now when by the means aforesaid, he is sure of the place, it
remains only that he learn his den or the place of his particular resort:
and forth diligent finding out of the same, he must go early to the place,
which he knows to be the general haunt of Hearts for the present time and
hour, as is before declared: and he shall lead with him his bloud-hound that
is not given to open, to foot him withal, having first wet his nostrels with
good vinegar, The means of finding out the particular place and lodging of the
Heart.
that so he may have the better scent. He may also gather some perceiuerance by
the other marks before specified, that is to say, by the prints of his feet
upon the grass, by the carriages of his head, his dung, gate beatings, and
rubbings which he may make upon such things as he meets withal in his way:
howbeit the hunts-man in this case must be ruled according to the
variableness of the place where he makes search, for it is one craft and
s^eight to find the lodging of the Heart amongst the underwood, another amongst
the corn fields, and a third kind of skill to find him out amongst the high
woods, and they are better learned by practice in hunting and experience, than
by instructions delivered in writing: and to the end I may not be too tedious,
I will say no more of this matter.

CHAP. XXV.
How the Heart must be hunted.
THe hunts-man after deligent search, The report of the hunts-man unto the king.
having gotten as well the fairness and largeness of the Heart, as also the
lodging, shall come and make report unto the King, or unto his Lord (for we
have said before that the hunting of the Heart belongs unto Kings, Princes,
and great states) of his endeavor, representing unto him the dung of the Heart
which he shall have marked, making rehearsal withal of the marks and notes
of the Heart which he has seen: and then his Lord may make choice of and
appoint the day and hour, for the hunting of the heart in the place which has
bin foretold by the hunts-man.

The day appointed, Three sorts of dogs, as bloud-hounds, coursers, and for
easements.
the horsemen must be ready to be gone early in the morning, having with
their guide and dogs (as well their bloud-hounds and coursers, as those which
are to be put on in a set and certain place for the easing of those which had
him in chase before) as also whatsoever other their necessary furniture. The
m^^e dog is (...) which opens, not but follows the trace of the Heart.
And when they are come to the place, they shall make diligent search to find
out where the Heart is lodged, and that both by their bloud-hound that will not
open, as also by other means that they may devise and invent before they make
choice of any standing for their dogs, either coursers, or of easement. When
they have cast about the covert, and found the layre of the Dear, they shall
take up the Lya^ hound, and first place the Hewed round about that side of the
vvood, out of which they would by no means have the Dear to break through or
pass. This Hewed is a certain company of men coasting that side of the
covert about, and making continual noyses and clamors, whereby they may
affright the Dear from daring to attempt to come near that coast. Then on
that side through which they would have the Dear to pass, and where the
course shall be made, there they shall in senet stands, made in the trees,
twenty paces within the vvood, place the Bows, which, as the Dear shall
pass by, may shoot according to their skils and fortunes. And this coast shall
be kept with all the secretnesse and priuacie that may be: and great regard
shall be had of taking the vvind, How to place the greyhounds for Te^sers,
Reset, and Bac^^^t.
least the Dear find offense as he is hunted. When the Bows are placed, then
on the next champion ground, and as near the covert as you can conveniently,
you shall place your Teasers, that is, the first brace of greyhounds for the
course, which should be the lightest, nimblest, and swiftest dogs you have,
that putting the Stagge to the utmost of his speed at first, he may be the
less able to endure his course forth. Then a quarter of a mile before them,
or more, according to the quantity of ground, you shall place your Reset,
which would be a brace of greyhounds somewhat stronger than the former,
which coming in more fresh, may pinch sorer, and make the Dear in more
despair of safety. Lastly, a quarter of a mile before them, you shall place
your Backset, which would be two of the strongest and forest biting
greyhounds you can get, who taking advantage of the Stagges weariness, and
coming to pinch, may there hold him, without suffering him to tun further.
When you have thus placed your course, you shall then take your hunting hounds,
and vncoupling them, cast them off into the covert, encouraging them both with
horns and voices, till they have the Dear on foot, and so hunt him,
Directions how to hunt the Dear with hounds only.
till you have brought him to take his end at the Bows, or in the course. But
if you make no use either of Bows or Greyhounds, but only intend to hunt the
Stagge at force with hounds only, then as soon as you have cast off your
hounds, and got the Stagge on foot, you shall by all the diligent means you
can, get sight of him so soon as is possible, and upon his view take such
special and true knowledge of him, that whensoever you shall cross him, you
may know him from any other Dear whatsoever: And then you shall give good
heed unto his manner of hunting, and unto the sleights which he uses in the
chase; of all which we shall speak severally hereafter. And in case your
hounds may be ouer-haled and vvearied by the long standing of the Stagge, it
shall not be amiss to have hounds of easement in some convenient place,
which you may cast off in the midst of the day to relieve the former, and
make the chase or royle much shorter.

The Heart being once perceived by the horsemen, Dogs of easement are such as
are rested to run when others are weary.
or winded by the blood* hound, they must place their dogs of easement at
three or four several stands, and certain places, to the end that they may
ease the other dogs which are weary with running, or have lost the footing
of the Heart, and so by them give new chase unto the beast: and such dogs of
easement shall be so set in companies, that if the first fail and give over
the chase, yet the later may be the more strong, able, and fierce kind of
dog, The placing of the dogs of easement.
following the chase, not coldly, a far off, and behind, as the others, but
leading the way before all the rest, and that with great stoutnesse and courage.

The dogs of easement being placed in standings most convenient, the coursing
dogs must be uncoupled for to run; regard being had according to the place
where the Heart was seen.

The horsemen tending upon the company of dogs, shall second the coursing
dogs, and wind their horn, the more to encourage them, casting (...) in the
way of the Heart, thereby to hinder his swiftnes in running, if so be the (...)
not already cast some therein, in his watch, at such time as he made search to
find out the lodging of the Heart, or else the horsemen themselves, before the
vncoupling and letting loose of the coursing dogs. In the mean time, if it
fall out, that the Heart in his course do happen to pass near unto the dogs
of easement, the horseman which keeps the same, must mark whether the Heart
be pursued with any of the company of the coursing dogs, and then presently
to uncouple the company of his dogs of easement, hallowing and whupping the
dogs continually, and casting of boughs of trees in the way where the Heart
should pass: but if he pe^ceiue that there be not any of the company of the
coursing dogs, neither yet hear any noise of the men that are hunting, he
must not uncouple any of his dogs, but only mark the way that the Heart
runs, to make report thereof to the company, to the end he may know
whether the same be the Heart in chase, or no: because that sometimes Hearts are
driven through fear out of the places where they use to lie, hearing the noise
of the company of the dogs and horsemen.

In the mean time, the horsemen appointed to wait upon the company, must
always second and keep by the sides of the dogs, to cause them the better
to keep and agree together, and to help them at a default, if at any time
they happen to be out of the trace, and not to follow the right way.

They must also have a care of the vviles and sleights of the Heart, The (...)
of the Heart.
who when he sees himself near pursued by the dogs, indeuoureth and
bestirreth himself how to acquire and rid himself of them, making many
windings and turns, and that in diners manners.

For sometimes he busieth himself about the finding out of the dens of
other beasts, The moliciousnes of the Heart.
hiding himself therein, and letting the dogs by that means to ouerslip him,
as not being able to find the sent of him, having couched his four feet under
his belly, and drawing his breath from the coolness and moisture of the
earth. Again, he has this subtletie and craft by nature, as to know, that the
dogs do gather more sent from his breathing and feet, than from any of the
rest of the parts of his body. But to prevent this his crafty wiliness, you
must have cast many boughs in the entrances of such thickets as the Heart is to
pass by, to the end they may the better find the last feeting and breathes,
which will yield some near guess of the place wherein he shall be hid.

Othersome times, when the Heart sees the dogs chasing him, and that he
cannot avoid himself from them, he goes from one thicket to another, seeking
the haunts of Hindes, and other lesser Hearts, and thrusts himself into their
company: and moreover, sometimes draws them away, and causes them to run
with him the space of a whole hour or more upon his way, afterward casting
them off, and making way for himself out of and far from any way. And if it
happen that his wiles be found out by the exquisite sent of the dogs, and
wisdom of the hunters, then he casts about into his first way, to break
off by that means his ^ormer traces, and thereby to mock the dogs: then
after that, he enters into some large and wide way, which he follows so
long as his strength will endure. To avoid these sleights, the horsemen must
have an eye when the Heart shall fall into company of other beasts, and run
away with them, to the end they may stir up the old dogs of the company to
pursue the Heart with greater carfulness, keeping near about them to help
and aid them: and if the Heart have taken the broad way, to the end he may take
away all sent from the dogs (for this is a most (...) thing, that all sorts
of beasts do pass through the broad ways, whose earth turns into powder)
in such sort, as that the way of the Heart, and the places which the horn of
his foot did tread upon, become quickly filled up again and covered by the
falling together of the dust, the horsemen must look very carefully, and view
the ground very well, to see if they can perceive any traces of the Heart, and
then they shall cast the boughs out of their way lustily, and encourage their
dogs, calling unto them in cheerful and cherishing manner.

Again, it sometime falls out, that Hearts do run overthwart the burned
grounds where the dogs can have no sent, because the smell of the fire is
greater than the sent of the Heart: yea, and sometimes the dogs do give over
coursing, having drawn into their nosthrils this evil smell: vvhereupon the
horsemen must go aside a little out of their way with the dogs, until such
time as they be got past the same, and then bringing their dogs into order
again, let them encourage and cheer them forward to follow the game.

Sometime the Heart runs a contrary course to that by which he is winded, to
the end that his breath may be scattered and dispersed, and that it may not
come to the sent of the dogs, as also that he may hear the noise of the
dogs which chase him, and then the charge lies upon the horsemen to mark
his steps and traces.

Again, there be some Hearts, which in going from the rest do make breaches,
casting themselves upon their bellies before the horsemen, and show themselves
to be put forth by the dogs, as if they were weary, and had been long
chased: these wiles do show them to be very subtle and long winded, able to
stand a long time before the dogs, trusting in their strength: and this the
horsemen must beware of, to the end they may be able to judge of the
deceitfulness of the Hearts: for sometimes they feign themselves ouer-chased,
when indeed they are not.

The signs and tokens showing that the Heart has been long chased, The signe^
and tokens of a Heart ouer-chased.
are these: if in running before the dogs he neither hear nor see any man:
if he hang down his head, holding his nose unto the ground: if he stumble and
stagger, reeling with his legs: afterward, if he see a man upon the sudden,
he lifts up his head, and gives a great leap, as who would say he were yet
strong and lusty: furthermore, if he have his mouth black and dry, without
any froth, and his tongue drawn up into the ^ame: if in his gate he shut his
hoof, as though he went steadie, and yet afterward on the sudden straineth
himself, and opens it, making great sl^dings, suffering his bones to kiss
the ground very often, following commonly the trodden path and broad ways:
likewise, if he meet with a hedge, he holds along by the side of it, to see
if he can find any out-gate, seeing his strength fails him to leap over.

Now after his long running and manifold shifts, The Heart long chased,
when he becomes weary and spent, and that he cannot longer stand out, being
past all hope of himself, he leaves the low vvoods and forests, and flies
to the champion fields, or unto the cornfieldsd and villages bordering next
thereto, or else he betaketh himself to some river or lake, whereby it falls
out oftentimes, that he auoideth and freeth himself of the coursing dogs:
for in champion places and void fields the sent of the footing of the Heart is
very small: and as for rivers and lakes, he has the craft rather to take
downward with the stream, than to swim upward against the stream, to
bereave the dogs by that means of coming by the sent of him.

The horsemen shall see to such his escapes: and therefore if he have taken his
way into any champion ground, they shall find out his traces by the sight of
the eye, and with the blast of the horn they shall cheer up and encourage
their dogs to a new course. If the Heart have taken the water, whether it be
for the cooling of himself, or as the uttermost refuge he has for the saving
of his life, the hunter shall look at what place the Heart shall have taken the
same, and there cast in good store of boughs, attending his passage: and if
they see that he comes not out of the water, they shall cause their dogs to
take the water: or else (if they be afraid of causing them to take cold) they
shall send to seek a boat: or else if they can swim, they shall put off all
their clothes, and with a dagger in (...) and swim unto him to kill him: and
yet they must look, that they see not upon him, but in some deep place,
because that if the Heart find ground for his feet, he would be able to hurt one
of them with his horns, whereas in a deep place he has no strength.

Furthermore, To become to stand to the ^ay.
there must great wisdom be used in the hunting of the Heart, when he can no
longer hold out, but being out of all hope of his life, stands still, and
suffers the dogs to bark at him, for then he grows dangerous, as being
given to strike with his horns the first of the hunters that he can mee^
withal: And this is the cause why it is grown to a proverb, The Beer for
the Heart, and the Barber for the Bore.
A Beer for a Heart, and a Barber for a vvilde Bore. Wherefore it stands
every man upon to look well to himself in coming near unto the Heart when
he endures the bay, and not to adventure too far, and hazard himself too
boldly.

When the Heart is taken, he that shall have given the blow, shall ^orthwith
thereupon sound the retrait, to the end he may call together his fellow
hunters and the dogs: and after he has presented the right foot of the Heart
unto the King, or unto his Lord, then to cut him up as he shall know it meet to
be done In the mean time he must not forget to take care of the dogs, and to
give them some relief and sustenance of the prey they have gotten in hunting:
unto the bloud-bound, that is, unto the dog which by his sent has led the way
to the Heart his lodging, he shall cast the head and the heart, as his right and
due: unto the rest he shall give the neck and brain of the Heart, or which is
better, he shall take bread and cut it into little lunches into to a pan with
cheese, and temper the same both together with the blood of the Heart in his
greatest hea^, and afterward put all this provision forthwith upon the skin,
stretched forth upon the grass, and in the mean space every man shall put his
horn unto his mouth, and therewithal comfort and cheer up the dogs.

Some men use now and then (and yet after this first provision) to make a
second with the entrails of the Heart all whole, which the master hunts-man
does cast unto the dogs after they have ended their feast, holding them up on
high: and whiles the dogs are eating these entrails, they must be cheered up
with the noise of the horns, shoutings, and hallowings.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of the profit that may be reaped by the killing of the Heart.
NOtwithstanding, that the hunting as well of the Heart, as of other vvilde
beasts, be undertaken and performed by great States rather for the exercise of
the body and recreation of the spirits, than for any other desire and hope; yet
the killing of the Heart is not without great profit, and that in two respects:
the first being for the making of meat thereof: and the second, for the
medicinable helps which may be made of his parts and members.

As concerning the meat made of the Heart: his flesh is not very pleasant, The
flesh of the Heart.
if it be not of that part of him which is commonly called the pizzle: for to
speak generally according to the truth, Hearts flesh is very hard, of an evil
juice, melancholicke, hard to digest in the stomach, and very apt and easy
to procure many great diseases. It is true, that many great Ladies (having an
opinion, that the flesh of Hearts being eaten often, does free and deliver men
from all danger of Agues, because the beast himself is not subject at all
thereunto) at their rising every morning have accustomed to taste of Hearts
flesh: notwithstanding, who so is careful of his health, should not touch
any such flesh, except it be of some tender Fawn, or young Hiude, which are
made services for the most part at the Tables of Princes and great Lords.

The medicinable helps which may be prepared and made of the Heart, are
infinite.

Some find a bone in the heart of the Heart (howsoever there be some that think
it to be false) which is singular good against faintnes, The bone in the Hearts
heart.
or swowning, trembling, and beating of the heart, and other effects of the
same, as also against the venimes, poisons, and dangers of the plague, and
likewise against the hard ^rauell of women.

The blood of the Heart fried in a frying-panne, The bl^ud of the ^art.
and put in clysters, does heal the bloody flux, and stays the flux of the
belly: being drunk with wine, it is a sovereign remedy against poisons.

The privy member of the Heart washed diligently in water, The privy parts of
the Heart.
and the water wherein it has been so washed, drunken, appeaseth forthwith
the pain of the collicke, and retention of the urine: if it be steept in
vinegar the space of four and twenty hours, and afterward dried and made in
powder, the weight of a French crown of this powder being drunk with water of
plantine, ^^ux of blood.
stays the fl^xe of blood, and all manner of flux of the belly. Likewise
dried and poudred, it may be mingled with remedies which have power to provoke
carnal copulation. It may also be made serviceable and of good use in the
ple^risie, and against the bitings of Serpents, if it be taken either alone or
mingled with things which are good for such diseases.

The horn of the heart burned, made in powder and drunk with honey, kills
the worms, (...)
which is a sign that the hearts horn has great virtue against venom, and
that not much less than the horn of the unicorn.

The tender horns of a young heart (...) in small gobbets, and put in an
earthen pot well leaded, and close stopped with clay, and afterward put in a hot
furnace until such time as they be dried (they may also be beaten to powder,
(...)
putting thereto pepper and myrrh) do yield a powder which is singular good
against the cholicke taken in excellent wine.

The marrow and sewet of the heart are good to make liniments and cataplasmes
for cold gou^s, (...)
and tumors that are hard, and not easily softened.

The hunting of the wild Bore.
CHAP. XXVII.
The best time to hunt the wild Bore, and the marks of a good wild Bore.
IT is certain that the hunting of the wild Bore is a great deal more
difficult and dangerous than that of the Heart, (...) hunting of (...) wild
bore ^^^gerous.
in as much as the wild Bore does not fear the dogs, but tarrieth and stays
their coming, and which is more, does sometimes set upon them so far as till
he be amongst them, ^uds made the wild (...) dangerous.
and all to the end he may tear and rent them with his teeth, whose wounds
(especially those that are given into the chest of the body) are (as it were)
incurable. Wherefore the good hunts-man that makes any account of his dogs,
for to hunt the Heart, the Roe-bucke and Hare, must never give chase to the wild
Bore with his coursing dogs, but rather with some company of mastiues, whose
proper pray the wild Bore is: or else which is better to find the means to
take him in toiles, or to kill him with a wile and a spear, as we shall
further declare.

But howsoever the matter go, yet this is to be known, that all Bores are not
fit to be hunted, (...).
but such only as are not past four years old, howsoever they may be
otherwise both fair, great and fat: for after four years the wild Bore
grows l^^ne through oldnesse of age, and forthwith loses all his goodness.
Again all times are not fit to hunt them in, (...)
but only when they are in season and in the best plieght, as namely from mid
September to December, at which time they begin to go to rut: and yet in April
and May they are more easy to be taken in toiles, than at any other time,
because they sleep more in this season than at any other time: and the cause
is, for that they feed upon strong herbs, which stirs the blood, and
sends vapors up unto their brain, whereby sleep is brought upon them:
again the Spring time does then restore and renew their blood, whereby they
are brought to take great ease and rest.

The hunts-man therefore shall know the fairness of the Bore, ^ marks to
(...) a wild (...) worth the ^^^ting. (...).
and that he is worth the hunting, by these marks, that is to say, by his
traces, rooting, foil, and dung.

The prints of his traces great and large: the taking of the trace before,
round and gross: the cutting of the sides of the traces used, but not showing
themselves cutting, the heel large, his gards gross and open, wherewith he
must tread upon the ground in the hard wheresoever he goes: all these things
declare him to be a fair and great bore. In like manner the traces behind
being larger than those before, do show the thickness of his haunches: the
wreathes and wrinkles which are betwixt his gards and the heel, if they make
their prints upon the ground, do show that his steps are great and long. The
marks of his traces deep and wide, do show also his heauienes and
corpulencie. The rootings of the bore being deep and large, do note the
thickness and length of his head.

The soil of the wild bore being long, large, and great, does note and argue
the bore to be great: or else in going from the soil, his greatness may be
known by the entrances of the thickets, by the leaves and herbs which the
soil has touched, because that at such time as he comes out of it, he
beare^h d^rt and mire upon him, and therewith the leaves are bemired, as he
goes amongst them; and hence is gathered his height and breadth: or else it
falls out oftentimes, that the wild bore after he has bin at soil, goes to
rub himself against some one tree or other, and there he leaves the mark of
his height.

The dung of the wild bore being thick and long, does show the greatness of
the wild bore, howbeit the hunts-man is not to present it unto the company,
but only give them the view of it in place as it lies.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of the wild Bore, tame Swine, wild Bore and wild Sow, and of their haunt.
THe difference betwixt wild Bores and tame Swine is this: The wild Bore in his
gate does always set his hinder feet in the stepts of his forefeete, The
difference betwixt the wild bores and the ^ame swine.
or very near, and does pitch his steps rather upon the forepart of the foot,
than upon the heel, resting notwithstanding his gardes upon the ground,
spreading the same abroad thereupon unto the utter sides: the ^ame Swine in
their gate do open the cleft of their hoof before, pitching rather upon the
heel than upon the forepart of their foot, and their hinder foot does not
ouer-reach their fore-foot: the sole of their foot is full of flesh, so that
the prints of their steps cannot be but uneven, contrary to that of the wild
Bore. In like manner the wild Bore makes deeper rootings, because he has a
longer head, and when he comes in^ields that are sown, he willingly
follows one furrow, nu^ling all along the ridge until he come to the end of
it: which the ^ame hog uses not to do, for he neither turns up the earth
in so deep manner, nor yet follows on along with it as the wild Bore is
accustomed to do, but he casts up one piece of ground in on place, and
another in another further off, crossing the ridges, the one of them not
reaching unto the other. Furthermore, when the wild Bores go unto the corn,
they bear^ down the same all in a round; but so do not ^ame Swine. The wild
Bore also has this particular property, namely, that he is never meazelled as
the ^ame Swine will be.

The difference betwixt the wild Bore and the Sow is this: The difference
betwixt the wild Bore and the wild Sow.
The Bore goes wider with his hinder legs than the Sow, and commonly sets
his hinder steps upon the edges of his foresteps on the outside, because of
the thickness of his hanches and stones, which cause them to go wider dehind,
which the Sowes do not; for they are empty betwixt the hanches, for which
cause they tread narrower. The Sow makes not so good a heel as the bore, and
has her hoof longer and sharper before, and more open, her steps and soles of
her feet behind, more narrow than the Bores. The bore with much ado, and
hardly, will be brought to cry when he is killed, but the Sow will not let to
make you hear her aloud.

The wild Bore has no certain abode, (...).
and as some say, he is but a traveler, because he does nothing but run from
one forest and wood to another: and yet he takes great delight to remain in
the country and place where he was bred: in so much as that if he be hunted
by dogs from any bush or forest, he is still ready to run without any stay,
until he come in the country from whence he first came, and where he was
bred; for there he sets up the rest of his safeguard, and makes it the
only refuge of all his force and strength: he is also oftentimes found in the
countries where small nuts and beech mast may be come by, for he more
delights to feed of them than of acornes.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of the taking of the wild Bore.
AS concerning the hunting of the Bore, it craves rather many men than dogs;
for there is no greater cutthroat to dogs than the wild Bore: and yet there
may dogs be used, but with such discretion, as that the horsemen be always
mingled with them, and pressing upon the Bore as valiantly and forcibly as they
can: for when he sees himself set upon with hors-men and dogs both at once,
even upon the first push they besetting him hard, do astonish him, and cause
him to loose whatsoever his courage, and in steed of wrecking his furious mood
upon the dogs, he is constrained to run away and fly the country. Then also
you must let slip some of your fresh dogs, or dogs of easement, but let them
not be young nouices, but rather old ones, and such as have been well trained
and taught, that they may succor the first, and force the Bore to a more
speedy flight. And you need not fear that he should betake himself to any
turnings, (...) Bore is given to ^^^nings and (...).
windings, or other deceitful tricks, because he is heavy, and that the dogs
are able to follow him close and hard by. But when after long chase the
horsemen see that the wild Bore does endure the abbaie (which he will never do
until he be mightily urged) they must forthwith, but as privily as they can
compass him about, and set forward all at once directly toward him, having in
their hands every one his sword, and not failing to kill him: and yet
notwithstanding they must not hold their hand low, for so they should light
upon his head, but they must rather bear their hands on high, and strike at
him with their swords, to give him deep blows, but taking heed that they
strike not the Bore on that side next their horse, but rather on the fide
further off; for look on what side he feels himself hurt, that way he
turns his head presently, and so he might either kill or wound the horse.
This is a most certain truth, that if there be dog collers hung with bells
put about the dogs necks which are called coursers, when they hunt the Bore,
that he will not kill him so soon, but run away before them, never coming to
the abbay.

CHAP. XXX.
The profit that comes of the killing of the wild Bore.
THe profit coming of the killing of the wild Bore is twofold, as is that of
the Heart: the one concerning food, and the other concerning medicine, for which
it may be employed and used.

As concerning nourishment, the flesh of the Bore is better without all
comparison than that of the Heart, for the proof whereof I refer me to the
stately bankets of the ancient Romans, who so greatly esteemed Bores flesh, as
that they did serve them all whole upon the table. The princes and great lords
of this our age do prize it highly, but especially, and above the rest, the
head of the bore, as being judged a delicate and dainty fine morsel: young
and tender wild Bores, are likewise very well accounted of, in Winter feasts
and bankets. And to say the truth, the flesh of the wild bore does nourish very
much, and begets great quantity of good blood: which are the causes why
Physicians make such reckoning thereof, especially when the Bore is taken by
hunting.

As for the Physical helps, The urine of the wild bore.
the urine of the wild Bore has many virtues: you must take the bladder of the
wild Bore, wherein there is yet some quantity of urine, and with this urine
mingle a little quantity of oil, hanging up the same bladder in the smoke of
the chimney, and let it abide there until the urine therein become somewhat
thick, and of the consistence of honey: which done, it must be carefully kept
in the bladder, to use to anoint the navel, temples, and nostrels of young
infants withal which are tormented and pained with worms, Worm^ in young
children.
which thing I have often experimented with good success. This urine likewise
thus prepared, does break the stone of the bladder, The stone.
especially if there be some small quantity of it taken inwardly in drink;
his gall likewise is good against gravel The gravel.
and the stone.

The hunting of the Hare.
CHAP. XXXI.
Of the pleasure of the hunting of the Hare, and of the dogs that are fit for
the same.
Certain it is that the hunting of the Hare is more pleasant, more lively, and
less costly (not only for gentlemen, but also for all men of estate) than of
any other beast, because it is accompanied with a thousand pretty pleasures
and recreations every hour, and of small charges, besides the security
thereof, and the avoiding of the dangers and inconueniencies which are many,
and happen often to such as hunt the Heart and the wild Bore: whereunto you may
add the great contentment, and no small pleasure which may be taken in seeing
as it were the spirit of this little beast, as it were admirable in nature, and
the sleights which she uses to shift and rid her self from the dogs that
chase her. Such game we will allow our Farmer, yea, and so as that I could wish
him to use it as often as he can, for it cannot but afford him both pleasure
and profit.

And whereas this game consists principally upon multitude of dogs, the
gentleman that will do the deed, To fit the dogs for to hunt (...) the Hare.
and has a young company of dogs to teach, must observe two things
principally, to train and instruct them well. The first is, that from the
beginning he accustom them to go uncoupled, and to run in all sorts of
grounds and countries, that is to say, upon plains, underwoods and thickets:
for otherwise if you accustom them from the beginning to run in one place
only, as in woods or grounds that are fallen, and have the wood cut down,
they will not make any reckoning of the plains and fields, but they will go
and raunge the grounds where they have been accustomed to find sport and take
their pleasure in finding the Hare. The second is, that he never teach his dogs
to hunt in the mornings, because of the dew and coolenes of the earth, but
rather in the height of the day: for if you use them to the cool seasons, and
then afterward bring them to hunt at the height of the day, they feeling any
heat or small wind will not afterward hunt any more.

Wherefore the fittest time to train young dogs up in, and to make them fit
for the hunting of the Hare, is after September unto December, because that
then the time is temperate, as also because that the young hares are foolish,
and but weak bodied, neither skillfull, nor able to work their wiles: and
besides, because they themselves do start of themselves many times before the
dogs which take pleasure therein, and become better entered and enured thereby,
than they would be, if they should be hares that would run away and be packing
apace from them.

CHAP. XXXII.
The marks of a good Hare, of the male and of the female, and of their forms.
NOw although in hunting of the Hare, the hunter takes what he can have, and
not what he can find, because of the swiftness and wiliness of this little
beast, which oftentimes disappointeth him of his purpose: notwithstanding if at
any time it be granted the hunter by the good hap of hunting to choose the
best Hare amongst many, or else that some Lord, not willing to loose his
labor, has sent his hunts-man to find the Hare before he hunt her; the
marks of a good and fair Hare, and such a one as deserves to be hunted,
(...) marks of a (...) and fair (...).
are these: Those which keep in woods or plains, or which feed upon little
hills upon the herb Penniroyall, or wild Time, are much better than they which
keep near the waters, as also better than the little red Hares, which are of
the kind of conies; ^^res keeping ^re unto wa^ are leprous.
for such as keep near unto water are commonly leprous. Further, the male is
far better than the female.

The marks to know the one and the other are these: The male has commonly his
dung smaller, drier, and sharper at the point: the female has them greater,
rounder, and not altogether so dry as the males: the female has a grosser
body, but the male has a more slender and fine body: the male in coming out
of his form, has his hinder parts whitish, as though he had been plumed:
the male has also red shoulders, with some long hairs mixed amongst, he has
also a shorter and more bushie head than the female, the hair and beard of his
jaws long, his ears short, wide, and whitish: the female has a long and
narrow head, and also great ears: the hair growing along the ridge of the
back of a dark gray. When the dogs course the female, she does nothing but
coast round about her seat and country, passing seven or eight times by one
place before she ever squa^: the male does the contrary; for being coursed
with dogs, he runs sometimes seven or eight leagues distance from his
form.

To know the form of a Hare, you must take the benefit of the night: for in
the night she withdraws her self into her form, and not in the morning,
because of the dew: neither yet upon the height of the day, because of the
heat. There is more regard to be taken unto her traces: for the print of the
hares foot is sharp, and fashioned like unto the point of a knife, having her
small nails all pricked right down into the ground, and they do leave their
print round about, drawing always narrower and narrower, having the sole of
her foot always close, after the manner of the point of a knife.

CHAP. XXXIII.
The killing of the Hare.
FOr the hunting of the Hare, the very best time to kill her with coursing
dogs, begins at mid September, and ends at mid April, because of the
flowers and great heat which then begin to reign, for both these are apt to
deprive the dogs of their necessary scent: besides that, at these times the
Hares are but young and feeble.

Notwithstanding, Places in which the dogs have no scent.
there be certain countries and seasons, where and when the dogs have not any
scent of Hares, as in Winter in the plain countries where the ground is fat
and strong, because the Hare has her foot underneath full of hair, so that
when she runs, a fat ground will take hold upon it, and so she carries it
away with her foot, and so all the scent that the dogs might otherwise take, is
withheld: and upon plains there are neither branch nor herb for her to hit
her body upon, no more than there is in broad and trodden ways. In like manner
it is an unfit time to draw out dogs to hunt in frostie weather: for they would
both loose their nails, and sp^ile their feet: on the contrary, the Hares run
better at that time, than at any other, because they have their feet furred.

Also high ways are very dangerous and ill to hunt upon: for by reason of the
much traveling of men and other cattle, the scent which the Hare should
leave, is clean taken away, and the dogs noses are stopped with contrariety of
odor: nor is it good to hunt where flocks of sheep, herds of goats or
cattle are kept; for the hotnesse of their sent takes away all scent of the
Hair.

The first point making way for the killing of the Hare, That the finding of
the form of the Hare, is the first and chiefest step to kill her.
consists in finding out her form, which the better to find, you must have
respect unto the season wherein you go about it, and the time how it shapeth:
for if it be in the Spring or Summer, the Hares lodge not amongst the thick
places of woods, because of the ants, serpents, and lizards which drive them
thence, and so at such times they are constrained to lodge amongst the corn,
fallowes, and other weak places. In Winter they do the contrary: for they take
up their lodging in some thick bushes, or thick places of the wood,
especially, when the Northren winds, and other high and low winds do blow, for
of such they are much afraid. Wherefore according to the time and place, where
you shall see the Hares to take up their lodging, you must prepare your dogs to
go and set upon the Hare within her form, and when she shall be started, the
horsemen (which shall not be above three in number) must encourage the dogs to
follow the chase, without making of much crying or greatly whupping of them,
for fear of setting of them in too great a hea^e, which might cause them to
ouerslip the traces, and, not to hold on right.

But touching the most general and best places for the finding out of Hares
both Winter and Somme^, What places ar^ best to find the Hare in.
you shall repair to the moors or heath which are ouergrowne with ling, or
with gosse, whins, Brakes, or such like, for they are special harbors in
which a Hare delights most: also in such places where there is great store of
fog or long dead grass which lies vngot. You shall be sure to find Hares
haunt, especially in the Spring time, because such ground being given to
moisture, makes them take a greater delight therein: for Hares at that time of
the year love to have all their hinder loins covered with water: from whence
it comes that the best Hare finders, when they seek Ha^es, look all the
Winter up to the top or ridge of the lands, and in the Spring, down to the
lowest bottom of the furrows. Now as soon as you have found your Hare, and
started her, the horsemen which follow the chase, shall by all observations
possible take good heed to the wile^ and sleights of the Hare, the which are
very many and diverse, as in the time of rain the hare does rather follow
trodden paths and broad then at any other time, and if she light upon any
underwood, she will not go in but to refresh her self by the sides thereof,
and lets the dogs pass by: after when they are gone past, she turns and
^unneth back in the same steps by which she came thither, unto the place from
whence she was dislodged, rather than she would run up into the forestes, by
reason of the moistness which is amongst the wood. When such practices are in
hand, the horsemen must stay some hundred paces from the wood by which the
hare is come, for he shall not fail to see her return by her former way right
upon him, whereby he shall be able to call in the dogs. The horsemen likewise
shall observe and mark whether it be a male or a female, and whether she be
one that keeps continually in the country, or but a guest for a night: for
if she be a wanderer and not of constant abode, she will have her form in
couer^, and suffer the dogs to put her up three or four times near unto her
form: for this is infallible that the hare, bred and sed where she is put up,
and especially the female, if the horseman observe and market the first place
and compass that she takes the first time after she is departed and gone from
her lodging being before the dogs, all the rest of the co^rfes that she shall
make that day will be by the same places, ways, and muses, if it be not a
male hare come from far, or else the dogs have hunted her so hard, and wearied
her so much, as that she be driven to forsake her woonted haunt: and this
commonly they do voluntarily betake themselves unto, if they be at any time
coursed two whole hours, without default.

At the first when the dogs begin to course the hare, she does nothing but wind
and turn, tracing over one place five or fix times, and that all in the same
trace. And this you must learn, that if the coursing dogs miss of taking the
hare one day, then it will be good for the horseman to bear in mind the
places and coasts that then she passed through: for if he return at any other
time, and have her in course with the dogs, she will pass by the same places,
and practice the same shifts she did the day before when she escaped, and thus
being before acquainted with her cra^ts, and ways which she will run he may
greatly help his dogs.

Some hares as soon as they hear the sound of the horn do start, and take
some river or lake, and then you must use what good means you can to cause her
to avoid the water, drawing the dogs near the place most likely for her
landing, that so they may take her.

The females are more often in practicing their wiles, and in shorter space,
which the dogs love not: for it is a wearisome i^kesomnesse to courageous and
lusty dogs, to be drawn a side so often, it being their chief desire to course
such a beast as will run out before them, that so they may run according as
their strength will serve them. And for such hares as are given to wind and
turn so often, it is requisite that you take great compass of ground, that so
you may enclose all her wiles, leaving no passage for her to find but only one
way to go out, and by this means you shall abridge her much of her helps, and
drive her to forsake her shifts and sleights.

There are also some hares given to run in trodden paths, and high ways, to
the end the dogs might not come by any scent of them, there being neither
branch of tree, nor herbs, nor moisture, which can touch their bodies, to
gather any scent for the dogs, in such manner as there would, if they were in
other covert places, as woods, corn, and other cool places, and especially
when they feed in any green corn, because they rest their bodies in one
place. When the horseman shall find such hares, and shall perceive the default
of the dogs, by reason of the high way, he must draw them on forward all along
the said high way, following them continually until such time as the dogs find
her out gate, or else till he have found some little valley or cool place in
the midst of the way, where the dogs may seem to have found her scent. And
he himself also must light from off his horse to see if that he can epsy any
of the traces of the hare, such as we have described them before. And by these
traces or footsteps, he shall by little and little pick out which way she is
gone, and this amongst hunts-men is called the pricking forth of the hare, one
observation no less needful than any other observation whatsoever: for it is
not to be used only in plain high ways and foot paths, but also in any
other ground which is plain, as upon fallowe lands, or other worn ground
where the green swarth is taken away: and this above all other is the most
safest and surest way for the recovering of a loss, because it goes not by
conjecture or imagination, but by certain knowledge, and by knowledge of that
member by which the hound hunteth only, and by which he bears the whole scent
he seeks.

The hare has a thousand other shifts, all which in general the wary and
wily horseman may meet withal, if when he has seen her fetch her first
compass, and withal got the knowledge of the coast, which she betaketh her
self unto in her course, he get before her to behold her with his eyes, and in
the same place encourage the dogs, making them to fetch great circuits, to the
end they may be sure to include and compass all her wiles and shifting tricks.

Hares live not above seven years at the most, and especially the males: they
have this trick with them, that if the male and the female do live together
in a country, they will never suffer other strange hares to abide there, if
they can remedy it, except it be such as they have bred: and thereupon some
say, The more that a place is hunted, the more hares there are
That the more that any place is hunted, the more hares are found there, because
that strangers, and those of other countries do come thither.

The hare being killed, it will be good to give the dogs their fees, the better
to encourage them, and to cause them with much more joy to hunt in that place
afterward. This their repast or fees may be made of bread, The meat that is
made of the har^ for the dogs.
cheese, and some other dainties, all put into the body of the hare, that so
it may be moistened and ouerdrowned with blood, and after spread upon the
clean grass. For their second sort of meat, as a more royal banquet, if
there be store of hares taken, will be good to uncase one and first taking out
her lights, then to cast the whole carcass to the dogs, giving them leave to
tear and eat her: and after that they have eaten her, to give them bread least
they should prove sick at their stomakes, and cast their gorge, seeing that
hares flesh is enemy unto them. In like manner when the dog which is taught to
hunt the hare, shall be brought to course the heart, he will not make any more
account of the hare, because he has found and tasted the flesh of the heart to
be far better than that of the hare.

CHAP. XXXIIII.
What profit comes by the killing of the Hare.
LIke commodity as is to be found in the killing of the heart and wild bore,
may be found also in the hare: and to speak first of the food rising thereof,
we see not any food more common, nor more in request in our country of France
than the hare. It is true in deed, that Physicians do judge the flesh of the
hare to be melancholic, hard to digest in the stomach, and begetting a gross
juice: but this is to be understood of old hares, as such as are above a year
old, and such as are kept tame in boroughes and other enclosed places: but the
young leuerets have a very pleasant and dainty flesh to eat: yea in those
which are grown great, there are some parts which are in request, as the
loins, the shoulders and hanches. There may be marked in this little beast a
marvelous fruitfulness in nature, The fruitfulnes of the hare.
for that monthly she brings forth a great number of young ones. I know that
some think, that the male and female are of both sexes, and that both of them
do conceive and engender as if they were hermophrodites: but it is a false
conceived opinion, and a thing altogether strange and unaccustomed to be in the
works and generation that is according to nature. And it is furthermore most
true, that the female being b^gd, cease to engender again for the time, that
is to say, to admit the company of the male, thereby to have a second
conception, but by and by after she has kindled, she takes the buck again,
and that is the cause of their so great fruitfulness: as much may be said of
conies which are a kind of hare.

As concerning the medicinal virtues of the hare: (...).
the flesh of the hair well roasted is a great help against bloody and
humorall fluxes of the belly: that liue^ dried in the oven, and made into
powder, is singular good for them which have a weak liver.

The brains being thoroughly boiled and rubd upon the gums of young children,
helps them of the pains they have of their teeth, and helps forward their
growth.

Take a whole hare both skin and hair (save that you must take away her
intailes) close them up in an earthen pot very well stopped and luted:
alterward put the pot into a hot oven, and there leave it so long, as till the
whole body may be made easily into powder, in such sort, as that there be
left no manner of moisture, for else you should be constrained to put the pot
again into the oven until every part and parcel were brought into powder.
The weight of a French crown of his powder, (...) stone of the (...).
taken with white wine every morning two hours before mea^e, does take away
the difficulty of making water, and breaks the stone both of the re^^es and
bladder: but yet before the use of this powder, the body must be purged: and
during the time of the use thereof, there must be applied upon the reins, two
plates of lead of the breadth of four fingers, sewed together betwixt two
linen clothes.

The gall of the hare mingled with sugar, ^^^he gall.
cleanses the eyes, and takes away the pearl or spots of the eyes.

The dung of the hare being carried about women, hinders their conception: but
one thing of a cert^^netie, ^^^he dung.
if it be put up into the secret parts of a woman in form of a pestarie, it
stays the terms following excessiuely, and dries the mother that is too
moist.

The blood of the hare dried or fried, ^he blood.
and applied unto a scab or ringworme, dries and heals it incontinently.

The hare has a little bone in the joint of her legs, ^^he bone of the hare.
which is sovereign against the cholicke.

The hunting of the Brocke and Fox.
CHAP. XXXV.
The profit coming of the hunting of the Fox and Brocke.
THe killing of Foxes and Brockes, neither bring pleasure nor profit to the
hunters, The flesh of the Fox is unsavory
taking profit in this place for meat and nourishment: for the Fox his flesh,
(and much less the Brockes) is nothing pleasant to eat, in as much as it has
an unsavory, strong, and wild kind of taste. Howbeit Galen in a certain
place lets not to say, that the flesh of the Fox has the like faculty and
virtue with that of the Hare: and yet in another place, as restracting his
former assertion he says, that the Fox is of the same temperature with the
dog. It is certain that some country people having not the benefit of any
other victual, live not upon any other than Fox ^lesh, but it is in the time
of Autumn only, because that at such time the Fox feeds of nothing but of
grapes, by which means it may be that his flesh may prove somewhat good.
Howsoever it be, if any profit grow upon the killing of the Fox and Brocke,
it is only because they devour foul, and annoy the conies and warr^n,

Add hereunto that the Physicians do make great account of the lungs of the
fox, for the disease of the lungs and shortness of the breath: and of his
grease, The profit that the body of the fox ^oth bring forth in medicine.
for the pain of the sinews: of his blood, for the stone: o^ the oil wherein
the whole body of the Fox has been boiled, either quick or dead, (whereof
we have spoken in the third book) for all manner of ioint-ach: and of the
privy members of the Fox, against the stone.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Of the two sorts of Foxes and Brocks.
BEfore we go any further, there are two sorts of Foxes, Brocks some like hogs
and some like dogs.
and two sorts of Brockes, that is say, great Foxes and little ones accustomed
to lie and lurk in their dens: and Brockes some like swine, and some like
dogs. The two sorts of Foxes are sufficiently known. The hog-like Brocks are
whitish, and have the hair above their noses, and under their throats a great
deal more white than the dog-like have, their body of a greater bulk, their
head and snowt also more gross. The hog-like in going out of their dens do
freely dung, but evermore they make a little hole with the end of their snowt
before, or else scrape one with their feet, and then dung therein: the dog-like
make their dung a far off from their earths. The hog-like commonly make their
dens in sandy or other ground that is easy to dig, and open places, to have
the heat of the Sun, and being given to sleep continually, they are fatter
than the dog-like. The dog-like make their abode in tougher earth, or else in
rocks, making their holes and dens deeper and narrower than the hog-like,
because they cannot dig the stiff and tough earth or rocks, as the other do
the sand and light ground. The dog-like have their nose, throat, and ears
yellowish, after the manner of the throat of a ma^ten, and they are a great
deal blacker and longer legd than the others. The two sorts accompany not
together, but they feed of all manner of flesh: they do much harm in warren^,
especially unto the young rabbets which are within their nests, and are very
sweet and dainty, but more to pigs and hogs, whereof they feed more than of
any other flesh: they feed also of all sorts of wild flesh, as geese, hens, and
such like: they are very cold and chil, and if they be left in any room where
fire is, they will go lie in it and burn their feet: they will live hardly,
as also they have a hard skin: they fear their nose notwithstanding very much,
neither can one give them ever so little a blow thereupon with a stick, but
they die suddenly: they are deadly enemies unto the foxes, and oftentimes fight
with them.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Of two sorts of earth-dogs usual course foxes and brockes withal, and the
manner of teaching and trayning of them thereunto.
COncerning the hunting of the Fox and Broke, it is to be performed with
earth-dogs, Two sorts of earth-dogs.
which are of two sorts: the one has crooked lege, and commonly short hair:
the other has straight legs, and a shagd hair like water-spannyels: those
which have the crooked legs creep more, easily into the earth than the other,
and they are best for the brocks, because they stay long there, and keep
better without coming forth. Those which have straight legs serve for two
uses, because they run as coursing dogs about the ground, and also take the
earth more boldly then the other, but they tarry not so long, because they
vex themselves in fighting with the foxes and brockes, whereby they are forced
to come forth to take the air.

Now if it fall out that the hunts-man have not earth dogs ready taught, (...)
he may train them in this manner. The time to begin to take them in hand,
must be when they are betwixt the age of eight and ten months: for if he will
not be brought to take the earth at a year old, he will scarce ever be able to
be made to take it; again, they must not be roughly dealt withal in the time
of their training, neither so handled, as that they may take any hurt of the
brockes in the earth, because that if they should be beaten or hardly handled,
they would never ^ak the earth more. And for that cause it must be carefully
looked unto, that such young trained dogs be never made take the earth, where
there are any old foxe^ or brocks, but to let them first stay out their year,
and be thoroughly nurtured, and furthermore there must some old earth dogs be
put in always before them, to endure and bear off the fury of the brocke.

The most convenient and readiest way to train them, is thus: as such times as
foxes and brocks have young ones, you must take all your old earth dogs, and
let them take the earth, afterward when they shall begin to stand at an abbaie,
then must the young ones be brought unto the mouth of the hole one by one (for
fear they should beat themselves) and there cause them to hear the abbaie*
When the old brockes or foxes shall be taken, and none remaining but their
cubs, then you must take up and couple up all the old earth dogs, and after let
loose the young ones, encouraging them to take the earth, and crying unto them,
Creep into them basset, creep into them, Hou take them, take them: and when
they have hold of any young, brocke or fox, they must be let alone, till they
have strangled him in the burrow or hole, taking heed that the earth fall not
in upon them, least it might hurt them: afterward you must carry all the young
brocks and foxes unto your lodgings, and cause their livers and the blood also
to be fried with cheese and fat, making them meat thereof, and showing them
the head of their wild flesh.

They may also be trained and taught after another manner: as namely, you must
cause the old brocks and foxes to be taken alive by the old earth dogs, and
with pincers fit for the purpose, take and break all the teeth of the nether
iaw, wherein the great gripers stand, not touching the uppermost at all, to the
end that by it may continually appear and be seen the rage and furiousness
of the beasts, although they be not able to do any harm therewith at all:
afterward you shall cast earthes in some meadow plot of sufficient largeness,
for the dogs to turn themselves, and go in by couples on a breast, covering the
burrowes afterward with boords and green turfes: this done, the brocke must be
put in, and all the dogs both young and old let slip and encouraged as has
already been said. And when they have baited him sufficiently, you must
strike seven or eight great blows upon the side of the hole with a spade, to
harden and acquaint them therewith, against the time when you shall stand in
need to use deluing: then you must take up the plankes over the place where
the brocke is, taking hold upon him with pincers, killing him before them, or
else causing him to be stifled by some greyhound, that so there may meat be
made of him for them. And you must have cheese which you must cause to be cast
them presently after their wild flesh, when it shall be dead: and if
peradventure you would not break all the teeth of the nether iaw of the
brocke, yet you must cut off all the greater and master teeth, that so he may
be kept from biting and doing of mischief.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
The manner of killing of the Fox.
AS for the killing of the Fox it is much more easy than that of the Brocke:
herein especially, seeing that after they once scent the dogs which bait
them, they gather themselves together, and rush out upon the sudden, except it
be at such time as the female has young ones, for then they will not forsake
them.

Naturally they are given to dig their earths in places that are hard to be
dug, The Fox his borow.
as in rocks, or under the roots of trees: they have but one hole, but it is
both strait, and reaches far.

Some hunts-men are of opinion (and sure it is very likely and credible) that
the Fox never makes his own earth or kennell: for though he be the
subtilest of all beasts, both touching his own saftie, and the gaining of his
pray; yet he is nothing laborious or given to take pains for any thing, but
his belly only, neither has nature given him any especial instruments for
the same use, more than to other mungrell dogs of which he is a kind; so that
he may scrach or dig up the earth a little for the hiding or maine covering
of his pray: but to make such tedious, deep, long and winding vaults, and in
such difficult and tough places is hard to be coniectured: whence it comes,
that those of better observation affirm, that the Brocke or Badger, or as some
call him the Gray, by reason of his color, who is a beast of infinite great
industry, cleanliness, and fearfulness, does first make the Foxes earth,
but not with any determinate purpose that the Fox should enjoy it, but as a
place of refuge and rest, for himself only, which as soon as the Fox
finds out, he presently watches the going out of the Badger, and then
entering in at the hole, By what means the Fox comes to have such great (...)*
he defiles the mouth and entrance thereof both with his dung and piss (which
is the loathsomest of all excraments) in such filthy and hateful manner, that
the Badger returning and finding his lodging so nastily beraied, presently he
forsakes the place and comes there no more, but leaves it to the Fox and
digs himself a new cell in another place. But to our former purpose, when the
the dogs have once overthrown the Fox, he resists a little, but it is not
with any such boldness and courage as to daunt the dogs, neither has he any
dangerous bite: and yet some say, that he has his shift, as to clap his tail
betwixt his legs, (when he sees himself once overthrown by the dogs,) That
the Fox his urine stinketh.
and to piss upon it, and therewithal to besprinckle the dogs, to the end
that feeling the stench thereof, they may be driven back and let him depart.

If you take a bitch Fox when she is salt, and cutting away her privy member,
How to take the Fox without hunting him.
and the gut annexed thereunto, with the little testicles or stones, which are
the cause of ingendring, (being the same that gelders use to take from bitches,
when they geld them (and put all the same cut in pretty gobbets into some
little pot all hot as they were cut away, and take Galbanum and put it in,
mingling altogether, and covering it, that all may not breath out: you may
keep it a whole year, and make it serve at any time when you would make a
train to allure the dog Fox, by taking the skin or a collop of lard, and
putting it upon a gridyron, and when it shall be broyled and all hot, moisting
it in the pot where the privy part of the Fox and Galbanum is, therewith making
all your trains: then you shall perceive the male Foxes following o^ you every
where: but he that makes the craine, must rub the soles of his shoes with
cowes dung, least they should take the scent of his feet: Thus you may see the
means how to draw on the dog foxes to any place where you may take them in a
snare, or gin, and so kill them in the evening with a cros-bow.

This is most true, that if you rub an earth dog with brimstone, or with oil
of the lees of oil, and thereupon cause him to take the earth, where there are
foxes or brocks, they will get themselves thence, and come no more there for
two or three months. There is furthermore another thing to be noted, that
after that the earth dogs are come out of the earth of foxes or brocks, they
must be washed with warm water and soap, to rid them of the mould that shall
be gotten betwixt the hair and the skin, for else they would grow scabbed of
a scab that would very hardly heal.

Some subtle fox hunters take the fox without any help of dogs, (...)
with this wile: they rub the sole of their shoes with a great piece of lard
lately roasted, at such time as they are about to return home from the wood, or
from any plain where they know that there is any foxes: after the same manner
they use to scatter by the way (as they go) little morsells of hogs liver
dipped in honey, drawing after them a dead cat: whereupon the fox following the
trace at hand, allured by the scent of the lard and hogs livers: they have a
man accompanying them with a harquebuze, or arrow to kill him at a blow.

CHAP. XXXIX.
The manner of killing the Brocke.
AS for the killing of the Brocke, it is more difficult than the killing of the
Fox, (as has been said) because their holes are deep and narrow, and
consisting of many conueyances and passages: for which cause it is me^^e and
convenient for the undertaking of such a work, first to have four or five men
furnished with spades and tools fit for the digging of the earth: secondly,
half a dozen of good earth dogs at the least, every one armed with his collar
about his neck, of the breadth of three singers, and hung with little bells, to
hunt the several earths, to the end that the Brocks may be driven the sooner
to their stand, and the dogs defended the better by those collars from taking
any hurt: and when it is perceived that the Brocks are at their stand, or that
the dogs grow weary and out of breath, or the bells to be full of earth, you
must take up the dogs, and take away their collars from them: whereas at the
first they are of good ^eruice, and cause the Brocke the sooner to take them to
their stand.

But before you let slip the dogs, there must regard be had to view the earths,
what manner of ones they be, and the place wherein they lie, and where the
furthest parts of them are; for otherwise a man should but loose his labor: in
so much as if the earths should be on the side of a hill, it were requisite
that the dogs were put in underneath toward the valley, to the end that the
brocke may be compelled and forced to the uttermost end of the uppermost holes,
where the said earths are not so deep as the other, and therefore may the more
easily be dug.

But otherwise if the earth should be in some raised piece of ground, and
therwithall round about the same, the rising ground being seated in the midst
of a flat piece of ground, then the dogs must be put in at the holes which are
highest, and nearest unto the top of the rising ground: but before they be let
slip and put into such earths, there must twenty or thirty blows be given
with the head of the spade upon the highest parts of the earths, thereby to
cause Brockes to remove from out of the midst of them, and to cause them to
descend to the furthest ends of their earthes which are in the bottom of the
rising ground. There must always two or three dogs be let slip at the mouths
of the holes, that so by their vehemency and eagrenesse they may part and put
a sunder the Brocks which shall be together, and force them to fly to their
rests,

They have a trick to stand the abbaie at the places where their holes do
meet, and stoutly to resist the dogs in such places: which, when it is
perceived, it is requisite to smite three or four blows with the spade, and
if yet for all that they will not remove, you must forthwith discover them with
an a^gar. Then when it is perceived that they are fled unto the furthest part
of their holes, you must not pierce through right upon them, for then they
would bolt forward again into the wide spaces and meetings of their holes, and
offer violence unto the dogs: for which cause it behooves, that the hole be
bored right over where the voice of the dog sounds with a round augar, for
the nature thereof is to cast up the earth, and not to let it fall down
within: and after that is done, presently to put a slat augar into the hole of
the round augar, that so it may cross the hole right in the midst, least the
Brock should recoile upon the dog: and if it be possible to shut the dog
forth on the hinder part of the augar, it will be very good, for and if he
should be shut within toward the sore-part of it, the Brocks might beat and
handle him roughly, seeing that sometimes there are found mustered together in
the uttermost end of one hole six or seven, which might beat and drive back
the dog. When the hole is thus crosse-barred with the flat augar, you must
presently make a trench with spades and shouels, to the end that it may serve
to set a man in, and at convenient time to let in some dogs by the said
trench, and to cause them to hold a bay in that place, where a man may see
warring and fighting on all sides. These things thus furthered, care must be
had, that the Brockes do not cover themselves with earth, which they are
very ready to do, being driven unto their uttermost places of flight,
insomuch, as that the dogs are sometime upon or our them, and yet not know
where they are. Afterward, their fort being thrown down, you must pull them
forth, not by the whole body, but by the nether jaws: for if you should take
them by the whole body, they might hurt the dogs: and if by the upper iaw,
then you might hurt their nose, which is in them very tender, insomuch, as that
being hurt therein, be it never so little, they die incontinently. When they
are thus drawn out, they would be put in some sack, and after carried into
some court or garden, closed in with walls, to make them coursing-game for
young earth-dogges. But in the mean time it will be good to draw your boots
upon your legs: for when they are once thoroughly heated, they spare not to
run upon men after the manner of the vvild Bore, in such sort, as that
oftentimes they carry away with them pieces of their stockings, yea, the flesh
also, which is under them.

CHAP. XL.
The hunting of the Conie.
WE have entreated of Conies largely enough where we spoke of the Warren,
That Conies are harmefull.
the hunting whereof is profitable, not only in respect of the provision of
food which it ministers, and that very good, but likewise in respect of the
damage which this little beast brings unto Corn, Trees, and Herbs: and
that so dangerously (as Strabo vvriteth) as that certain Nations were
constrained, in the days of the reigns of Tiberius and Augustus, Strabo.
to send ambassadors unto the Romans, that they might have their aid and
succor against the urgent and ^ore pressing injuries and damages which their
Countries sustained through the excessive number of these little beasts.

We have make in our Treatise of the Warren two sorts of Conies, the one of
the Clapper, and the other, of the Warren: Those of the Clapper are easy to
hunt, because they are came, but those of the Warren are somewhat more hard to
take, because their nature is more enclining unto wildness: The manner of
hunting them is chiefly of two sorts, and both of them very well known, that
is to say, either with Pursnets, or with the Ferrets: As concerning the
Ferrets, The hunting of the Conies of the Warren.
they are put into the holes of the Conies to fight with them, whereby they
being astonished and frighted, bolt forth by and by out of their holes, and
fall into the pursnets which lie spread upon the tops of their holes: sometimes
the Ferret does kill them within, which falls out to be the occasion of no
small attendance oftentimes unto the hunters.

The catching of Birds.
CHAP. XLI.
That men of old time made no account of catching of Birds.
THe taking of Birds has not been much approved nor liked of, by men of old
time, by reason of the little exercise which it affoordeth: seeing they made no
account of any manner of hunting, whereby the body received no kind of
exercise, whereby it might be made more nimble and ready to manage matters of
greater importance: again, we find not any mention made of the hunting of
Birds, in the books of the ancient writers, as Aristotle or Plin^e, who
seems not to have been ignorant in any thing that might make for the truth
of his writings: neither yet of hauking, which is the noblest kind of hunting
of birds of all the rest. All which notwithstanding, the men of our time have
not ceased to put in practice many sorts of taking of birds, as, with birds
of the pray, which excels all the rest, with great nets, small nets,
tonnelling, fire, snares, bundles of straw, with the cros-bow, long-bow,
nooses, pit falls, chirping, pipes, horse, crow, bell, hand, and many more
ways, which are well enough known to birde^^: we will first speak of hauking.

Of Hawking.
CHAP. XLII.
What Hawking is.
IT is most certain, that the skill and knowledge of hawking has been
brought into an art of late times, as has been said: ancient writers, as
Aristotle and Pliny, the admirers of high and excellent things, and the
diligent and industrious searchers out of all things, would not have cast
behind them so great and famous a work of the skill of man, as to lure and
reclaim the birds of pray, but would have written of it, if it had been then
in use. For this is a wonder to see a bird which has been wild to become tame,
to drop out of the skies and to light upon a man's fist: to soar aloft as high
as the clouds to seek other birds to kill them, and also to make war upon
the fowls, and such as live below upon the earth, and withal to take certain
four footed beasts, as the Hare, Rabbets, and Conies. This skill is now a
days so highly honored, as that the great nobles of the world, will that it
should be consecrated wholly to themselves, as reserving it for a pastime
only beseeming them, and in this our country of France it is had in such
price, as that the gentleman which is ignorant in this skill, and that other of
hunting, is lightly prized, as though he lackt the two things which of all
other (chilualrie and martial skill excepted) are the most rare and excellent.

Now as hawking is the art and skill of luring and reclaiming of birds of the
pray, to cause them to fly at other birds, living either in the air, upon the
earth, or about the waters: so he is called a Faulconer, whose place and
office it is to reclayme such birds: wherein, if we please to look a little
more nearly into the name, it should seem, that the later Frenchmen have
followed the elder and ancient Frenchmen and Greeks in their giving of names:
For even as the ancient Frenchmen were of judgment, that the name of Sacre,
which the Greeks named (...), and the Latins Accipiter, was the general
name, under which should be comprehended all birds of prey (howsoever that
Sacre in French, and (...) in Greek, be the special name of a bird of prey:)
even so the Frenchmen of our time have agreed together, that the Faulcon should
be the chief in his kind, and afford the general name (as by the way of
surpassing excellency) unto all other birds of prey: because that the Faulcon
(compared with all the birds of prey) is the best of vving, and exceeding all
the rest in goodness, stoutnesse, and tractablenesse: as if a man were
disposed to lay, the Faulcon gentle, the Pilgrim Faulcon, the Tartarie Faulcon,
the Barbary Faulcon, the Gerfaulcon, the Faulcon Sacre, the Faulcon Lanier,
the Punician Faulcon, and so of the rest.

CHAP. XLIII.
What birds are good to make Hawks of.
NOw we must not think, that all birds of prey are good and fit to make
Hawks of, but only such as are stout, and of a resolute courage, and are able
to fly at any bird whatsoever, either vvater-fowle, or land-fowle: of which
nature, there are ten special and several kinds, being sufficiently known
of every one, and for the most part very common to be had in France, that is
to say, the Eagle, the Gripe, the Goshawke, the Sparrow-hawke, the Gerfaulcon,
the Merlin, the Faulcon, the Lanier, the Sacre, and the Hobbie.

Four of them fly from the fist, and kill at random, as the Goshawke, the
Sparrow-hawke, the Gerfaulcon, and the Merlin: and four of them lie aloft in
the air, as the Faulcon, the Sacre, the Lanier, and the Hobbie. As for the
Eagle and the Gripe, they are not any thing known in France. A great part of
these birds (the Gripe only excepted) have the feathers of their traynes and
vvings very much glistering for the most part. All of them have their beakes
and tallons crooked, and they are almost like one unto another, for they show
no difference, except it be in greatness, seeing likewise that their color
does diversely change according to their mues, which cause them to be called
Hagards, or Sores, all one with that which is usually done by dried Her^ings,
which are called Sores, or red Herrings.

There are very many birds of the prey which are rouers continually abroad,
neither can it be learned well from what place or country they come, nor
vvhither they go: so that we might always remain ignorant of what country
our Hawks are, were we not given it to understand by them which use to
bring Hawks out of Italy, Germany, and other strange countries. Such as
bring us Hawks, do take them for the most part with lime-twigges, which is
the cause of the crushing of their feathers, which yet may at pleasure be
taken away with vvarme water.

But whether they be brought from far, or bred near about us, for to
reclaim and bring them unto the lure, first, they must not be taken out of the
neast before they be strong, and grown pretty great ones, and able to stand
upon their feet: for and if they should be taken away sooner, yet they must not
be handled, but kept in a neast as like unto their own as may be. Afterward,
as the time shall afford, they are to be set upon blocks, or upon some perch,
for the better preserving of their feathers from grating upon the ground.

They must be fed with live meat as often as may be, because it will make their
feathers to put forth the better. Notwithstanding, the meat and flesh that is
more than ordinary good for them, is to feed them with the legs or necks of
Hens: cold flesh is naught for them: Beef, Porke, and such other, are of too
strong digestion for them, and especially the flesh of night-beasts, that is to
say, such as fly about in the night, and are ^^arce ever seen in the day
time: such are the great Duke, the little Duke, the Owl, the Shrich-owle, and
the Bat: for if they should eat thereof, they would die. The flesh of Pigeons,
young Swallows, and Mutton, is far better for them. Hens flesh, being
swee^e and pleasant, does trouble the belly of the bird, if she eat it cold:
wherefore, the bird that is greatly delighted with such flesh, might possibly
forsake the game, and seize upon Hens, if she see any in her way as she is
flying. Wherefore to meet with this inconvenience, you must feed the bird
with young Pigeons, or young Swallows: the flesh of Pies and old Pigeons is
bitter, and bad for these kinds of birds: Cowes flesh is bad for them, as
making them too laxatiue, which comes by the heaviness thereof, which
causes hard digestion. And if necessity compel you to fe^de them with gros^e
flesh, for want of better, let it be tempered and washed with warm water: if
it be in Winter, you must press it: and in Summer it must be washed in cold
water. The flesh that you feed your birds withal, must be picked, that there
be not fat sinews or veins left upon it. You must not suffer them to eat
whiles they will at once, but with some small distance of time betwixt, letting
them rest in eating: and now and then you must hide away their meat, before
they be full gorged, and then afterward give it to them again: but when it is
taken from them, and also when it is given them, they must not see it, for
fear of making them bate.

Likewise it is good to make them plume upon small birds, as they did in the
vvoods. Yearly in the beginning of Autumn they must be brought down by
laxatiue medicines, if they be too high: as namely, by giving them Aloes with
their meat: ^^purge the ^^d.
which must be of some good, live, and warm meat, for otherwise they would
be taken down too much. After that they have been purged, you must prepare
them for the game: and again, when you are purposed to fly them, it will not
be amiss to give them casting of Towe, covered with flesh, and made in form
of a pill, and that at night, to the end they may cast it up again in the
morning, with much more flegmaticke matter: for by this means they will become
more healthful, of a better appetite, more empty, swift, and ready for the
prey. ^cause her to (...) out.
Porkes flesh given them warm with a little Aloes, makes the bird loose and
to slice out readily: but you must observe and see that she be put in a warm
place after she has been purged, and withal, to feed her on your fist with
some live bird, for at such times her entrails are much dried. They are
discerned to be sick, when their fundament swells and becomes red, (...)
declaring (...) birds of the (...) to be sick.
as also their nosthrils and eyes. And thus much of the luring and reclaiming
of them in general: now let us got unto the particular.

CHAP. XLIIII.
Of birds of the prey in particular.
AMongst all birds of the prey, The G^ipe.
the Vulture (called of the Grecians (...), and of the Latins Vultur) is the
greatest: a passenger (or bird for a time) in Egypt: known in this country
rather by his skin and feathers, than otherwise, because the Skinners are
wont to make stomachers to lay over the stomach, and the Fletchers feathers
thereof, to set upon arrows. They may be fed with small tripes, dead
carkas^es, and out-cas^^ngs of beasts. Likewise some report of them, that
ordinarily they follow Camps, because of the dead bodies. They cannot rise
from the earth to fly, except they first take their advantage by running, or
else take their leave upon some great butt.

The Eagle is called the King of birds: very unhandsome to carry upon the
fist, by reason of his corpulencie: hard to reclaim, being once wild, because
of his boldness, might, readiness, and easy inclination to hurt the Faulconer in
the fate, or elsewhere. Wherefore, who so desires to have him good, must take
him in the neast, and reclaim him with coursing-dogges, to the end, that when
he is to fly, he may follow them, that so they having put up the Hare, Fox,
Roe-buck, or any other such beast, he may seize upon it to stay it. He may be
fed with any manner of flesh, especially of such beasts as he takes and
seizes upon. The Faulconer must be diligent to attend him well, because he is
very apt to fly away: but that mischief may be prevented, by sewing the
feathers of his train in such sort, as that he cannot spread them to fly with
them: or else by plucking bare the hole of his fundament in such sort, as that
it may appear: for thereupon he being driven into a fear of the cold, he will
not be hasty to ^o^re so high. The Eagle is known to be good and fair, when
he is of a red color, having deep eyes, and a whiteness upon his head or
back.

The Sparrow-hawke and the Goshawke The Sparrow-hawke and the Goshawke.
differ not in any other point than in greatness and strength: because the
Goshawke is of a stronger nature, and therefore not so soon sick as the
Sparrow-hawke: they are both of one kind, as are also the Raven and the Iay,
the great dog and the little one, and both of them are of two sorts, either
such as are taken abroad in the woods, or else such as are taken young out of
the neast. Of this sort there is good choice to be made, in respect of their
aptness to learn; as also of those which are fliers, but have never mued
their feathers, neither made any air, or fed any young ones.

The goodness and fairness of a Sparrow-hawke is known by their being great
and short, and yet having a little head and somewhat round above, a thick
beak, the eyes somewhat hollow, and the circle about the apple of the eye of a
color betwixt green and white, a long and somewhat thick neck, open in the
place where the reins lie, sharp toward the train, not very long, set with
good and large feathers, having flat and short legs, sharp ^allons, thick
and broad shoulders, long and small feet, black feathers when they are taken
young in their air, and which follow the old one from bough to bough, having
never yet mued.

And though here, The Goshawke more worthy than the Sparrow-hawke.
for the familiarity and common use we have of them, I put the Sparrow-hawke
before the Goshawke; yet it is to be understood, that the Goshawke is a great
deal the more worthier Hawke, both in respect of her beauty and comeliness,
as also in respect of the worth and estimation of the prey she kills: for
amongst Faulconers, that Hawke is held worthiest which kills the greatest
prey: The Mallard-killer be valued before the Partridge-killer, and the
Hearne-killer before the Mallard: so the Sparrow-hawke, which is most usual
for the Bush and Blackbird, at the most can aspire no further than the killing
of a Poo^e, or a Partridge, cannot compare with a Goshawke, which kills not
only the Partridge, but the Phesant, Hare, and Conie. Most of the French
Goshawkes breed in Norway, but they are the worst kind, and neither so valiant,
sound or durable, as those which are bred in Ireland, especial^ in the North
parts thereof, which are easy to be known from any other country goshawke,
by the ^lender and fine shapes of their heads, their exceeding quick and
sharp looking eyes, and the palish or sea-coloured greenenesse of their legs.
As for the sparrow-hawkes, they are bred both in France, England, Ireland, and
many other countries, and very good and hard hawks in all those places: yet
are some ayryes better than other some, according to the situation of the
place, and temperature of the air, for such as are bred in warm climats, and
where they pray but upon small birds, as sparrows, robbins, wrens, linne^s, and
such like, are nothing so valiant as those which are bred in cold climats and
tall woods, where they pray upon black^birds, iayes, pyes, and such strong and
fiercer foul: neither is the air of the wood so good as the air of the
rock, because their pray being so near unto them, they do not labor or take
that ^oyle which the other does, and therefore are much more sloathfull of
wing, and less given to pains taking: also the ayrie which builds highest
and upon the tallest timber trees is the best, because it shows courage in
the mount, and those which build low and near to the springs are worst, for it
shows a faintness of spirit and a sloathfulnesse in nature. Now though the
best taking of either of these hawks (as before I said) is when they are
branchers, and are able to follow their dams from bough to bough, and to foot
the pray which she kills for them: yet some Faulconers love to take them from
their nests, as soon as they be disclosed, and to bring them up in such manner,
as they may know no other damme but their keeper, being persuaded that such
familiarity and long acquaintance with the man, makes them more loving, and
less apt to take toy and fly away than the other by many degrees, Differences
and ^ualities between the Ra^nage or Brauncher hawks and ^he Iias hawks.
and doubtless it is most true: yet these thus brought up, and which are
called of Faulconers Iias-hawkes, are nothing so valiant a^ those which are
taken long time after, and are called ramadge hawks. Besides this, too much
familiarity or acquaintance with the man, makes them so over fond and do^ing,
that they will never leave crying, or making a noise as often as they are either
bare faced, or want any thing they desire: besides they will be so do^ing of
the man, that you shall be a much longer time in entering them or making them
foot the pray than the other, because they will expect every thing from the
keeper, and rather fly and sit upon his shoulder than labor or strive for the
pray which flies before them: therefore howsoever the care of holding or
keeping your hawke fast unto you, may entice you to esteem the Iiaes hawke,
yet you shall ever find the ramage or brancher much less troublesome, and
fitter for your purpose.

The way to take them is thus: the birder must be hid behind a bush, and
before the bush a plain or smooth air, but four square, and six sticks
pricked down about it of the thickenesse of ones thombe, and of the height of a
man, three on every side: to these sticks you shall tie nets of green thread
that is very small, and to them a small line or cord, which shall be at the
command of the man that is hid behind the bush: within the air there shall
feed diverse small birds, especially spinks, or chaffinches, whereupon the
sparrow hawke will not fail by and by very fiercely to fly into the nest,
thinking to take the birds, but indeed becoming fast, and ouercast in the
nets: then the birder shall take her, and bind her wings below, together with
her legs and train, that so she may not struggle or beat herself.

They are purposely wont to hide themselves in Winter upon long poles, amongst
high and tall trees, under some small and slender tree in some hedge row: they
are reclaimed by keeping them long, and often upon the fist, but especially at
the break of day: they must be fed twice a day, or once, as when it is
determined to fly them the day following; for then she must be kept sharp,
that so she may be the more eager upon the pray: which likewise they will
perform if they have put off their gorge of the same day, which is perceived
by the emptiness of their gorge. They mue yearly in March or April, and at
such times they must be kept in warm places, or in such places as where the
South Sun shines against some wall. Their meat must be of good flesh, as
birds or mutton, that so they may become very far: the sparrow hawke is apt to
fly away: but to prevent the same, her keeper must be careful to do^ her no
hurt, neither yet to gainesay her in any thing, being given to be disdainefull.
When he goes forth to fly her, he must not let her range any far way off,
because that if she mis^e of the bird she flies at, she goes for anger, and
flies to some tree, refusing to return again to her keeper: he must not fly
her too often, but content himself with what she can reasonably take, giving her
of her prey to feed upon, that so she may perceive and find, that her prey is
something worth unto her, and thereby become the more freely stirred up to
fly. The birds which she takes, are the Partridge, Quail, Stare, Blackbird,
and other such like. For to fly her at smaller birds, as the hedge-Sparrow,
Linne^, and such like, is not good, because being naturally coy, and apt to
find fault, it will entice her to carry and fly away with the prey in her
foot, to which they are more apt than any other Hawke whatsoever: and having
once found a taste or spice thereof, they are ever after very hardly reclaymed.
It is good to enter your Sparrow-hawke How to enter your Sparrow-hawke.
first at the Partridge, when the game is very young, and not able to fly
either far, or above one flight at most, that thereby she may get blood
quickly, and so be encouraged to fly the game home: whereas entering her at
strong game, such as are able to fly far, and often, missing the first or
second time, she will take such a distrust to her wing, that not being able to
trusse or foot them at the first springing, she will presently turn tail, and
refuse to fly further. There be some that use to enter their young
Sparrow-hawkes at the hand Partridge seeled, in this manner: They take the
Partridge, being seeled, and a long creance fastened to her feet, and then
coming into the field, in a place likely for haunt, dig up a round ^odd, and
lay the Partridge into the hole: then cover the Partridge with the sodd, so as
it cannot rise, and to the sodd also fasten another creance: and then
encouraging the Spanyels to hunt, and making such a cheerful noise unto them
as Faulconers are wont to do in such like cases, on the sudden pluck the
sodd from the Partridge, and let her spring in the full view of the Hawke: then
let off the Hawke after her, and having footed her, feed her very well upon the
same: and thus do twice or thrice, but no oftener in any case, least the Hawke
finding your deceit, and her own ^ase, look so much for it, that she will
refuse to fly at any other game. And these flights are called trains, because
they only train or teach a young Hawke how to bestow her wing, and make her
self victor over the prey she seeks: yet these must be used but only at the
beginning, and not often, for fear of the inconvenience before rehearsed. Some
other old Faulconers enter their Hawks at the Quarrie, which is, when an old
Hawke has flowne the Partridge to the mark, and is upon her wing ready to
attend the retriue, then to let in the young Hawke to the old, that they may
both come to the death of the Partridge together. This is also a good manner of
entering of Hawks* but is fitter and more oftener used for entering of Hawks at
the river, than at the field, because those often stoopings at the river makes
a Hawke more expert and cunning, and she stands in much more need of
instruction and example in that* than in the other.

There must great care be had to heal her when she is sick. The diseases of
the Sparrow-hawke.
If she ^all into an ague after much flight, or by reason of other accidents,
she must be set in cool places, upon some perch, wrapped about with wet
clothes, and feed her a little and often with the flesh of little Chickens,
first soaked in water, wherein have been steeped the seeds of Cucumbers or
Gourds. If she be ouer-cooled, she must be ^et in warm places, and fed with
the flesh of some Cockrell or Pigeons soaked in wine, or in the decoction of
Sage, Mari^rome, or such other Herbs. If she have lice, you must anoint her
perch with the juice of Nightshade or Wormwood. If she have the worms i^
her belly, you must powder her meat with the powder of Peach-tree leaves. If
she digest her meat ill, and keep it altogether, you must make her swallow
^^wne the heart of a frogge into her throat, pulling the same back again by
and by, being held by a small thread, for so you shall make her c^st all her
meat. If she have the gowt in her wings or legs, you must let her bleed some
few drops of blood upon the vein that is under her wing or thigh. If she
have the gowt in her foot, you must anoint her feet with the juice of the
herb, called in French Lectorelle, as also, her perch, anointing the place
afterward with tallow.

If she be troubled with the frounce, (...).
or mouth canker, you shall wash the ^ore with allome and strong vinegar,
beaten together till they be as thick as puddle. If you will prepare her
stomach for the receiving of a purge, and both comfort and strengthen it, you
shall wash her meat in water, in which cloves and licoras have been steept:
if you will purge her stomach, you shall give her Aloes: if you will purge her
liver, you shall give her Rubarbe: if you will purge her kidnes, or take away
the shortness of breath, or kill worms, give her Agaricke: if you will purge
her of her gripings in the body, or take away the pantas, or kill fellanders,
give her Rewe or herb of grace: (...).
if you will comfort the heart, or fortify the lungs, give her Saffron: to
cleanse away all putrefaction, give her Myrthe: if you will purge her head, take
away windiness, or what grief comes of cold causes, give her Mustard Seed:
if you will purge from her gross humors, give her wormwood: for any disease
of the liver whatsoever, there is nothing better, than to wash her meat in the
water of Liuerworte: for any inward inflammation, wish her meat in the water
of Sorrel: for the casting of her gordge, and to strengthen the stomak again,
wash her meat in the juice of Mints, or the distilled water thereof: for all
dullness of spirit, and sadness of heart, wash her meat in the water or juice
of burrage, or buglosse: to molli^ie the hardness of the liver, or any other
oppellations, give her the juice of Hearts-tongue: to make away obstructions,
or stoppings in the head, give her either Ros^marie, or the water thereof: for
the weakness of the sinews, trembling of members, or for cramps, swellings,
soars, or canker, give her sage-bruise outwardly, or the juice inwardly: for
pur^inesse, or short breath* give her the juice of Horehound: for the numbnesse
or stiffenesse of ioines, cankers, or sores, bathe them in the decoction o^ of
woodbine: for all manner of infection, poison, or inward bruises, give her the
herb Cardus Benedictus, which herb, you may give either green, or dried,
either the juice, or the powder, or if you please, you may give the distilled
water: for the biting of any mad dog, or any other venomous beast, annoint
the place either with Angelica, or the juice of an onion: for any extreme
drought or heat which is in the stomach, wash all her meat in the decoction
of French Barley: for any Fistula, or cankorous sore, take Brimstone: for the
Pantas, take Butter and Rose Water: for the Crampe, take Polipodie of the oak,
or the juice of Brianie, or of Garlic, or where they fail, take the powder
of the roots of Pionie, and let the Hawke smell to the same, or pounce her
na^es therewith: for the falling sickness, wash her meat in the juice of
Pellitorie of Spain: for the pin in the foot, make her a plaster of
Galbanum, white pitch, and Venice-turpentine, and apply it to the same: Lastly
for the Rye, which is a disease of all other, most common and incident to all
manner of hawks, but especially to these short winged hawks, you shall take a
rumpe of mutton, and cut away the fat which is about it, very clean, and then
foulding the same in a handful of parceley, let your hawke feed and tire
herself thereupon at her pleasure, and it will make the filth to issue and
come forth out of her nares, and purge her head wonderfully.

The Faulcon (as we have said) in the art of hawking, is sometimes a general
word taken for all kinds of hawks, sometimes it is taken for a special word,
and according to that sense, there are diverse sorts of that name, which I omit
to entreat severally of, because of such as have written of the nature of
birds: but howsoever, the Faulcon is the prince of the birds of pray (I mean
in respect of flight) for her stoutnesse and great courage, and is to be
accounted of great value, when she has a round head, and the top of her head
is full, her beak short and thick, her nostrels great and open, her eye
brows high and thick, her eyes great and cloaked, a long neck, a high breast,
large shoulders, the feathers of her wings thin, long thighs, short and
chicke legs, green, great, and well spread feet, black, sharp, and pearching
^alon^: and which i^ for bigness neither too great nor too little.

The Faulcon, as all other birds of prey, has her Tiercelet, and they are
called of the Latins Pomiliones, that is to say, small birds, resembling them,
and nothing differing from them, save only in greatness: and they are all of
them (as it were) the males of the birds of prey, the females being, for the
most part, of greater bulk and bodies than the males. That of the Faulcon is
called nothing but a Tiercelet, or the male Faulcon. The Tiercelets of the
other Hawks have their proper names: as, the male Sparrow-hawke is called a
Musket: the male Lanier, a Laneret: and the male Sacre, a Sacret. The Tiercelet
of the Faulcon has his feathers ver^e glittering, his head and eyes black,
ash-colored upon his back and train, and yet glittering. He is a Hawke for
the lure, as also the Faulcon, and not for the fist. His legs and feet are
yellow, having for the most part a pale breast: he carries two very black
spots upon his feathers, on the sides of his eyes. To reclaim the Faulcon, you
must have him commonly upon your fist, feed him with the wings and legs of
Hens soked in water, and set him in a dark place: sometimes presenting them
with a basin full of water, wherein they may bathe themselves, and after their
bathing, dry them at the fire: they must be used first to take small birds:
then, indifferent great ones: and afterward, greater ones: but you must not
feed them with any part of the birds which they shall have taken. They fly
marvelous swift, and mount very high, there houering and soaring, but withal,
still looking downward: and when they see the Duck, the green Goose, Crane,
or Heron, they come down like an arrow, their wings shut and drawn together,
right upon the Foul, to break in upon her with her tallons behind: at which
time if they happen to mis^e, and the Foul fly away, they presently fly
after: but and if they cannot seize upon her, as enraged and angry, they take
so long a ^light thereupon, as that they loose their master.

The Faul^on is more fit than any other Hawke to fly the Heron, and all other
foul of the river. Her diseases, and the curing of them, are like unto those
of the Sparrow-hawke: howbeit, the Faulcon is of a stronger nature than the
Sparrow-hawke.

The Hobbie is the least of all Hawks in respect of body, except the Merlin,
and is likewise for the lure, and not for the fist, being of the number of
those that soar aloft, as the Faulcon, the Lanier, and the Sacre. This bird is
sufficiently known every where: for there is not any country where the Hobbies
do not follow the hunters, in as much as it is the proper work of the Hobbie
to make her prey of the little birds as they fly, as by name, the La^ke. This
is his special property, that having found the hunters in the field, going to
hunt the Hare or the Partridge, he keeps them company, still flying over
their heads, hoping to meet with some one little bird or other which the dog^
shall put up: but for the most part these little birds do rather choose to
become a prey unto the dogs, or else to find out some means to save
themselves amongst the horses, or to be taken alive, than to commit themselves
to the mercy of the Hobbie, their mortal adversary. But howsoever, the
Hobbie will not follow the hunter longer than a certain time, as though he had
his hours limited him: for leaving them, he goes to look out the place of
his rest amongst the vvoods of high timber trees, where they keep and perch
ordinarily. He has a blew ^eake, yellow legs and feet, the feathers under his
eyes very black, the top of his head betwixt black and a dark yellow, two
white spots above his neck, but underneath his throat, and on either side of
his temples, russet ones: his wings very blew: his back, train, and wings,
black on the upper side: his train very much consisting of variable colors
underneath, by reason of red spots traced overthwart amongst the black. If you
can see him flying in the air, he may be perceived to be somewhat red under
his train, and betwixt his legs.

The Hobbie is so quick and swift, as that he dare adventure upon the Raven,
and give him many a dry bob in the air.

He is chiefly esteemed for the sport of darying of Larkes, The use of the
Hobbie.
to which he is naturally inclined, because it is the prey in which he most
naturally delights: and the manner of daring of Larkes is in this sort. When
you see a Lark play and fly near unto the ground, quiuering her wings, and
making a gentle noise in the air, you shall then li^t up your fist whereon the
Hobbie sits, and give her the sight of the Lark, who presently thereupon
will spread them abroad, and wave them in the vvind, at which sight the Lark
will leisurely stoop down to the ground, and there lie close, as if she were
unperceived, vvhilest you in the mean space shall with your Horse and Hawke
ride about her, and about her, till you come so near her, that you may lay
your daring-net over her: which net is a little round net like a Pursnet, not
above a foot or two overthwart, and fastened bought-wise unto the end of a long
pole, like a Hawks pole: as soon as you have covered the Lark, you shall
light and take her up, and give your Hawke the head only. This is a sport very
delicate, and of long continuance, and therefore much respected amongst ladies
and gentlewomen.

The Merlin is the least of all other Hawks which Faulconers make any use of:
he is for the fist, ^he Merlin.
and not for the lure: howbeit, for ne^essitie ^ake he may be trained to the
lure: he resembles the Faulcon so naturally, as that there may seem to be no
difference betwixt them, save only in greatness: for he has the same ges^es,
plumage, and conditions: wherefore he must be reputed as royal as the
Faulcon, or at least of the same lineage and nature with the Faulcon. He is very
stout of courage: for although he be not much bigger than a Blackbird or
Pigeon, yet he dares to adventure upon the Quail and Partridge, and such
other birds greater than himself: and his courage is such, as that oftentimes
he will fly them to the next houses or villages, yea, into burning fire, and
under the garments of men or women. He must be ^ed and handled after the same
manner that the Faulcon. The general prey whereupon he most ordinarily
feeds, is the Lark: whence it comes, that he ever choosing to live where
they most haunt, he is often taken with the day-nets: for stooping to strike
at the Lark, he is taken in the net himself. Of Merlins (...) Merlins.
there are both male and female: the male is called the Jack Merlin, and is as
the male of other Hawks, a great deal less than the female, and indeed are
so very little, that they are of very small or no use: the female is called the
formale, and being much larger, valiant, and full of courage, they will sley
the Partridge all Summer long. These Merlins are of all Hawks the tenderest,
and can the least endure cold of any bird whatsoever, especially of their
feet: which being once nipt with frost, and benumbed, they presently will
eat them of themselves, and so become lame and vselesse. Therefore when you
mue them in the Winter time, you shall mue them in a very warm and close
house, and upon a perch very well lined and covered with thick lists, or
other vvoollen cloth. Some use to line their pearches with Cony-skinnes, or
other furred skins, turning the furred sides outward, but that is somewhat
too hot, and makes them more tender and apt to feel the cold than otherwise
they would be: use then a moderate temper of warmth, and no further. Of all
sorts of Merlins, the Irish Merlin The Irish Mer^in.
is the best, for she is never at any time troubled with this infirmity: and
you shall know her by her pale green legs, and the contrary Merlin by her
bright yellow legs When they have flowne all Summer at the Partridge, you may
make them for the bush in the Winter, and so have them flying all the year;
which is the best course that can be taken with them: for they are naturally
of themselves so tender, that they can very hardly endure m^ing.

The Gerfaulcon The G^rf^ulcon
is a bird that is seldom seen, except it be amongst Faulconers belonging to
great Lords: she is a great bodied bird, insomuch, as that she is thought of
some to be a kind of Eagle: she is fit to fly at any thing, for she is bold,
and never gives over any thing: but she is more hard to reclaim and bring to
the lure, than any other Hawke, because she is so venturous and fantastical:
for and if she be not handled gently, and have a mild master to use her kindly,
she will never become reclaimed. This is the strongest of all other birds,
except the Eagle: she is kept upon the fist, she is long bodied, having her
b^ll, legs, and feet of a blew color, and her tallons very open and long:
she is cunning at the taking of the birds of the river, for she wearieth them
in such sort, that in the end they are forced to yield, as not being able ^o
diue any more.

The principal flight wherein she takes delight, is at the Herne, for her
spirit and courage stirs her up to actions of the greatest worth: and of these
Gerfaulcons, the white is the principal best of all other, Of (...) the
w^^te^^ the best.
and of greatest price: they are exceeding tender, and very apt to take
surfeits, and therefore ^eldome long lived, which is the reason that they are
not of such general use as other hawks are, neither are they got but with
great cost, and paine^ulnesse which makes them to be held of very great price,
and so not for every ones purchase. Above all other things, they may not
endure the loss of any blood, in so much that the shedding of one poor
drop, though at the pounce, or other outward part which is least mortal, is
the utter loss of the hawks life: they can in no sort be kept too cold, or
withered too much, in so much, that if after her flying, you suffer her to sit
abroad one whole frostie night, she will be much the so^nder, and better for
the same. Nay I have seen some Faulconers, which after the bathing of the
hawke, How to k^^ps use the Gerfaulcon
have set her abroad till the moisture has been frozen upon their feathers,
and has been persuaded that she has ^lowne her next slight much better for
the same: she must be exceeding painefully labored withal at her first
beginning, for she is apt to take deslike at the man's face, and therefore must
be carried upon the fist more than any other hawk: she must also be kept much
barefaced after she is acquainted with the man, and c^ntinually stroaked and
coyd about the head, body, and feet with a loose feather, to make her more
^ame and gentil: she must also be much whooped and gibbetted unto, that she may
be acquainted with the voice of the man, and with those sounds which she must
obey and ^ollow: she may very well be flowne from Michaelmas until the Spring,
but in no wise after; for the ^ea^on of the year growing then warm, and lust
springing within her, out of a natural instinct which she has to her own
clyme, she will away and leave you, how well soever reclaimed, or how sharp
and ^it soever ^et for the pleasure you go about: In so much that it has been
credibly known, that diverse Gerfaulcons have been taken up in Island, some
with French, and some with English varuells upon them, to the great admiration
and astonishment both of those which have taken them, and those which have lost
them. The Gerfaulcon like the Faulcon gentill, is to to be chosen all of one
pe^ce, and either a black or ^andie male, by no means dropped, but of a clear
and bright plume, with full summed feathers, vubrused, and unbroken: of all
hawks they cover their sickness longest, and out of their me^^alls seem
sound, when they are inwardly most rotten; therefore it is not good in any wise
to buy or meddle with them til you have seen them mute, received ^ full gorge,
and put it over, and lastly in the morning have seen her casting: in all which
if you find no extraordinare imperfection, you may then safely buy her, and
what los^e after succeeds impute it to your own negligence. The male to the
Gerfaulcon is that which is called ^he Ierkin, being a much less bird, yet of
exceeding good metal and courage, and as sit to fly at the river, as any
other hawke whatsoever, having a natural love to all manner of water foul,
and continually when he is vvild, making his prey upon the same.

The Sacre being a principal bird amongst those of the prey, is like unto the
Faulcon in greatness, a hawke that is good for the Kite, but he may be made
fit for any vvild flesh, as also for the open field to take wild Geese,
Feasant, Par^ridge, and all other sorts of vvild foul.

The Sacre The Sacre.
is of more ill favored colored feathers than any other hawke, for she is of
a color as it were betwixt red and smokie, short sooted, having blew legs and
talons. It is a vvandring bird, and seldom found in this country: her
Teirselet is the Sacret; so that the Sacret is the male, and the Sacre is the
female. Noble men desirous to have some sport betwixt him and the Kite, do
first make the Kite to stoop (for the Kite is wont in the Summer to keep on
high in the air, to e^uoy the coolness of the air, which is greatest in
the middle region of the air) by having some one or other Faulconer to carry
a ducke upon his fist, having a certain quantity of a Fox tail hanging
thereat, thus letting her fle in some plain ground, they give the Kite
occasion to stoop: for when the Kite is advised of the Ducke, he stoopeth by
and by unto the ground, and drawing near unto her, does there keep himself
without doing any other thing, but beholding of her, as maruelling at her
form: Then the Sacre is to be cast off at him, who thinking himself swift,
hops by flight to overtake him: whereupon the Kite mounteth upward, turning
round therewithal as much as he can: and so the combat becomes pleasant to
behold, especially if it be in a plain without trees, and that the air be
clear, and without wind: for one shall see both the Sacre and the Kite to
mount so high, as that they will be both out of sight: but all will not serve,
for the Sacre will make him yield, bea^ing him down to the ground with such
chumps, as he lights upon him withal.

The Lanier Lan^er.
diff^reth not much from the Faulcon, and he takes his surname of the Faulcon,
for he is commonly called the Faulcon Lanier: he is commonly found in this
country: and for that he is of gentle conditions, and better endures gros^e
meats than any other Hawke, men are wont to content themselves with him,
causing him to serve their purpose every way. Faulconers choose those Laniers
that have great heads, short bills, blew and yellow feet, their fore-feathers
of a mixture of black and white, not having overthwart strakes, as the Faulcon,
but straight spots going along the feathers, a short and somewhat thick neck,
as also a bill of the same fashion. The Lanier is the female, and the Lancret
is the male, and has not so big a body as the female, neither yet so well
esteemed of, but as for the rest, he is almost like the female in plumage.
There is no kind of bird that keeps his perch more constantly. He abides
with us in Winter, and is to be seen of us at all times, contrary to the
fashion of ethers, which keep not in our countries but in the Summer time.
Fa^lconers, when they would make the Lanier a forrester, they put him in a
lower room, so dark, as that he can see nothing, except at such times as he is
fed: and likewise they never carry him upon their fist, but in the night.

And when that he is ready to fly, they make a fire in the chamber for to
heat him, that so he may afterward be bathed in pure wine: and having dried
him again, they give him to feed on, the brains of a Hen: then getting
forward before day toward the place where the game is, they cast him off a
good way from the place where the Crane is, at such time as it begins to be
day: and though he take him nor the first day, it is all one, for it will be as
good in the days following, and especially from after mid July, until toward
the end of October. And yet after the mue, he will be better than before:
but it is not good in the time of Winter.

Yet to speak truth of the Lanier, he takes more delight to prey upon the
Partridge, than upon any other foul whatsoever, because the flight does not
mount much, to which he has no affection. He is of so strong and good a
constitution, that his grease seldom or never melts to his hurt or
prejudice: neither is he so foolishly ouer-free of courage, that he will hurt
himself with too much violence, or paines-taking. Whence it comes, that his
owner can seldom ouer-flye him, no, though he fly him six or seven ^lights
in a morning: and for this cause he is called the Scholars Hawke, as being an
excellent encourager of young Faulconers, and a bird on which, without
danger, they may try all needful experiments.

Thus much of the manner of luring and reclaiming of Hawks, as well in
general as in particular: and yet it remains that we speak a word or two
concerning the same matter.

You must understand, that all birds of the prey do serve to fly either upon
rivers, or else ^n the fields: of which, some fly from the fist, and that
without any spare: of this sort is the Goshawke, the Sparrow-hawke, the
Gerfaulcon, and the Merlin: The others fly on high, as namely, the Faulcon,
the Lanier, the Sacre, and the Hobbie: the one of them is called from the
flight, by holding out the fist unto them, and the other by casting out unto
them the lure, that is to say, an instrument made after the fashion of two
fowls wings coupled together, hung at a leash, and at the end thereof a
tennise-ball, or crook of horn: for by these lures the Hawks are allured,
thinking them to be live Hens.

This is the destinction of our French Faulconers, yet generally it is not so
received, for of other Faulconers, Which be called long-win^ed hawks, and which
be called short-w^nged hawks.
hawks are divided into these two kinds, long-winged hawks, and short-winged
hawks: the long-winged hawks do properly belong unto the lure, and ^lie a
^oft, soaring in the air, and from thence ^^ooping down and taking their
pray: they are upon their wings long before they either see or are seen of
their pray, looking when either the spannyells shall spring the partridge from
the ground, or the Faulconer with his poale beat the foul from the river: and
of this ^or^ is the Eagle, the Gripe, the Gerfaulcon, the Faulcon, the Lanyer,
the Hobie, and the Merline, some will intrude the Castrell, which in deed is a
long-winged hawke, as touching his shape, but looking into the cowardlinesse of
his nature, he is far unworthy to rank in their society. The short-winged
hawks do properly belong to the fist, for from thence ever they fly, and
thither also back they are ever recalled. They never take their wing till they
see their pray on wing before them, and then they make a maine after it, and
fly it to the mark, where presently they take a tree, hillocke, or some other
stand, as near the place as possibly they can, and there sit till the
spannyells come into the retriue: but the long-winged hawke never takes stand
at all, but flying about and about grathereth up again to her first pitch, and
there expects the retriue. Now the short-winged hawks are the Goshawke, the
Terssell of the Goshawke, the Sparrow-hawke, and the Mus^^e^, some intrude the
bauld Buzzard, and the Ring-tayle, but they as the Castrell are not worthy of
the rank, being naturally cowards, and of faint spirits, not daring to contend
where there is any show of resistance.

Some of them begin not the game, but follow it being begun by the Hawkers, To
lure.
as we have said of the Eagle. To be brief, hawks seem not to differ, save
that all of them do not fly at all kind of birds and foul alike, for in deed
every one of them buckleth himself unto the bird, to the flying whereof he is
given and addicted, and not to others. And concerning all sorts of flying and
hawking* you may find a more ample treatise in the particular description of
the nature and properties of every bird of pray which we have made.

CHAP. XLV.
The taking of melodious singing Birds.
WE have spoken of the sport that is made with birds of the pray called
hawking, and now we will enter into some speech of taking of birds, which sing
melodiously with sweet and pleasant songs, wherewith the master of the farm
may take his recreation and pleasure, by hearing them sing in his closes,
park, low-woods, and high-woods, or in his chamber window, or else shut up in
some cages or rooms made for the purpose to contain the subject of such
pleasure and delightsome melody. And that we may not omit any thing, before we
set down any manner or way of the particular taking of such birds, we will
take a brief view of the nature, feeding, and diseases of the same, For it
were but lost labor to take the birds, if to the end that we may have their
sweet and melodious songs a long time, we know not what meat is good for
them, what diseases they are subject unto, and what means and remedies are
necessary for their distemperatures. In the mean time I mind not here to
bring in the fabulous histories touching the original and breeding of the most
part of them, which fantastical Poets have invented. I mean to rest my self
in this only persuasion, namely that all birds were miraculously created of
God by his almighty power, that is to say, of his own mere will and word,
whereby likewise he did create all other creatures in the beginning of the
creation of the world.

CHAP. XLVI.
Of the Nightingale.
WE will make our choice of the Nightingale in the first place, which according
to the judgment and common consent of every one, sings the most sweetly and
melodiously of all the rest: she is a bird sufficiently known, especially in
the country of Italy, and is called of the Latins Luscini^ or Philomel^: she
makes he^ nest in the Spring, at such time as the earth in the month of May,
is all over covered, beset and hanged with flowers and pleasant green, and
that in groves and thick bushes, upon which the Sun in the morning does cast
his cool and temperate beams: from noone till Sunset, she (...) the cool
places, fountains, brooks, thick hedges, and well shadowed places. True it
is, ^ Nightingale ^ nest.
that some of them do make their nests upon the ground, under hedges, or
amongst the waste grounds: and other some of them make it in a place somewhat
raised, as upon some green and thick grass grown, clod of earth or butte.
The number of their eggs is uncertain, for some of them lay four, and some
five, and those which nestle in Summer, lay (according to Aristotle his
assertion) sometimes six or seven. Now the Nightingale which you would keep,
must be bred in the Spring; for how much the earlier bird she is, by so much
will she become the more perfect, and you may have better hope and assurance of
her longer living, and of her being brought up, and kept with more ease,
because that coming (as all are woon^) to mue her feathers, if she be ouerrun
of certain cattle in August, the cold coming and finding her bare of
feathers, causes her to die, which thing happens unto many of those which
were bred in Summer. The young Nightingales must not be taken from their nests,
until such time as they be feathered, and that they be almost covered all
over with the same, that so you may have the les^e trouble in bringing of them
up, ^teat ^or the ^ightingale.
keeping them in a solitary and by-place: their meat must be the heart of a
Weather clean and old. And you shall make of the fat of the skin, which
covers the heart, and of certain sinews which are within the same, cut and
shred small into little pe^ces, meat in manner of worms, wherewith you shall
feed them once every hour, or more oftener if need require, giving them at each
several time three gobbets: and thus you shall feed them in their nests as
long as you can, and after they be grown up, you shall put them in cages, made
fit with little sticks and pearches, to the end they may begin of themselves
to stand upon their legs: and within the said cages, you must put moss, hay,
or chafe, whereupon they may rest themselves, if so be they will not sit upon
the pearches, always taking heed to keep them clean as much as may be. It
will be requisite also, that their cage have not any light but on one side
only, and for this cause, such as are most careful, do hang their cage for
the space of three whole parts of it with green cloth. When you know that the
Nightingale ca^eth alone, you shall mince her the heart of a Weather very
small, after the manner of pie meat, and lay it upon some small paper, in such
places, as where you know that she may feed easily, and without any trouble,
you shall use this care and diligence until the bird has go^ the custom to
eat alone, not neglecting notwithstanding to give her sometimes a day as much
as a bird carries (...) her bill to be the surer and for the better: take
order likewise least she die, that she never want any of the foresaid meat,
and withal that it stink not, as it falls out oftentimes in Summer. Besides
the heart of the Weather, you may give her diverse other sorts of meat, as the
paste whereof we will speak hereafter for one: or in steed of that paste, take
a new egg (for else it might cause some disease to breed in her, and bring her
easily to her death) boil it hard, give her the yelke to eat. It is true,
that you must not give it her often, or not at all, except it be for want of
their meat, because it is given to bind them in their bodies, and make them
continue. You may likewise feed them with certain worms which are found in a
doves nest, or else in old flower of meal: but this must be done as seldom as
may be, because that such meat should rather be unto her as physic, than
ordinary food, as we shall say hereafter. If she will not pick up these
meats, she may have them mingled amongst her meat of a sheep heart, that so
she may learn to feed of whatsoever shall be set before her.

CHAP. XLVII.
How Nightingales taken in the month of August must be fed, as also those that
are taken after they be through grown.
SO soon as you have taken the Nightingale in August, tie her wings presently,
that so she may not bea^e her self in her cage, The mann^r of the k^eping of
the Nightingale taken in August
and by this means she will grow tame sooner, and more easily, and withal
fall to eat, whereas otherwise she will be hard to tame: for seeing her self
deprived of her liberty, she becomes not tame, till of a long time after.
You shall shut her up in a cage covered and wrapped round with paper, not having
any ^^icke for her to perch upon at all: in the mean time have regard to feed
her five or six times every day, and that very handsomely: sometimes lay
before her flies, or little worms, which by their crauling will stir up the
bird to pick them, wherefore for the first time you shall give her them alive,
whereas afterward you may cut and mince them: the third time you shall begin to
feed her with a sheep heart shred small, mingling amongst the same of the
worms before mentioned likewise minced and knodden together, for to accustom
her to the said heart. And if you perceive that the bird does not feed her
self, neither yet desire or seek after any thing but worms, you shall leave
off to give her them mingled and tempered with the sheep heart by a little
and little, and so offering her such meat as is most easy, you shall wont her
to eat of the said heart without any mixture all alone: you may do the like
with the paste, if you perceive that she does eat it willingly, which thing is
easily discerned by any man of judgment.

CHAP. XLVIII.
To bring up Nightingales that are taken in March.
IT is true, that the Nightingales which are taken after the first of March
unto the midst of April are very fit to keep and bring up. To bring up
Nightingales taken in March
When therefore you have a Nightingale of this season, you shall put her in a
cage well wrapped about with paper, for fear that upon the ^ight of any man, she
should beat her self and cry, as also to the end that she may learn to eat
alone. For to do this, you shall have a vessel of glass like a cup without
a foot, wherein you shall put seven or eight small worms, and set them near
the bird, who seeing them craule within the glass, will by and by for envy at
them fall of p^^king them, wherefore you shall give her them quick for the
first time. The second time mince and cut them small: and when you see that she
eats well of such meat, you shall take of a sheep heart well beat and cut,
and mingle it with the said worms, and making thereof as it were a paste, give
it her to ea^e. But if you perceive, that in feeding, she choose to eat of
nothing but the worms, leaving the heart, you shall endeavor your self to
mix it with all possible care and cunning, that so in eating she may not choose
but eat of both together, that is, both of the worms and of the heart. And
when she is accustomed to eat of this mixture, you shall by little and little
take away the worms, and feed her only with the heart. Let it not be found
strange unto you to see your Nightingale continue some days without eating.
For the cause why it so falls out, is, because they are grieved for having
lost their liberty, and thereupon continue some time without eating or feeding
of any thing; some, three days; others, fi^e or six days; yea, eight or ten
days: whereat you must not marvel, neither yet leave off to feed them. For
there are some old ones, which though they be hard to feed, become
notwithstanding better singing birds than any of the young ones.

If peradventure the bird will not take any other thing than worms, give her a
birds bill full four times a day, and three or four morsells at a time, and
not any more, because of digestion, and when she shall have accustomed to take
the mixture of the heart with the worms, give her twice a day only, that is
to say, morning and evening, for to preserve and maintain her. And this is the
order and course that ye shall take.

CHAP. XLIX.
To know if the Nightingale begin to eat of her self, and whether she will
prove good, or no.
AS soon as the Nightingale begins to sing, it is a most certain token
that she eats likewise alone. There are some which make not any kind of noise
or sound for the space of eight days; others of fifteen: and othersome
continue a whole month without singing. If they exceed this time without
singing, it is to be thought, that either they are females, or else that they
will never be ought wo^th. They give great hope of proving perfect birds, which
begin to sing quickly, and use to cate quickly likewise by themselves.

CHAP. L.
How to order a Nightingale which eats alone, and sings.
WHen the Nightingale shall eat well by her self, and shall sing, you shall
take away by little and little the paper wherewith the cage was compassed about,
every day a little, in such sort, as that the bird may not perceive it,
covering the place again from whence you shall take the paper, with some
green, insomuch, as that all the paper being taken away, and the cage covered
again with green leaves, you shall by little and little accussome her to see
the light. For if that you do otherwise, you will be the cause of making her
to loose her singing, either for disdain, or for fear, which will not come to
pass, if you order her as has been said. Notwithstanding that Elian in the
thirteenth book of his natural history ^aith, (following the advice of
Aristotle) That it is hard to bring that bird to singing, which is not taken in
her own nest. Which opinion is found to be most false by ordinary experience:
for very often it is seen, that old Nightingales b^come more perfect and
excellent than the other.

CHAP. LI.
How the male Nightingales are known from the females.
Men's opinions and judgments concerning Nightingales (as namely to know of
whether sex they be) are very diverse: Nightingales male and female.
for some distinguish the coke from the hen by their grosenesse, saying, that
the cock is the grosser bird: others are of mind that the cock has a greater
eye: some say, that he has a reddish tail: all which opinions I have found to
be far wide; for I have had perfect good Nightingales, and that a great number
of them that have been very small and little ^ as also hens with all those
marks which are assigned unto the cocks. Wherefore for a more sure and
certain sign, you shall rest upon, and trust to that which follows: That is
to say, when you have a Nightingale taken out of the nest, which shall begin to
eat alone, without having of it cramd into her, and shall record diverse
melodious notes from day to day, contenting herself therein some time with
pleasing and beseeming noises, you may thereby assure your self that the same
is a male. But unto this, you shall add certain other notes: as namely, her
quiet and peaceable abiding in her cage: her standing upon one leg only, and to
hold on the warbling of her breast, which continuance is not to be found in the
hen: more than that, she goes hopping and whistling up and down the cage with
a noise and song that is very much interupted and short. I will not deny
notwithstanding, but that sometimes the cock may be known from the hen by
the marks which some have set down before: but this is that which I affirm,
namely, that some are mightily deceived by those marks, and that by their
singing, the Nightingales taken in August are most certainly and clearly
known and discerned. And as for those which are taken in March, the knowledge
of them rests, not only in singing, but also in the lower parts of the sex
which the cocks do put forth, but the hens do not, for then is the time that
birds do^ couple together. These therefore are the most certain evident and
infallible arguments, whereunto you may trust and betake you self.

CHAP. LII.
Of the King of birds, or the little King* otherwise called Robin-Redbreast.
YOu shall understand that the little king, The king of b^rds.
or king of birds is naturally very small, of a dainty tractable complexion,
he sings most sweetly, and is not much inferior in this respect unto the
Nightingale. He is oftentimes seen in Winter upon the tops or roofes of
houses, or upon old ruins on that side that the Sun shines, and whereas the
wind may least annoy him. He is to be fed in this sort: You must keep him
warm in his nest, giving him for his meat of a sheep heart, or of a calves
heart minced, in all points as we have already said, speaking of the
Nightingale. He must be fed with a little atonce, and often, by reason of his
digestion, being careful that he take no cold, and especially in the night.
For which cause, you shall put him in a cage, which has some pretty provision
made like a little chamber, trimmed with red cloth, and made as it were a
little ho^-house, wherinto he may go, in the night season, and shun the cold
all the whole year. Now when he shall be used to be fed, you shall feed him
with some heart well beaten, and small minced, and sometimes you shall give him
of the paste that is used to be given to Nightingales, which will do him no
small good. And you shall give him sometimes flies to pecke for her greater joy
and speedier taming, and herein you shall use great diligence.

CHAP. LIII.
Of the Finch.
AMongst the fairest and most beautiful birds, Fi^^h.
yea, or rather the most beautiful of all, is the Finch, being no less
delightsome to the eye, than pleasant unto the ear: and yet there is not that
account made of her that should, because of the great number of them that is to
be found. They ne^^le thrice a year, that is to say, in May, June, and August.
Some are of opinion, that those which are bred in the month of August, are the
best, and amongst them those which are of the third feather, or which have mued
thrice. Others affect those most which have their nests amongst the thorns,
and have certain orange colored feathers, which I my self do not mi^^^ke:
but I say further, (that whereas the black ones are commonly the pefectest and
best birds of all) that there is not any one (...) or more perfect than
another. It is true that those which breed amongst the thorns, are stouter and
stronger birds than the other, and better made to sing. They are unlike the
other, in as much as their feathers are somewhat more gray and dark. The
cocks have a black throat, as likewise the shoulders and head black, and
long and flat. The hens have their shoulders gray, their throat black, and
their head round.

CHAP. LIIII.
How the Finch must be fed.
WHen you have taken the Finch with her nest, (...).
you shall feed them in manner as follows: you shall first soften in the water
of sweet almonds, and afterward chaw very well a little piece of biscuit, or of
a pan-cake, and you shall make of these two things a paste, and cram into the
bird of the (...), as shall be needful. Afterward you shall work the things
aforesaid in a mortar together, and having tempe^ed them with wa^e, you shall
give them as much as a bird will hold in her bill, with a chickens feather,
upon pain that you make her meat new every day, least it should grow four,
and spoil the bird. When you have fed the bird, you shall make a little stick
like a tooth-picke, at the point whereof, you shall tie a little cotton, you
shall wet this tooth-picke in water, and with the same, you shall wash the
birds bill, that so there cleave not unto, or hang thereabout any of the said
paste, for causing of apostemes or ulcers, such as wherewith she might be kept
from being able to open her bill, and so she would easily die. Now when she
begins to eat alone, you shall give unto her in her little box a little
bruised mustard seed, and you shall renew it daily, least it should become
rank, which would make her die. The same diligence must be observed in
bringing up of green Finches, Canarie-birds, Line^s, Goldfinches, or Silkens,
and Spinkes. You must be careful when they moute, to air them and
besprinckle them with a little wine, setting them also a little in the Sun
twice a week.

CHAP. LV.
How to feed the Spinke.
THe Spinke is a very beautiful and melodious bird, What (...) the Spinke must
(...).
but all Spinks have not one and the same tunes: for some of them sing after
one fashion, and some after another, which needs not to be further proved;
for there is great variety of them, and they are called after diverse sorts.
Some bring them up after the way, that is used in bringing up of Finches. This
bird has this imperfection, namely, that she easily loses her sight.
Wherefore when you perceive that she is in the way to grow blind, take of the
juice of bee^s, and mingle it with a little water in her water-pot, and that
for a day only, that so she may drink thereof. And furthermore, make her a
perch of fig tree wood, whereupon, and against which she may tub her eye, the
which will do her much good: you shall give her likewise to eat of the seeds
of melons, the space of two or three days, because they are cooling and
wholesome. And if by this means, the Spinke do not mend and become better,
give her leave to take her liberty in the ^ields, for she will never be ought.

CHAP. LVI.
Tor^lieue the diseases of the Finch and Nightingale.
WHen the Finch is in her mue, The Finch (...)
you shall comfort her, besprinckling her lightly with wine, that so she may
mout the sooner, which will be to her further good. And if she happen to have
lice after this sprinkling with wine, set her in the Sun, and there let her
stand until such time as she^be dry. Some of them mout in June, some in July,
and other some in August, according to their complexion and heat. And this is
the course which they follow which are put into the cage, having spent one
year abroad before, for those which are taken in the neast, do (...) within a
month that they are put in: and this must be understood in general of all
birds. And therefore to come to the particular: The Nightingale is troubled
with fatness: and therefore she must be purged twice a week, giving her two
or three worms of the Pigeon-house (as we have taught before) for the space
of fifteen days. (...)
If she grow melancholic, you shall cut the bladder which is above her rumpe,
and put into her drinking-pot some Sugar-cand^e, and little lumps of paste or
sugar, of the bigness of a nut. And if you see that she complain her self of
sickness, put into her vvater-pot some six chyres of Saffron, or thereabout,
continuing therewithal to give her the paste, and sometimes of a Sheep
heart. And if peradventure she still grow worse, give her the yelke of an hard
egg, and the white also. Besides, the Nightingale having been two or three
years in the cage, becomes gowtie: now when you shall perceive it, anoint
her feet with Butter, or else with Hens grease, which is a very good
remedy for to cure her. The Nightingale is likewise subject to have apostemes
breaking out about her eyes and neb, for which you shall likewise use Butter
and Hens grease. It is meet also to make ^^ouision for the Nightingale that
is lean, when you see necess^^^^ that way to require it, giving her new
^igges to eat in their season, and at other times dry ^igges, well chewed:
and afterward, you shall bring her unto her ordinary diet, and so you shall
continue with her, to maintain and keep her. There happens also unto the
Nightingale another disease, called the straitness or strangling of the
breast, which comes of having eaten some rank or fat thing, and it is
perceived by the beating and pain before not accustomed, which she abides in
this place, and also by this, that she is given of^ to gape and open her bill.
This disease comes also of some sinew or thread of the sheeps heart, which was
not minced small enough, and so thereby does hang in her throat: wherefore you
shall very handsomely open her bill, and take it from her with a pin. You
shall know it to be this disease, when you see in her throat certain broken
or loose ^lesh. Give her afterward a little Sugar-candie, which shall be a very
good remedy for to cure her. In brief, all such kind of birds as eat sheeps
hearts, or the hearts of any other beasts, are subject to be troubled with
the disease above spoken of.

CHAP. LVII.
To know the Canarie-bird from others, and what diseases she is subject unto.
YOu shall understand that the Canarie-bird is brought from the Islands called
the Canaries, and is of much account amongst us, because she both comes out
of a strange country, as also because she is a good singing bird. She is
known from others by this, because she continues and heaueth the passages of
her throat, in singing, more than any other birds do: besides, she is of a
less body, and has a longer tail; in so much as the lesser they be, the
perfecter they be. On the contrary, the great ones which sometimes turn their
heads behind them, after the manner of fools, and for that cause are called
fools, are the worst, and come from the Isles of Palm^ virte. Wherefore the
nature of the Canari^-bird is not to be fat, or to maintain and keep her
flesh well. She is very subject unto Impostumes, which happen upon her head,
and those of a yellow color, and they must be anointed with butter or hens
grease about three times: then leaving off to do any more unto them, for the
space of three days, you shall then take them in hand again, and open them
gently, whereupon you shall see coming out of them thick matter, like unto an
eggs yelk. Which done, you shall anoint the said Impostumes very well with the
foresaid grease, and thus you shall do as often as they shall return. This
bird is likewise troubled with melancholy sometimes, and then the end of her
rumpe would be cut and wrung out very well, giving her of these herbs,
lettuses, beets, and such like. But and if for all these things, you see that
the Canarie-bird does not amend the better; you shall cool her with a little
of the seed of melons, giving it her to eat, and you shall put into her
water-pot a little Sugar-candie, twice, or thereabout, and that so much as may
endure and l^st one whole week: which may be done likewise when she is in
health twice a month.

When the Canari^-bird mouteth, The Canarie-^bird (...)
give her of the seeds of melons, and sprinkle her with a little good wine, in
such sort as has been said in speaking of other birds, and that twice or
thrice a week, setting her afterward in the Sun, and by this means, you
shall make her mout more properly. This course you shall likewise practice if
she have lice, The Canarybird ha^ing (...).
to kill the vermin that would wast and consume her, that so she may be
preserved.

CHAP. LVIII.
Of the Linnet, and of her diseases.
THe Linnet is a good and melodious bird, The Linnet.
even that which is taken in her nest. Sometimes she will be melancholicke: she
hunteth the mountains amongst the M^ttle bushes, Boxe-trees, Iuniper-trees,
and Bay-trees: she makes her nest of very small roots, and other matter like
unto feathers. This bird brings forth young ones thrice a year. (...).
She is subject unto the disease called the pthisicke, which may be perceived
by the seeing of her melancholic, and her feathers standing in staring wise,
and by her belly, which then will show it self, somewhat more puffed up than
ordinary, full of red veins, and her breast lean, and by seeing her spill
and pecke mustard seed. This disease comes to her by feeding upon
mustard seed, which is very hot: wherefore it were better to give her pannicke,
(...).
or else continuing to give her mustard seed, to use withal this remedy:
which is, when you see her troubled with this disease, to cut the end of her
^umpe, and to give her Sugar-candie, or some other sine sugar to drink: and
for her meat, you shall give her beets, lettuses, and other such like herbs
to eat; as namely, sometimes some mercury. If you have used to feed her
before with mustard seed, you must give her pannicke to eat, to cool her
withal, or else the seed of melons well husked, and to continue the same meat
the space of three days. Her ordinary meare must be of the said berbes.
Besides this, you shall put into her c^ge a little earth, and that in such
sort, as shall seem good unto you: howbeit, it would be best to put theirin
some beaten mortar, or some clay, to the end that feeding upon it, she may be
healed.

The Linnet is likewise subject unto the straitness or conuulsion of the
breast, wherefore being oppressed with this disease, you shall feed her with the
seeds of melons, and in her water you shall steep some Sugar-candie, or else
small mor^els of past. You shall put therein furthermore a little piece of
licoras, to the end the water may somewhat ^aste of it; and so you must
continue it for the space of five days, one day always betwixt, that is to
say, one day, and not the other. Seeing to it, that you give her a beet leaf,
or some other, upon the day that you shall give her pure water to drink. The
same remedy will serve to help her to her voice again, i^ the bird were
hoarse, for thereby she shall ^ind her self well: notwithstanding that there
are but few that escape of the Phthisicke. You shall use the like remedies for
the benefit of other birds, which are found to be grieved with such diseases,
as those are, whereof we will now speak.

CHAP. LIX.
Of diverse infirmities happening to little cage birds, together with their
remedies.
AMongst other diseases of birds, they are subject easily to loose their sight,
and become blind, if it be not speedily looked to, and especially the Spinkes.
Wherefore, for their better recour^rie before they be quite blind, you shall
take beets and draw the juice out of them, mingling it with a little sugar, and
with this licour, you shall make her drink for the space of three days, to be
taken every second day, after the manner that we have spoken of in the behalf
of the linnet. And you shall lay in her cage a stick of the wood of the
fig tree, in such sort as that the bird may use it for a perch, and rub her
eyes against it, for the curing of them: which remedy will then be expedient,
when you perceive their eyes to begin to shed tears, and their feathers begin
to stare and stand up. When they shall be troubled with impostumes, (...)
you shall use the same remedies which we have spoken of in the chap^er of the
Canarie bird.

But in as much as it often falls out, that birds do break their legs, I
have thought it good to teach you the way to heal them ^ you shall give them
their meat in the first place, (...).
in the bottom of the cage: secondly, you shall take away their rods and
pearches, that so they may not thereby take occasion to be hopping to look for
their meat, and so thereby to labor and stir their leg, because by
stirring thereof, they perish and are spoiled. And this course will likewise
serve when any bird has her thigh broken. And I would advertise you not to
bind or swaddle it after the manner of the world, for so you should cause some
impostume to grow in the place where you did bind and tie it. You shall do
that which has been said very easily* if you lay her meat in the bottom and
lowest part of the cage; all manner of pearching being cut off by the taking
away of the rods and sticks which were in it for that purpose, and keeping
them in some by-place for fear, that by the hearing of noise, they should
beat and shake themselves, letting their leg or thigh which they shall have
broken remain untied and unbound; for nature will heal it, and make it to
grow together again speedily.

CHAP. LX.
The manner how to serve ones turn of birds, when he would take and catch
them, and how to make them sing.
NOtwithstanding that all birds, except the Spinke, do sing in Winter, as by
name the Finch, the Linnet, the Miskin, and other such like: there are some
found notwithstanding, which being come out of the mue, do give over their
singing, because of the said mue. Wherefore from the beginning of May you shall
purge them, which you would use for your purpose, to catch other birds withal,
in such manner as follows. You shall give them in the first place of the juice
of beetes mingled with a little pure water, and the day following, you shall
give them a leaf of the said herb. The third day following, you shall keep
them close in the house, setting them upon the ground, that so they may eat
their meat upon it, for the space of ten days, withdrawing them by little and
little, day after day, from the light, into some obscure and dark place. And
when they have thus pas^ed over ten days, you shall give them some beets
again, and shut them up in some square chest in a dark and by-place. At the
evening, you shall dress them with a lamp, so dealing, as that the said birds
may see the same light for the space of two hours, during which time, you may
make clean her water-pot, changing their mustard seed every eight day, and
giving them of the leaves of beets every fourth day, and every twentieth day of
the juice thereof, especially, unto the spink, being the most subject of all
others to become blind. And that you may keep them without lice, you must
change their cage every twenty days, as also for another reason, which is
because of the filth and stench thereof, which might easily kill them. Thus you
must still be practicing of these courses, unto the tenth of August, which
term being expired, you shall purge them anew in like manner as before,
suffering them by little and little more freely to see the light, until the
twentieth of the same month, taking heed that they come not in the Sun. Thus
they will serve you very well to take and catch birds withal in September and
October, and finally in all the rest.

CHAP. LXI.
Of the Misken.
AMongst the little birds of the cage, the Misken The Mis^^n.
is a of cheerful nature, and sings sweetly and delightsomely: she is
exceeding pleasing unto the sight. She breeds thrice a year, first about the
end of April, amongst the shrubs or hedges of iuie or laurel, secondly, about
mid-May, and thirdly and lastly, in the end of ^une: and this is their
ordinary and most common course; for sometimes they come sooner or latter,
more or less. Their nests are made of the most ^ine roots of herbs, and
oftentimes of the leaves of reeds, according as the place will afford them
where they nest.

To seed the Misken taken out of her nest, you shall give her of a sheep
heart mi^^^ed very small, taking away the fat and sinews, or else of a calves
or heyfers hea^^, taking from it likewise the sinews and the fat, all the rest
being well beaten and shr^^, because of digestion. You shall seed her in her
nest oftentimes, giving her every time a mo^^ell or two, and no more, least
they should die, by being too much filled. And when you shall perceive that the
Misken will ^ate alone, you shall hang at her cage a little of the said heart
minced, not ceasing notwithstanding to feed her, by putting it in her mouth
certain times every day for more as^urednesse. After she has been accustomed
to eat alone, you may give her some paste, feeding her therewithal only, not
giving her any more heart, when she shall be accustomed thereto. Furthermore,
if you have any great desire that she should learn some proper song, take the
pains for to teach her, for it is a bird that is very easy to be taught. The
Miskens, which are taken in birding, prove better and more perfect than the
other. They are wont to continue without singing the space of ten days after
they are taken. You shall feed them, for the space of eight da^es, with new or
dry ^igs, and after you shall begin to give them of the paste which is wont
to be made for the Nightingales, whereof we will speak hereafter: such as are
fed with paste do live longer than those which are fed with nothing but figs.

CHAP. LXII.
Of the solitary Sparrow.
BY nature the solitari^ Sparrow is given to be melancholicke, she loves
by-places, and thereupon comes her name, because they are very solitary, as
namely, the old decayed walls of churches, and other ^^^^habited places, as
being far removed from the company of other birds: she (...) very jealous over
her young ones: she makes her nest in the holes and clefts of old buildings,
and breeds thrice a year: first, in April: secondly, in May: and thirdly,
in June.

If you will bring up, and take any pleasure by the solitary Sparrow, which
have taken young in their nests, you must choose the greatest and biggest,
namely such as are well covered with feathers, for else you shall never bring
them to any proof.

If peradventure, (...).
when they are grown thus great, they will not open their bills, you shall open
them, giving them as much as a bird will hold in her bill three or four times.
But and if you perceive that they will eat of themselves, you may put in their
trough or meate-boxe, some of the foresaid heart, not giving over
notwithstanding, to put it into their mouths, until such time as they can
eat alone. But for such as open their bills, you shall feed them with the said
heart, after that you have taken off the skin round about, and the fat also,
and that once every hour or more, if you hear them cry and see them gape.
Put in their cage a little straw or hay, keeping them as neat and clean as
possibly you can; for if you do not, they will become lame, or else die in a
small time. Wherefore you shall do as has been said, until they have mouted,
and afterward if you will keep them in sand, it will be very good: howbeit, I
think it better to keep them in hay all the Winter following. And whenas they
shall eat of themselves, their meat shall be sheep heart small minced, and
sometimes of the paste which is wont to be given to Nightingales. And
sometimes for an extraordinary dish, you may give them hard eggs, as also
raysins.

CHAP. LXIII.
Of the Throstle.
THe Throstle is a bird known to every one, (...).
and she is as good to be eaten, as to sing: she makes her nest in hills full
of snow and ice, upon high trees: it is made of the moss of the wood mingled
with earth, and fashioned of a round form with singular cunning, in the
midst thereof they leave a hole, to the end that it may not fill with water
through long and continual rain, which might prove to the drowning of her
young ones. They breed thrice a year, as other birds do, that is, in April,
May, and June.

The Throstle taken in the nest must be kept and fed in like manner as the
solitary Sparrow, (...).
as well whiles they are young and small, as when they become old and great
ones. Furthermore, you must know that the Throstle is a great deal more
delicate and fine than the solitary sparrow, and has tenderer bones. So that
to preserve and keep her alive, she must be kept very neat and clean. See
that the Throstle which you would bring up and keep, be a great one, and well
feathered: for if you choose her great, and that she begin to eat alone, and to
mout, you shall be the more able to bring her up, and she will prove the
better.

You must note also, (...).
that there are three ^orts of Throstles: those which are best to bring up for
singers, are rather the little ones, than the others, and those which are of a
brown and dark colored feather, called in Italian Tordi sasso^i. On the
contrary, those which are nothing worth to sing, are much greater, and their
feathers of a whiter color, called by the Italians, Tordelli, which in my
judgment are better for the belly than the ear.

CHAP. LXIIII.
Of the Calander, Coridale, and Lark.
COncerning the nature of the Calander, (...) Calander. ^ Cor^dale. ^ Lark.
it is known by the effects, for she is hard to tame, if she be not taken in
the nest: she will be so vexed sometimes as is marvelous, and a thing almost
incredible, for being carried from one place to another; and in this vexation,
she will continue a whole month without singing: yea there have some bin seen
which did never sing again after, except they were brought back to their
accustomed place.

The Lark, notwithstanding that she is disdainefull, does not forsake her
singing in such cases, above two or three days, as does in like manner the
Coirdale. These birds make their nests upon the ground, and in meadows, and
sometimes amongst the corn. Their nests are made of the dry roots of herbs,
and they breed thrice a year: first in the beginning of May, then in the
beginnig of June, and lastly about mid July. Notwithstanding they differ herein
sometimes, according to the season and time, as do all others.

These three sorts of birds, as they are of one and the same nature, so they
are fed and eat after one manner. For their ordinary meat and feeding shall
be no other than that we have said to be good for the other birds: namely, the
heart of a sheep beaten and minced very small. If they eat not alone, you
shall feed them very diligently in their nests, according as you shall see it
needful. Look to it, that they continue not too long in their nests, for
fear they should become lame. But after certain days put them in their cage
strawed with sand, and there leave them day and night. Being accustomed to eat
alone, you shall give them heart mingled with the grain, called of the Latins
Far, or else with paste which is made for Nightingales, and therewith you shall
feed them, till they become great ones, and stand upon their feet. Afterward
you shall scatter some of the aforesaid corn called Far, amongst the sand of
the cage, to the end that the birds may learn to know of themselves, the said
corn amongst the sand, and to pecke it now and then, continuing
notwithstanding to feed them, and to put into their mouths of sheep heart,
according to your former custom. But when these birds begin to mout, you may
give them hemp-^eed, spelt, and the ^i^tings of corn. You shall also, put into
their cages a piece of dry mortar, or else of the pu^^ice stone, or of clay,
whereupon the birds may sharpen and rub their bills, which is very apt to grow
blunt with pecking: and to the end that they mae eat some of it also
sometimes; for it is a thing that does them much good, and serves for to purge
them.

CHAP. LXV.
To make the paste which the Nightingales eat, being likewise good for the
solitary Sparrow, Miskins, Blacke-birds, Throstles, and many other birds.
PAste for the said birds (whereof we have made mention before) must be made
after this manner: take the meal of white Cich-pease, and boult it diligently
with a boulter, as is used to be done with wheat meal, and in such quantity,
as you shall see to be needful. For example: Let the quantity of meal be
two pounds, with one pound of sweet almonds chosen and husked, which afterward
you shall ^ake and stamp very well, in such sort as is used when paste for
march-paines is to be made. Herewithall, you must have three ounces of fresh
butter, which butter you shall put into a copper vessel tinned, and mix
therwithall the said flower and almonds together. After that you have done
this, you shall set the said vessel upon charcole fire, that so it may not
smell of smoke, s^i^^ring it diligently whiles it is upon the sire, with a
wooden spoone, that so it may bo^le by little and little, putting thereto the
yelkes of two eggs, and a little saffron: when you perceive the butter to begin
to melt, you shall furthermore drop into it of liquid honey, so much as shall
serve for the incorporating of the paste, and bringing of it into corns, still
continuing to stir it with a spoone, ^or fear the fire should make it burn
too. When you have thus done, you shall take a Colander made with such holes,
as will let pass so much at once, as the birds (for which you make it) will
eat. And when the paste is thus strained through the Colander, and the corns
made in such quantity, and quality, as is requisite for the necessity of the
birds, you shall take the past which could not pass through the said
Colander, so far forth as that the whole may come to be of a just consistence.
And for the keeping of it, you must pour honey above, handling and stirring of
it cunningly, and so you shall be stored of provision for six months.

CHAP. LXVI.
The way to know many and sundry maladies which do happen unto birds.
IT is apparent, that the diseases of birds are diverse, and the diversity
thereof causes diverse effects, and diverse signs, which lying hidden, the
disease continues unknown, and so there is no administering of any thing, in
as much as it is not known, whence it comes, that they are in that case, nor
what disease it is, nor what medicine or remedy is good or convenient for the
curing thereof. Wherefore it is necessarily required, that there should be good
regard given unto the outward signs, by them to know the mischief that
lurketh within, and that no les^e in the behalf of birds, than generally of
all other creatures. Wherefore I have endeavored my self, briefly to collect
and gather into this Chapter, whatsoever has been delivered scatteringly and
diffusedly elsewhere, in the touching of the infirmities and diseases that are
incident unto birds, and of the knowledge thereof; for the benefit and
instruction of such as would know the diseases whereunto such birds as they
delight in, and love to keep, are subject.

Birds therefore are subject, (...).
amongst other diseases, unto impostumes, which do happen unto them, and
appear in the head of a yellow color, as great as a Hemp Seed* yea, sometimes
as big as a Pease: a disease commonly haunting all birds, especially those
which are of a hot complexion.

Another kind of disease with which birds are troubled, (...).
is called the subtle disease, Pthisis: for the bird that is troubled with this
disease, swelle^h in her body, as having it every where beset with veins
full of blood, the breast notwithstanding being thin and lean: and
furthermore, the bird so diseased, does nothing but take, ^ast away, or
ouer-turne her meat and Hempe-seed.

The gow^ is another sort of disease common unto birds, (...).
and vexing them ^ore: for when as they are diseased thereof, they can neither
stir nor stand, because of the pain they do endure. This disease is known
by the roughness of their legs and feet.

The difficulty of breathing, (...)
or hard drawing of their breath, troubles them also: and it is known by
their hoar^enes^e, so as that they cannot utter their t^nes: or if they do,
yet very h^rshly and imperfectly: or else by their not saying any thing at all.
You shall lay your hand upon her breast, and by that also you shall perceive
it: for you shall feel an extraordinary beating, as showing it self to come
from some oppression and great difficulty: by all which you may gather for
certain, that she is infected with this disease.

Oftentimes it likewise comes to pass, (...)
that they cry and cast forth lamentable noises, complaining themselves,
which declares evidently, that they have the disease called Asthma, or
shortness of breath.

Birds also oftentimes fall blind: (...).
which, if it be not quickly helped, they will never be cured: and this
disease is perceived by the trickling of tears from their eyes, and by
certain feathers about their eyes, which do curle and crook by turning in
again.

The falling sickness is likewise incident unto birds: (...)
whereof they are scarce ever cured: for there is no other remedy for it, but
to keep the bird which you bring up, from the Sun in Summer: if she escape
the first time, you must cut the nails of her feet, and besprinkle her well
with good wine: purge her often.

Some say, (...)
That birds are subject to the disease called the Pip: which is false: for the
disease which they call the Pip, is not the Pip in effect, but another disease,
which grows in the bills of birds, for which it is good to use this remedy:
Take the seed of Melons, and steeping them in pure water, make them to drink
thereof three or four days, and perceiving the bird to grow better, you shall
give her a little fine Sugar, tempered likewise with sugared water.

It is hard to know when the bird has the disease of the rumpe: The disease of
the rumpe.
and for my part I cannot tell how to give you a better sign thereof, than her
growing melancholic, as by surceasing and abstaining to sing. The remedy is,
to cut away half of the sharp point which she has there, for you shall not
devise to do her so great good any other ways. This is a grief which all
birds are troubled withal, even those that are kept in the cage.

Besides the diseases before named, birds have sometimes the flux of the b^lly
The flux of the belly.
which is known, by their making of their dung more thin and liquid than
ordinarily they were wont, by the beating of their tail, and in that they
keep it close and near together. The remedy is, to cut the feathers of their
tail, and those also which are about the fundament, anointing it with a
little oil: And in stead of Hempe-seed, you shall give her the seeds of
Melons for the space of two days. But and if these be birds which use not to
eat any Hempe-seed, but heart, or paste, defer not to take it from her, and
in place thereof to give her hard roasted eggs, in such sort as we have said
before.

CHAP. LXVII.
Of the diseases that happen particularly to every particular sort of birds.
AS concerning old Nightingales of the cage, The dise^s^^ proper to the
Nightingale, and to these birds following.
they are subject unto gowts and conuulsions in the breast: unto which diseases
the solitary Sparrow is also subject, besides the falling sickness, or
giddiness of the head.

The Linnet is troubled with the subtle, or close and secret disease, more
than any other bird, Linne^.
as also with hot apostemes, conuulsions, and gowts.

The Finch is wont to have impostumes, Finch.
and the subtle disease.

The Siskin, Siskin.
on the contrary, is not to subject unto diseases, both because she is of a
better complexion, as also of more strength. And this is the cause likewise why
she seldom times falls blind.

The Spinke Spinke.
is more subject to blindness than all the rest: and when she is once
overrun of this disease, she is no more worth any thing, for she will ever
and anon fall into it again of set purpose.

Two only diseases do voluntarily molest the Goldfinch, Goldfinch.
that is, the subtle disease, caused through old age, and impostumes,
proceeding of the eating of Hemp Seed.

The same two diseases we find to befall the Canarie bird of Spain: Canari^
bird.
howbeit, the subtle disease is seldom times found to trouble her: she is
also subject to the conuulsion and oppression of the breast, because of her
excessive natural heat. The Miskin is more subject unto the gowt than any bird
that is. The solitary Sparrow is haunted with impostumes and melancholy,
which causes her often to die. The Corydale Corydale.
falls blind sometimes, and sometimes she is troubled with the subtle
disease. A^ it also happens unto the other kind of Lark, L^rke.
which has no crest upon her head. The Calander Calander.
likewise is subject unto the subtle disease, apostemes, gowts: and that which
is worse, namely, to become quickly blind. The bird, called in Latin Thraupis,
is likewise very subject unto impostumes, and oftentimes dies of fat. The
strongest and stoutest bird that can be, is the Blacke-bird, Blackbird.
wherein I cannot find any disease to kill her, except old age, which is the
common malady devouring all mortal things. Fat and impostumes do sometimes
hurt the Throstle, as also the disease of the rumpe, which is likewise common
to all birds that are kept in the cage. (...)


CHAP. LXVIII.
Birds are to be purged, at what time, and how often in the year.
NIghtingales and all other kind of birds which eat heart and paste, must be
purged at the least once every month with two or three worms out of the
pigeon house every time: two days after, put into her water-pot the quantity
of a nut, of sine sugar, and when her voice fails her, you must put into the
said water, some licoras, as namely, so much as may give some taste to the
water, and this will clear her voice very exceedingly. The foresaid purgation
is very needful when they are about to moute. The cage must never be without
earth or sand. She must be sprinkled over with wine at the least twice a week,
to further her in her mouting, and for the better preserving of her life,
setting her afterward in the Sun, (...) she be almost dry: the like course
must be taken when she is troubled with li^e: and if you give her any dry
figs, they will much rejoice her.

CHAP. LXIX.
To purge birds that feed upon Hempe-seed.
BIrds that eat Hempe-seede, shall take for to purge them the seeds of melons
husked, and herbs (as you shall think good) namely Succorie, Beets, Lettuses,
Scariole, and Mercury, which is principally good for the Linnet, but give them
what herbs you please; for they are very good to (...) to purge them: yea, and
though they have no need to be purged, yet you (...) not cease continually to
be giving of them some, giving then furthermore, amongst* either earth or dry
mort^^ in their cage, to the end they may eat of it, or dust themselves in it
at their pleasure and convenient time, which is very wholesome for them: and
likewise you must give them some Sugar, as you have been taught before. You
shall perceive when the bird would moute by the feathers in her cage, and then
you shall besprinkle her lightly with wine, as we have already spoken before.
Some birds mout in the end of Iulie, and others in the end of August. Those
which are taken in the nest begin to mout as soon as they be bred, and their
mouting continues a month. You shall besprinkle them with wine at the least
twice a week, to cause them to mout the sooner.

CHAP. LXX.
To know how long the birds live.
IF any man desire to know how long these birds live, let him know that amongst
Nightingales, some live three years, some five, and others unto eight, and
sing until that time, but from that time forward they are not any longer in
perfection, but decline by little and little. It has bin seen that
Nightingales have lived till they have been fifteen years old, and continued
singing every day les^e or more, so that it may seem that they live according
to the good ordering which they have, or else according to their good
complexion. The Miskins being subject to the gowt, do live but a short time,
as three or four years at the most. The life of the Miskin, the solitary
Sparrow, and the fi^ch.
The solitary Sparrowes live in good state and account for the space of five
years: many of them die of the subtle disease, some of impos^umes, others of
gowts, and some young ones of the falling sickness. Finches live ten, yea,
fifteen, and twenty years, more or less, according unto their complexion:
and they are always in good plight, singing unto the last day of their life.
The Linnet is short-liued, The l^fe of the Linne^, the S^kin, and the Spinke.
because she is subject unto the subtle disease: some live two years, some
three, and some five, according to their manner of ordering and governing. The
Siskins live, some five, others eight years, by reason of their good
complexion, and because they are not so subject unto diseases as other birds.
The Spinke lives but a short time, because they are subject to blindnes^e:
some live one year, some two, others till four: many of them die of the
falling sickness, because they have been set forth into the Sun in the
Summer time, whereby the heat has searched and penetrated into their brain.
The Calanders, Corydales, and Larkes, The l^fe of the Calander, Corydale, and
Lark.
live alike long, the one sort and the other, as three or five years. Some
Calanders do live longer than the Corydales: but she grows melancholy,
being removed out of one place into another. The Canarie bird lives long, as
five, ten, and fifteen years: The life of the Canarie bird, and of the
Thra^pis.
yea, there have some been seen to live twenty years, continuing always
good. The Thraupis is of the continuance of six years, or thereabout,
according as she is kept better or worse. It is a bird that is not much
regarded: for her singing is but irksome and tedious; some take pleasure in
it, and some do not.

CHAP. LXXI.
The manner of taking small birds, as well those which sing, as those which are
for to eat: as also all other sorts of small birds.
TO take birds with the voice of some leaf, To take birds with a chirp or ^all,
knife, or such other like thing, a man must stand in a bush, shadowing
himself with the leaves thereof, and with a whistle make a noise or cry,
counterfeiting some bird that has been taken before, or is then taken. Some
take a Sparrow, being kept somewhat near, and held in a snare, and make her
cry, pinching together her wings or legs, and then the birds will flock
about her to aid her, thinking, that the Owl has caught her: and having set
lime-twigges or lime-bushes upon the branches of the trees, the birds that
shall come to succor her, and lighting, will be limed.

To take Spinkes as they are going, To take birds as they are ^eeding, or going.
that is to say, in the place where many Spinkes are wont to pass, you must
enuiron their trees (after they have been cut and planted in a plain ground,
one distant from another some small distance, as three foot, or thereabout)
with leaves below, as if it were a lodge, and amongst them lay a coard, made
fast unto a bough, and carried up on the other side with some prop: this shall
be held by a man placed a good way off, and on the said bough shall be hanged
and made fast two or three Spinkes: then you must set the said trees very
choicely and thin with lime-twigges, and some distance off from thence, two
or three cages, wherein there shall be some Spinkes, for to call to such flocks
as shall come flying that way, which perceiving those in the cages, as also
those which are hanged upon the stick, will li^e themselves on the trees.

To take Pattridges with the Tonnell, To take birds with the Tonnell.
or Tombrell, there must a man be placed behind a Cow or a Horse, of wood, or
of o^^er, painted in such sort, as that it may resemble the fashion of a Cow or
a Horse, and in the mean time he shall ouer-cast the nets upon the
Partridges. This kind of taking of Partridges is now adays forbidden.

To take Partridges and Woodcocks in the night with fire, you must light a
match of old dry vvoollen clouts, take birds (...) fire.
dipped in melted tallow, wrapping them up afterward together in form of a
torch, as thick as ones arm, and of the length of a foot: then you must
astonish and amaze the Partridges in such sort, as that they may cast
themselves into the nets, wherewith they shall be beset and compassed.

To take birds with your hand, take birds (...) the hand.
you must scatter, in some plain and smooth piece of ground, Corn or Millet,
steept in the lees of good wine, and the juice of Hemlock, and afterward dry
them, whereof when the birds shall have eaten, they will not be able to fly
afterward, so that one may take them with his hand.

To kill birds with the Long-bow, (...) take birds (...) the long (...).
or Stone-bow, upon houses, trees, or butts, it is requisite, that he that
shoots, should have double shafts, forked before, when he would kill
Geese, or other great birds, and those very sharp every where, to the end
they may cut off the vving, or the neck, where they shall touch them: for to
strike them with the common shaft, would not so hurt the bird, as that she
might be constrained to abide in the place, for she would fly away,
notwithstanding that she were hurt or shot through, although she would die
thereof in another place.

The end of the seventh and last Book of the Country House.
FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE MATTERS contained in the seven Books of the Country House.
A
ABel borne the fourth of the Moon, a good day. 32 Abrecock-tree and
Abrecocks, how planted, 378. being grafted, are very tender in the time of
frost. 372 Acornes to grow Oaks upon, how they must be sown and husbanded.
655 An Acre of ground how much it contains. 518 Adam created the first day of
the Moon. 32 Agr^monie, 25. their virtues. ibid. A good Air is a necessary
thing to a Farm. 4 Alberges, or small Peaches. 372 Alembecks of glass, how
they must be ordered. 446 Alembecks of the Venetians, 445. how to choose them
of glass. 446 Alembecks for distillations. 447 Alkermus, and the confection
thereof. 487 Alkakengi, and the virtues and statutes thereof. 288 Alleys. 235
Aller trees and Aller plots, 504. how planted. 660 Almond trees, where and when
to be planted. 307 Bitter Almonds made sweet. 371 Almonds without shell, and
naturally written upon. ibid. Amel corn. 551 Angel^ea, and his virtues, 199.
the compound water thereof. ibid. The Angeuins lovers of their profit. 23 Aniou
a good soil. 12 Annise. 249 Ants spoiling Trees and Vines, 405, 406. to drive
away Ants. 314 Apple Trees, in what ground they grow best, and how grafted,
360. most precious and most in request of all other trees. 379 How to keep
Apples, 408. golden Apples, 253. how to have red Apples, 365. Apples with short
starts, 380. Apples of love, 252. marvelous Apples, 287. brought by Monsieur
du Bellay, B. of Man's, 288. Apples of yellow color, 364. Apples of two tastes,
ibid. wild Apples distilled. 454 Aqua vitae often distilled, 455. and whereof
it must be made, ibid. it has infinite virtues. 456 Aquitaine, a country
fruitful in all manner of good things. 12 Arach the herb, and the
observations thereof. 174 Arh^rs for Gardens, and woods fit tor them. 282
Arb^rs of the Kitchen Garden. 156 The Arders of Arable ground. 531 An Arpent of
ground how much it contains. 518 Ars^^art, why so called, and the properties
thereof. 197 Artichokes, 170. their virtues and manner of dressing, and the
Moules and Mice are enemies unto them. ibid. Asarum Bacchar, and the virtues
thereof, 198. good for a quartane Ague. 40 Ashes make a lean ground. 6 Ashes
cluttering together like balls, a sign of rain. 25 Ash-tree distilled, and
the oil thereof. 482 A^peragus may be grown of sheep horns. 183 Asses to
plow withal, 539. Asses fore-shewing rain, 25. 147, 148. the nature, burden,
and goodness of an Ass. ibid. Astrology invented by Shepherds. 110 Auens.
182 Autumn, and the constitution thereof. 34, 126, 366, 380 Auuergne, the
people thereof are industrious and painful, but coveting other men's gain. 23
B
BAdgers or Brocks are of two sorts, their earths. 699 Bay Tree where it must
be sown, 337. in what soil and place it delights, 396. the faculties
thereof, 397. Bay Tree keeps the house from lightning, ibid. Bakehouse
belonging to the ^arme. 570 That a Bailife of Husbandry cannot carry such an
affection and vigilant eye as the Fa^mor. 15 Balm, 252. it increases milk in
Kyne, 496. Balm distilled. 453 Balmes artificially made, and the description
thereof, and their kinds, 437. Balmes of S. lohns wort, 205. excellent Balmes
of the herb Nicotiana. 223 Barbell the fish. 507 Barbes in Calves. 63 Barley,
when and in what grounds it must be sown, 554. to prepare mundified Barley,
555. Barley must be sown in dust. 542 Barnes, where and how they must be made
and seated. 18 Basil sown, puts forth at the end of three ^aies, 161.
Basil and Amber are at perpetual hatred, 242. Basil causes ache and
scorpions in the head, 243. Basil distilled. 454 Basse^s, or earth-dogges, and
how they must be ordered and saved, 702. Bassets of two sorts, ibid. and how to
train them up and nurture them. 700 Bastard Dittanie, otherwise Fraxinella,
breaks the stone. 207 Marus Bath, 442. the pattern thereof, 443. Mary's Bath
multiplied. 442, 443 To Bat^le ground, and with what manner of dung. 537
Against Ba^s. 315 Beans, what soil they crave, 561. and why there are many
fools whiles they are in flower, 562. Beans amend the ground where they are
sown, 11. to cause Beans to be quickly sodden, 569. flowers of Beans
distilled for to keep. 465 ^ards of Goats. 238 ^ares-breech. 203 (...)* when
to be bought and killed, 30 of a double kind of life, 506. Beasts, or their
parts distilled, 470. to tame wild Beasts, 670. signs foretelling death of
Beasts. 29 (...) scarce of water, 6. it bears Ri^ contrary to his nature,
10. the people of Beauce are laborious. 23 (...) of diverse sorts, according to
the diversities of Countries, and the manner of making of them, and then
temperature, 587, 590. it fatteth Hens and C^pons. 591 (...), the profit of
them, and how they must be ordered, 316, 317. what manner of ones they must be,
318. how they must be handled, 319. their conditions, 321. their chast^tie,
sobriety, and neatness, 322. their kings, and wa^res among themselves, 323,
324. their kings must be killed, which are the cause of their contention, and
what be their marks, ib^a. Bees that are cruel, 326. swarms of Bees, and
their fights, ibid. what diseases Bees are subject unto, and their remedies,
326. they are engendered of a putrified carcass, 320. their ^ot going far
from their hiues, a sign of rain. 25 (...) ringing clearer and louder than
ordinary, a ^igne of aine. 25 ^^aiamine borne the 23. d^y of the Moon. 34
(...), 173. and the special observations about the same, ibid. (...) tree.
665, 666 ^^esonie, ^02. Betonie distilled, 453. wat^r Betonie, 211. Paul's
Betonie, 204. called the Leapers herb, and why. ibid. (...) or Oxen for the
plough, 539. fierce and cruel Beeues how tamed, 92. of their diseases, 9^, 94.
three Beeues will not plough so much ground as one horse, 91. great Beeues of
Languedo^ or Prouence, 103. to cause Beeues to have a good stomach, 436. to
fat Beeues to sell, 104. how they sore-shew rain, 25. to cure the^, being
bewitched, 187. the stable for Beeues, and how it must be built. 90 Birds of
all sorts, their taking. 931 (...) was not accounted of, of old, 704. and all
the sorts of Birds. ibid. (...) of the Cage, with their diseases and remedies,
724. the manner of taking of them, and how to make them sing, ibid. and to
keep them from having lice, ibid. the taking of singing Birds. 715 Canarie
Birds, how they may be known from others, and their diseases. 722 Birds of the
Prey and Fawlco^^ie, and their food, 705, 706. their diseases and remedies,
ibid. ravenous Birds. 707 To purge Birds that eat Mustard seed, 730. the
diseases incident to ^uerie kind of Bird, 729. to know how long every Bird
lives in his kind, 730. Birds their bathing, a sign of rain, 25. what Birds
are good to make Hawks, 705. and that there are ten kinds of them. ibid.
Bird-cages, how made and placed. 18 (...) of two sorts, and where planted. 212
Biscuit. 582 Bistor^. 20^ Bitter Cherry-t^ee. 374 Bla^k birds are notable birds,
not subject to any diseases, 729. and their food. 727 ^lanch, what kind of
corn. 218 B^as^hemie makes a man contemptible. 23 Man^ Blood and Goats blood
distilled, 457. Drakes blood and the virtues thereof, ibid. Goats blood good
against the stone. 120 ^loud-sackers swallowed by an ox^* 96. or by a sheep.
116 ^^rage, and his virtues. 175 Wild ^or^ and Sow, how they differ, 69^. wild
Bo^es the murderers of dogs, 692, 693. the hunting of them is dangerous,
690. they use no turns, 691. how to kill them, ibid. and what good comes of
the killing of them, 692. the best time to hunt them, and the signs of a good
one, 690. the difference betwixt them and tame Hogs, 691. his wounds are
dangerous, 690. after four years they do nothing but grow leaner. ^7^ Box-tree
the death of Bees. 285 Branne of meal. 573 Bread, the making thereof, 571. the
differences of corn, whereof it is made, ibid. the differences of bread, 580.
Bread of diverse sorts, according to the di^ersitie of Corn and Countries, 576.
repletion of bread, the worst kind of repletion, 580. Bread called (Pa^n
M^lle^) or Pain de bouch^, 578. spiced bread, 579. old bread is evil for the
body, 582. the diverse uses of bread, 583. tosted bread after meat, ibid.
washed bread good (...) the health, ibid. Biscuit, 582, 579. Bread distilled.
465 Brewhous^ for Beer. 587 Bridann^a^x, what kind of paste-mea^ they be. ^85
Brocks are of two sorts, 699. their earths, ibid. they are more hard to take
than Foxes, and what their nature is, 702. wherefore their flesh is good. 698
Broom, 285. Butchers Broom. 290 Brye situate between the rivers of Seyne
and Ma^ne, and therefore plentiful in fruit and corn, to, the people of Brye
are subtle, fierce, and ra^h. 23 Bubbles great in the water, are a sign of
^aine. 25 B^ssles, or wild Beeues, 103. to plow with them. 540 He that has
Bugle and Sanicle, cares not for the Surgeon of a bugle. 20^ Buglosse. 175
Building, as it is now used is differing from that of old, 1. where and how to
^eat your buildings, 6. the building and, enclosing of a Farme-house, 14. to
build on the top of high ground. 10 Building must be answerable to the revenue.
18 Bul^ing house, where it should be. 16 Bulls, and the marks of a good Bull,
62. one Bull to 60. Kyne, 104. Bulls tied to a Figtree, become gentle. 294
Bu^gundians are free and willing, but headstrong. 23 Burnet, and his virtues,
171. distilled. 461 Butter, and how it must be made, 64, 65. and where it must
be made. 16 Butter^lies eating Bees. 226 More, and more foolish Buyers, than
sellers. 3 Buzzards and Sparrow-hawkes do differ, the manner how to take and
feed them, and to cure their diseases. 708
C
CAbb^ges of all sorts, how they must be husbanded, 165. when to be sown, 160.
old Cabbage seed brings forth Radishes, 164. certain obse^^ations about
Cabbages, 165. good for all diseases, 166. enemies to Vines and Wine, ibid.
they resist drunkenness, 165. rotten, they hurt their next herbs. ibid.
Great Cages make the birds nothing the better. 13 Cain borne the third day of
the Moon, an ill day. 32 Cakes. 58^ Calves, and how to geld them. 63 Calamint.
244 The Calander her nature. 726 Camomile. 252 The people of Campaigne willing,
but st^^ding in their opinion. 23 A Candle of sheep ^ewe^ keeps mice from
eating clothes in a chest. 116 Canker in trees. 89 Canterburie-bels. 237
Caper-trees, and Capers, 291. Distilled Capers. 467 In what things Carters must
be cunning and expert. 123 Caraway. 249 Carets. 158, 186 Carps, how to fish for
them. 507 Carpenters herb. 496 Carpinus, a kind of Oak tree* 666
Caterpillars of the Garden die by the terms of women, 314. to cleanse the
trees from their hearts, 403. to help the Vines from being spoiled of them.
607 Cathltican distilled. 462 Cato a great husbandman. 4 Cats, licking the
soles of their feet, and reaching over their ears therewith, a sign of rain.
25 Caves and Cellars. 17 Cedar trees. 285 Celondine, 198. good for the eyes,
310. a compound water of Celondine. 461 Cements to ouer-draw cesternes withal,
and the composition and making thereof. 9 Centuarie, the sotts and virtues. 212
Ceruise-tree, male and female, in what soil it delights, and the natures of
the fruit. 395 The making of drink of Ceruises. 419 Cesternes requisite in
gardens that are dry and destitute of water, 6. in what place they are to be
situated and fitted, ibid. Eeles must be fed and kept in them, and wherefore.
ibid. Chalk makes a lean ground. 6 The Farmois Chamber. 16 The men servants
their Chamber. ibid. Chamlet made of Goats hair. 117 Chanaan borne the 12. of
the Moon, a dangerous day. 33 The people of Chartres are painful, peaceable,
handsome, and given to lay up. 23 Cheese of all sorts, 65. and the way to make
it. ibid. Cheese for the Linnet. ibid. In what place Cheese must be laid up to
keep. 16 Cherries sweet, 375. Cherries without stones, 361. spiced Cherries,
362. Cherries early ripe, 363. Cherries at all times, 365. how to keep them
good and sound, 407. Cherries preserved, 421. the space to be allowed betwixt
Cherrie-trees. 399 Cheruile. 182 Chestnut tree the most esteemed amongst trees,
649. and in what season it must be planced, 36. what ground it loves best, and
the nature thereof, 391. of the fruit, ibid. to make them grow of seed. 655
Chestnuts planted, 338. how to keep them. 407 Chibols and Cyues. 158, 177
Chickens of diverse colors. 73 Children borne the first day of the new Moon,
do live long. 32 Ciehlings, a kind of Peason. 563 Cider invented by the
Normans, 409. and how it must be made, ibid. etc. the virtues of Cider, 414.
Tastelesse and mungrell Ciders. 416 Cinnamon distilled. 480 Cinque^^ile. 104
Citron trees, 297. the manner to plant them, 302. bearing red fruit, 363. how to
keep them. 408 Citruls in what quarter of the Moon to be gathered. 31
Cipresse tree, male and female. 282 Clapper, or Warren, and storing thereof.
645, 646 To Clod the earth. 541 C^mpound water of trees. 461 Cl^uds dark and
thick, a great sign of rain. 26 The nature of the Lark called Cochenis, 727.
and her feeding. ibid. To cut Coc^rels, or to make them Capons, 77. to fat
Capons, ibid. with speed, 590. to make them lead Chickens, 515. to make their
stones good to make lean men fat, 74. Capons of Man's and Bretaigne. 73 Cocks
and Capons must not have their wings broken, 67. one Cock to a dozen Hens,
ibid. notes of a good Cock, and his color, 68. Cocks crowing at all hours a
sign of rain. (...) How to order and break Colts, 1^8. the marks of a good
Colt, 135. Colts how they must be looked to, 1^6. and to burn them, and slit
their no^^^^ils, ibid. to geld them, 127. the means to make them serviceable.
ibid Colutea. 291 Rock Coms^ey. 202 Great Com^rey. ibid. Compositions of
honey. 230 Con^es are a kind of Hares, 697. those of the Warren how they must
be cared for, and fed, 646. the diffe^ence between those of the Warren and
those of the Clapper. 648 Conserve of the root of Elicampane. 428 Conserve of
Quinces, wherefore good, 376. laxatiue conserve of Quinees. i^id. Constraint is
never good. 12 Sale Cooks, their use of great deceit. 117 Cork trees, what
ground they delight in. 667 Red Corant tree. 342 Coriander. 245 Corn of all
sorts, and the manner of growing them, 548. Seed-Corne how it must be chosen,
543. to sow, ^anne, riddle, and lay up corn upon the end of the Moon, 31.
such diverse sorts thereof as are fit to make bread. 571 Corn of diverse
Countries of France, and which are the best, 571. the grinding of them. 572
Tu^kie Corn, and how it must be husbanded. 553 Sarac^ns Corn, or Wheat. ibid.
Aduertisements concerning all manner of Corn and Pulse. 569, 570 Corne-flagge,
239. distilled. 462 Costmarie, and his properties. 182 The Court next the
dwelling house, and the situation thereof, 15. how it must be walled. 16
Cowcumbers without water, 195. how they may be kept, 281. enemies to oil, 190.
their hu^tful qualities, ibid. observations to be known concerning the same,
194 Cream of milk, and how it must be prepared. 65 Cr^spinet, a singular
herb against the Stone. (...) Cresses, and their faculties. 184 Crows
bathing themselves, and braying at night, are a sign of rain. 25 Crowfoot.
210 Cummin. 249 Curiosity the overthrow of good wits. 1 Curlew. 78
Cuttl^-fishes, and the manner of taking of them. 515
D
Adays work, how much ground it contains. 518 Critical Days concerning
the Moon. 3^ The 12. Days of the feast of the Natiui^itie do prognosticate
the disposition of the whole year. 28 The Huswiues Dairie-house. 16 The
Dairie-woman, and her office, 38. what medicines she is to know for the
diseases of the family. 39 Daisies. 237 Da^es how planted. 338 Date-trees how
planted, 390. male and female, and their nature, 292. what earth they crave*
390 Dates how to be kept. 409 D^^^-wort, 206. distilled. 453 ^earth, and the
signs fore-shewing the same. 29 (...) grounds, how they may be prepared to
bear fruit. 10 (...) ^i^ph^^nicon distilled. 462 (...) Diligence of the
householder does overcome the weakness of the ground. 10 (...). 249 (...)
good kind of Dissembling. 21 (...) by whom it was invented, and the kinds
thereof. 439, 440 (...) of many sorts of waters, with a brief discourse
ther^upon. ibid. (...) what it is. ibid. (...) of Oils and Quintessences, with
a discourse the^eupon. 469 (...) Herbs, Flowers, Ba^kes, and Roots, every one
by themselves. 45^. etc. (...) of Distilling. 440 (...) matter must be prepared
before it be Distilled. 448 (...) Distill by Coldness. 440 with the heat of
Sand. 450 oftentimes one and the same water. 451 what manner of heat is
requisite thereto, ibid. licours, and the manner of ordering all things therein.
454 compound waters three manner of ways, 460. etc. per descensum, 464, 468.
and without heat, ibid. with a filtre. ibid. living things. 458 wood. 480, 481
^^s^ruments and vessels for Distillation. 441 (...) form of Furnaces to
Distill chymicall oyl^^. 471, and 472. ^^ itches for fishes. 508 ^^ ittanie,
and his properties. 210 (...) 203 ^^^ogges, three sorts belonging to a
Farme-house, 120. to prevent their going mad, and how to handle them. 221
^^^^ogge^, their names, ibid. ^^unting Dogg^s are of three sorts in general,
685. their ke^nel^, and feedings, 676. their diseases and cures, 677. etc.
(...) Dogge^, how to train them up to fit them to hunting, to swimming, and
diverse other pretty qualities, 68^. their tumbling upon the ground, a sign of
rain. 25 (...) Mad Dogs. 678 (...) mad Dog having bitten an Horse. ^47
(...) Dogges-tooth, a sign that water will (...) found, if there be pits cast.
7 (...) Dogge-tree, 395. and how to keep the fruit thereof. ibid. ^^he back-
D^re of the house. 18 (...) ground Dung-house, how and where it must be made,
and ^eated. 17 (...) Doue-houses. 86 (...) Dragons great and small, 268.
distilled. 465 (...) Dreams joyful in the new of the Moon. 32 ^^ Drinks
made of fruits, and a discourse of the making of them. 410 ^^ ^rin^e of Sloe^,
419. of Ceruises, 395. the making of the Drinks of Cer^ises. 419 (...), have a
barren seed. 626 (...) Drunkenness how hurtful a thing it is to man. 625
(...) and Drakes how they must be kept and handled, (...) where they must ^it
on nights. ibid. (...) ^ild Ducks made drunk, are easy to take. ^8 (...)
^lesh pleasant to eat. ibid. Ducks blood good against all manner of venime.
^bid. Young Ducks. ibid. Dung of the Stables, where to be laid. 15 What manner
of Dung is to be laid upon the ground. 534 Than Dun^, nothing more dear. 535
Dun^ of diverse sorts, and how and when it must be spread. 536 Dung of
Pigeons, for what ground it is good. 89 Du^g, what is good or evil for the
Vine. 599, 602, 603 Dung of Oxen, Kine, and Sheep, is good for many diseases.
104, 116 of Men, Kine, and Pigeons di^tilled, and their virtues. 557 of Hares
hinde^eth conception in Women, 698 of Hens, swallowed of an Horse, causes
winging in the belly, 147. and causes ha^re to grow again. 74 of Hogs
stays the spitting of blood. 111 of Goats cures the Parotides, Bubo,
Sciatica, and other Apostemes. 120 of ^urtle D^ues, for the spots of the eyes,
84 of the Goose, for the Iaundise. 77 of Dogs, excellent for the Squinancie.
122
To Dung the ground, and what manner of dung it must be. 535 To Dung the ground
in the increase of the Moon. 32 To lay any Dung to Vines, is a damnable thing.
595 There must (...) two Dung^^^ made, and why. 15
E
EAgle, the king of Birds, 707. and the nature of Eagles. ibid. The Earth of a
cold and dry nature, 10. of contrary qualities, according to her particular
plots. ibid. Diverse sorts of Earth, and their diverse manner of tilling and
increase. 11 Blackish and yellowish Earth good and fruitful. 11, 12 E^^on
borne the sixth day of the Moon, a good day. 32 Eeles make the water light. 6
To set Eggs, and how the thing must be ordered, 70. how to have them to prou^
Cock or Hen ^irds, 71. without the heat of any Hen. 72 Eggs of Duckes set
by an Hen, are more worth than their mother. 78 Eggs of Pa^tridges cause
women to be fruitful. 8^ Eggs carried up into the air. 24 To roast E^ges
without fire. 74 Eggs wr^tten within. ibid. To make soft and tender
Egge-shels, and to wast and consume them. 73 Eggs, what are best. 73 Whites of
Eggs distilled. 465 Whites of Eggs, to stay bleeding at the ^ose. 75 Hard
Eggs, to stay the flux of the belly. ibid. The yolk and white of an Egg good
against burning. ibid. Whites of Eggs, against the cough. ibid. Egge-shels,
for the spitting of blood. ibid. The white of an Egg to ioin together ^brok^
glass. ibid. An Egg keeping a garment from burning. (...). Elder-tree, ^86.
distilled. 45^ Elecampane, 198. preserved. ^78 Elmes of three sorts, 662. and
where they must be sown. ^^7 The (...)-grove, and Elmes, 4^^ E^diu^, and
three sorts and properties thereof, 168 Eng^is^ practice add^d to the French. ^
Ephemeron, or Li^ium conuallium. 238 Estri^s, what manner of paste meat. 585
Eve created the second day of the new Moon. 32 E^^es about to lamb. 113 To
Extract any Quintessence. 451, 469 The masters Eye fatteth any horse. 14
Eyebright, and his properties, 197. a compound water of Eye-brigh^. 75
F
A Fad^^^ what manner of measure, and what it contains. 517 F^rmes, and what
thin^s are to be set to farm. 19 Farmors, and their duties, 22. what age and
condition they ought to be of. ibid. Vnfa^thfull Farm^^, and their nature. 15
To bear too strait a hand over the Farmor, makes him either negligent, or
else a thief. 23 What knowledge is requisite for a Farmor. 22 A Farmor must be
true of his word, not given to swear. 23 It must not be looked for, that the
Farmor should do, or have committed to his ^rust, every thing. ibid. Farage,
or mixed p^ouander. 665 It is good to know old (...), but to do as the time
serves, a proverb. 1 Fawlcon, the prince of Hawks, 710 Fawlcon is a word
sometimes signifying all manner of Hawks. ibid. Fawlconr^^ an art, but lately
used. 705 Sheep Fee^, how they must be d^essed to ^at. 11^ The Field is very
badly husbanded, when the Lord thereof knows not to command, 19. How much
ground he is to be allowed for a F^^ld in several, and how to enclose it. 16
Fennel good for sight. 43, 249, 250 Fennel distilled, 453 Fenugreeke. 564
Fermentation. 450 Fern, how it may be rid out of a ground. 10 (...), how
they must be kept and fed, 80. and where they must be lodged. 17 (...) in
what ground they grow best, 11. and their husbandry. 563 F^ther^ew grows in
untilled and rough grounds. 251 F^gge^ laxatiue. 295 To keep Figs green.
294 Figs laden upon Horses and Asses, make them loose all their strength,
ibid. naturally written upon. 363 Figge-trees of their fruits, 2^4. and their
plants, 342. of their diverse kinds, and what soil they crave, 377. when and
how to grant them, ibid. to cause them that they lose not their fruit, 363.
makes Bulls gentle. 294
Filberds, and Filberd trees. 373 Filberds distilled. 453 The Finch the most
beautiful bird of ^ll others, and how she must be fed, and her diseases,
cu^ed. 720 A Fire of coals to dist^ll withal. 450 To make a fire without
smoke. 429 Fishes die with the sound of the Gunne, shot off at wild foul,
508, their ^eeding in standing waters, mecres, and ditches, 509. to draw first
together into one place. 515 Fish, being sick, is refreshed with Parseley. 181
Fishing, and what manner of fishing. is forbidden. 507 The time of fishing. 5^5
Fishing in standing waters, in what season. 30, 31 Flanders abounding with
Islands. 10 Flea^ upon dogs, and how to kill them, 122* bit^^g more than
ordinary, a sign of rain. 25 Flesh distilled. 458 Flower gentle, or purple
velvet flower. 237 The Fl^^ called (...) swallowed by an horse, 147. to d^^ue
away fl^es from horses. 139 (...) 20^ The moss of Fo^e^oot. ibid. Fountains,
and how to try depth of their springs, 8. and the manner of carrying of them
whither one will. ibid. Furnaces for distillation, what manner of ones they
must be, 447. in what places we must set them. 450 Not to shoot at wild soul
in a (...), because it l^^leth since. 508 Wild (...) haunting ^ith-pooles. 506
The ^owles of the yard, and their pearches. 17 Foxes of two sorts, 699. the
manner of taking them. 701 Foxes where they make their earths, 701. then (...)
and ca^e^, (...). the way to take them without h^nting, 702. their pi^^e
s^^nketh, (...). the profit c^mming of their ^lesh. ibid. Frenchmen quick and
hasty, and yet but when there is need. 49 Fri^^ers. 585 Frogs croaking more
than ordina^ie, a sign^ of rain. 25 Frogs distilled. 4^7 Against ^rogges.
315 Fr^st, and how to keep it from hurting ^eedes that are sown. 567 F^uits
for keeping, grow in hot countries, 5. in what season they must be gathered,
31. how to keep them well a long time, 407. to have them exquisite, 360. of
what fashion you will, 363. laxat^ue, odo^^^erous, and having the virtue of
T^^acle, 361, 362 turned into ha^dnesse of stones, 9. precepts concerning the
planting of them. 399
Fruits without any blooming. 364 Fruits distilled. 469 Fruit Trees in what
distance they are to be planted. 398 Of the (...) of many fruits. 360
Fum^to^^e, with his special observations: 212 F^rmentie what it is properly.
552 Furz. 285
G
THe G^ll of a Partridge to clear the sight. 85 The Gall of an Hen^e. 74 The
Gall of an Ox, to what diseases it se^ueth, 104 Garden Madder* 307 Gardens of
their situation, earth, and enclosure, 153, 154, 155. how to make the mould
better, 156. the contriuing of the flowers of the pot-herbe Garden, 157. and
the placing of the beds when it must be sown, 15^. for flowers and sweet
herbs how they must be dressed, 234, 235. when weeded and watered, 162. and
their divisions. 17
Of the two particular Gardens at the end of the kitchen Garden, and of the
Garden of pleasure. 307 Garlic, the virtues and husbanding of it, 179. to
take away the stench remaining after the eating thereof, 179. good to keep
birds from hu^ting of fruits. 180 Garm^n^s for husbandmen. 22 Corn- Garners,
547. on what side they must have light. 16, 17 Garrett. 17 (...) Farms. 4
(...) hot, and soon angry. 23 (...) in the wane of the Moon. 31 (...) and
the manner thereof. 608. the (...) thereto, ib^d^m (...) and their office and
duty. 608 (...) virtues distilled. 196, 197 (...) (...), 76 of great profit
and loss, and how they must be ^ed and handled, and which be the ^^ll, 75.
having ea^en Henban^, or Hemlocke, ^h^y die, ^7. their crying and flying ^ore
than ordinary, a sign of ^aine, 25. their disease 77. their remembrance. 76
(...) ambes, 112. Bulkins, 90. Cal^e^, 63. Colts, 126, 127. Hogge^, 107. all
of them (...) Masters of the only G^^aings of the (...). 127 (...) o^
Q^inces. 420 (...) of all sorts. 2^7 (...), a H^^ke. 712 (...). 210, 211 (...)
that things a Geometrician, or measurer of grounds, is to be ^urnished withal,
519. and how the wo^ke of measuring is to be performed. 522 (...) a (...) may
reduce every parcel of ground into a Quadrangle, ^24. with a b^^efe sum of
the (...) art of ^^^'uring. 525. Instruments and people necessary in the
perfo^mance of the ^ame. 519 ^ Geometrical staff to measure grounds withal.
521 (...) must be kept short. 38 Henne^ (...) 74 (...), and to ^ill them. 314
(...) Kiddes, and their nature, 117. their coat, (...). they are n^uer without
an ague, 119 and the other (...) that ^hey are subject unto, ^b^d. their flesh
causes the (...) sickness. ibid. ^^le- G^ats, and their nature. 118 (...)
oat^ wheat, what manner of wheat. 553 (...) ^od. 200 (...). 342 (...)
preserved. 422 (...) ^^se-gras^e. 207 (...) Goose-house. 17 (...). 75 (...) 76
(...), are hard of digestion. 77 (...) and their kind^. 191. and virtues, ibid.
special things to be observed about them, 194. and to keep them. 281 (...) ^o
Gra^^ all sorts of trees. 35 (...) ^iue manner of wa^es. 344 (...) ^he (...)
sit for Gras^^ng. 3^6 (...) ^o Gra^^e in the Canon, upon the Willow, in the
Crown, with a S^ence, and with a Motsell, 358. in the ends of B^anches, 353.
in the Bark, Scutcheon, and Cleft, 347. in the Flute, 355. in the Budde, ibi^.
in the Canon. 356. after the manner of a Goats foot, 352. Vine upon Vine* 359*
604. upon the Vine, a singular and profitable thing, ^53. Orange trees, 302.
Olive trees upon the Vine, 388. Plumme trees, 341. Pomegranate trees, ^05.
Walnut trees, 384, 461. upon a Cabbage stalk, 345. Apple trees, 360
(...) ^peciall observations in Gra^ting, to have exquisit fruit, 360 (...)
tools. 347, 350 (...) ^he sappes of the Grant and grafted tree must iumpe
together. 351 (...) must th^iue the first year. 348 Trees Grafted, in what
season they are to be transplanted. 366 G^a^ts having put forth, how they are
to be handled. 403 Upon what trees G^afts hold best. 345 Graf^s broken or burnt
away, must be grafted again, 403 Grafts to grant. 345 To choose, gather, and cut
Grafts, 31, 349. and how they must be kept. 348 Grafts that have put forth, how
they must be hadled. 403 Fruit- Garners. 16 Grapes, how to know if they be
ripe, 608. how to remedy them, drying away upon the Vine. ibid. as also their
rotting upon the Vine, ibidem, to keep them a long time, 606. and to have them
in the Spring, ^^id. without kern^ls. ibid. Grashop^ers hurting herbs, and
how to kill them. 314 At what time Gr^^se would be gathered. 3^ Grease of
Heanes. 74 of the Goose, good for the pain of the (...). 77 of Hogs, good to
d^aw all manner of Aposte^es to a head. 108
The Orchards Greene-plo^, and the differences thereof. 333 (...) Corn. 57^
Gro^ell. 295 Clay Ground of no value. 11 To know the Ground well, is the
principal point to thri^t, 11. and how we must learn to know it. 12, 13
A^^able Grounds, of their m^^^ting, and of what (...) they must be, 518. the
people and instruments requisite to measure them. 519 A^rable Grounds of what
largeness they must be, and how many ardors they crave. 528, 529 Arrable
Grounds of France, what manner of ones they be. 527 What manner of things
strong Grounds bring forth. 11 Strong Grounds must not be often mar^ed, or
dunged, 5. signs of a fruitful ground. 12 Wheat Grounds how they must be
tilled. 534, 535 (...) grow lean, by being long sown. 157 much trampled, are
half eaten. 14 vn^it to he plowed, how they may be freed and made (...). 1^
stony, how to be made clean. ibid. lying far of^ from the Lord, do breed
nothing but bottles and staggons. 14 cha^kie and s^atie, are lean, and how to
make them better. 13
To cleanse Grounds of weeds, before you sow it. 538 (...). 207 Groundswell.
^1^ (...) distilled, 463. oil of G^aiacum. 48^ How to ^ish for (...). 526
(...) distilled, (...). to draw oils out of (...) 483. 484 The (...) of
G^yenn^, and the fruitfulness thereof. 12
H
HAy, how it must be made and ordered. 491 Hau^. and the signs ^ore-tokening
it. 25 How the (...) may be colored. 457 Of the signs of a good Hare, and of
her fo^^e. 694 Hares marks of the male and female, ibid. the hunting of them is
better sport than any other, 69^. (...) to train up dog^ for the same, ibid.
their (...), 696. the best season of taking them, ibid. their flesh is
melancholic and evil for the stomach, 697. wherefore their flesh is good,
698. their marvelous fruitfulness, 697. the more they are hunted in any
country, the more they are (...). they live seven years. ibid.
Plough-Har^^^. 18 To ^rrow plowed ground. 544 Hearts are not subject unto any
ague. 689 The hunting of the Heart is the game of great Lords, and how the whole
action is to be ordered, 684, 689 To know the place of the (...). 68^ The Har^
his enduring of the Abbay. 6^9 A Beer for the Har^ and a Ba^^er for the Bore,
a proverb admonishing Hunters. 689 The dogs the^ sees due from the Heart.
ibid Singular medicines that may be made of every part of the Heart. ibid.
Si^nes of the Heart his age, (...). when they cast their horns, ibid. then
wyles, deceits, and other (...) of nature. 645, 687 Heart Cherrie-trees. 374
Heart Cherries must be grafted. 341 Harts-hor^^, and his virtues. 171
Hearts-(...). 202 Garden Hasel-tree. 340 Haunters of Towns will never make good
Fa^mors. 22 The Hawke called a Merlin. 71^ To Hawke with the Faulcon, or other
Hawke, and what season is best. 709, 31 Headac^. 722 Herbs of all sorts, and
in what season they must be sown. 160 Pot* Herbs when and how they must be
watered, weeded, and cut, 162. the time to set and remove them. 163
Fine Herbs to sow in Gardens. 159 Herbs show what manner of ground it is
where they grow, 530. for ^^lowers, or (...) of good smell, 242. for Physic,
and how they must be ordered, 1^8. for the (...) 462 The remedies against such
accidents as do happen (...) Herbs. 312, 313 Heat is consisting of (...)
degrees. 413 Heat, when it is excessive in Summer, and what it prognosticateth.
26 Hemlocke is Hogs po^son. 203 Hemp, what (...) it requiteth, and how it
must be husbanded and dressed. 566 Henban^ death to buds, 77. to green ^ee^e,
ibid. it is also poison to Swine, and therefore called Hogs-bane. 10^
Henne-house must be kept clean, 66. where it must be placed. 17 Hens how to
order and feed them* 67. the marks of them which be good, 68. good to set
them whiles the Moon is new, 32. to take (...) them their desire to fit, 68.
to make them fruitful, 566. to fat them incontinently. 5^^
Rheume^ and ^^uxes of Hens. 69 the Henne-pip. ibid. Old Hens, and their
diseases, 68. their cures. ibid A Hen to suck out venime. 740 A Hen
crowing like a Cock ouet-fat enraged. 68 Water- Hens. 78 How Hens must be
sed and lo^ked to. 67, 68 Her^d caused the children to be slain the 29. day of
the Moon. 34 The Heron wandering and whi^ling about, a sign of rain. 25 The
Heromie, and the ordering of Her^nt. 671 Certain observations concerning the
Heron. 672 Hiac^^th. 239 Hissope, 164. distilled. 453 The Hobb^e, a Hawke. 711
Tame Hogs. 18 Hogs better burnt than sealded. 107 Hogges-troughs of
Tamariske wood, 290 Hog^hes, where they must be placed. 18 Hol^-bocks. 196
Honey of all sorts. 330 The notes of good Honey. 329 To make Ho^e, 329. The
virtues thereof. ibidem To gath^r H^^ie. 327 To make viuers compositions of
Hon^e. 330 Honey distilled. 456 Hops, and the virtues thereof. 287 Ho^e-hound
247 A Horse at his growth in five years, but a man not before five and twenty.
6^6 Horses (...) to drink troubled water. 129, 61, 63 Horses (...) how they
must be (...) and trained, 124. 12^. 131. (...) 129. (...) Horses. 146. (...)
winded, 149 having their backs broken, 129. pricked with a (...), 114.
b^wit^hed. 121. how to be handeld being (...) and to what diseases they be
subject, 137. the means to help the 139
The marke^ of a good Horse. 125 The know the age of a good horse perfectly.
ibidem Horses find ^eet to go well upon, when they have to ^eed well upon, 129.
a Proverb. A lean Horse. 147 Horses are (...) by the Masters eye, a
Proverb. 1^ Horse mint. 244 Horse tail. 209 H^and (...). 207 The House must
not be to se^ke for (...)* nor ground for (...)* 18. what is meant by the
country House. and (...) it comp chendeth ^ The (...) Lodging, 16. where the
Farme-house must be (...)* 4 of the enclosure thereof. 13 The entrance of the
Master of the family his House. 14 A ^umptu^u^ House canteth ones better to
envy 13 We must purchase peace, and a hoose ready made. ibidem A House-holder
must for ecast to have more to sell than to buy. 14 The Husbandry of these
times agrees with the Husbandry of the ancient times. ^ The Husbandry of
the vine both young and old, 60^. of men of ancient times according to their
countries. 1 of grounds diverse and variable according to the soil, and the
situation of places, (...)* of the a^bor and vine is a like. 157
Husbandmen must know the signs foreshewing rain, winds. etc. 24 The
Husbandmans clothes. 22 The work that the Husbandman must do every month
throughout the year. 35 The Husbandmans tools. 532 The manner of Husbandry
entreated of. 1 Hunting, a thing that a good Husband may lack. 2 The profit of
Hunting four footed bea^^es 672 Three sorts of Hunting. ibidem The Hunting of
the Hare more pleasant than any other. 693 Hunting of the Wild Bore dangerous.
690 A wine like Hydrome, and the virtues thereof. 330
I
Jacob, borne the sixteenth of the M^one, a good day. 33 Iapheth, borne the
24. day of the Moon. 34 I^samine. 286 Enclosure of the Orchard. 333 The Indies
discoured by the Spaniards. 83 Ins^sions, 448. two things to be c^sidered in
Insusions. ibid. (...) m^de in man's, goats, or swines blood. 449 (...) must
help o^ augment the force and ve^tue of (...). ibidem (...) the P^oph^t, born
the twentieth day of the Moon, day somewhat indifferent. 33 (...), a ^ind of
cheese, and the man's of making of ^^^em. 65 (...) b^ne the 18. day of the
Moon, a prosperous day. 33 (...), or ground pine. 205 (...) ^^es are tare in
France, 396. their nature, ibidem. (...) planted. 338 (...) ^^per. 285 causes
wine to run out of the vessel. 286
K
(...) He principal Keys of all the house. 46 (...) ^lesh, well accounted of,
117. their skins how greatly profitable. 119 (...) ni^ beans or (...). 560
(...) K^^ching, the first room to be built in a good house, where the Kitching
must be seated. 17 (...) ^is of d^^^rs fashions. 253, 254 ^^^ple Knot. 258
(...) and C^l^es, how they must be sed and handled. 62 (...) ^e ^^^king into
the sky, and drawing in the air, a (...) of ^ame. 25
L
^An through Labor does ^ame every thing. 10 (...) req^^sit in a Farmer. 4
The gardens Labir^^th. 158 (...) ^wto handle and seed ^ambes. 18, 111 (...) of
L^mbes, and their remedies. 116 (...) ^mbes, to make flocks. 112 (...), bo^ne
the (...) of the Moon, a dangerous day. 32 (...) venomous sithes in the sea.
507 (...) d^ drive men to contention and law. 4 (...) ma^uelous fruitful. 12
(...) a kind of Hawke. 714 (...) ^ dist^ led, 474. in what places it must be
kept. 17 (...) ^^der, 251 dis^illed. 463 (...), of the ashes of Cabages, good
to was^^ the head. 166 (...) great and small, their virtues and proper^^es. 175
(...), at what time they must be sown. 160 (...)-trees, 296. what earth Lemons
require. 376 (...) in what season they must be sown, 560^ to have ^^y good
Len^^s. 569 (...) of all kinds, their husbandry, nature, and special
observations, 167 when they must be sown. 160 they put forth the fourth day
after they are sown, 152. they procu^e sleep, ^68. how to be preserved. 279
(...), how it must be dressed. 575 (...) how distilled, 455. and what is meant
by (...) (...) place. ibidem (...) ^ighting in fair weather, a sign of rain.
24 (...), and what they presage. 26 (...). 238 (...) of diverse sorts and
colors, 239. their virtues, 240 (...) ^ater Lillies. 239 (...) Inhabitants of
Lymosin, painful, sparing, procuring (...) their own profit, than any
others. 23 den-trees, and others of such like wood. 665. 667. (...) and
diseases, 923. their food. ibidem (...) hutting the vine, and how to kill them.
607 Lice, and other vermin haunting Hens, 69 Lice of Calves, 63 Lice of Bees.
326 Line the husbanding thereo, 368. when to be sown, 36. in what quarter of
the Moon, and when to be pulled. 31
Loches, and how to fish for them. 516 Locusts come every third year, and what
harm they do to trees. 649 Locusts, eating vines, how they may be driven
away. 607 L^^-tree. 306 L^pines and their husbandry, 560. and whereto they are
good, ibidem. when they must be sown, before they bloome, ca^^ell must be put
into them, 570. ^at the earth. 10

M
Madness of Dogs. 147 Maine, a rich country. 12 The people of Maine are
subtle, crafty, and very painful for profit. 23 Mallows. 196 Man will not
be won by rough handling. 21 Mandraages. 253 Maple tree. 662 Mar^h corn. 554
Marchpanes, what manner of pastrie. 585 Mares, how they must be handled. ^^5
The covering of Mares, and taking of the horse, 124. their amo^ous rage. 147
Ma^^^ome. 250 Marigolds, and their faculties. 172 Marigolds in conserve, 280.
distilled. 454 Marshes hu^tfull to the Farme-house. 5 Market matters would not
be left undone, till after drinking. 22 Ma^le in what grounds necessary. 6
Marq^ots, a sort of Vine necessary. 597 Beef Marr^w. 104 Masters must know
the natures of their servants. 23 Masters must keep more amongst their
servants, than at the town. ^3 Masters of families their office and duty.
ibid. Masticke t^ee. 306 Stinking Mathweed. 53^ Mead and Meth^glin, what manner
of drink they be amongst the Polanders and Englishmen. 332 Meadows and
Medow-plots, and how many sorts of Meadows, and the manner of making them, etc.
49^, 492 What manner of herbs must be sown in Meadows. 495 To harrow,
water, and cut down Meadows, 498. to gather in the hay. 499 In what quarter of
the Moon Meadows must be cut down. 32 Medow-sweet. 59 Meal of all sorts.
573 (...) Hogs, ^07. all Hogs better burnt than scalded, ibid. Me^hoacan
with a discourse of his marvelous root. 225 the reason of the name, and his
virtues, ibid. the marks of it. ibid. the picture of it. ^^6
Meddicke fodder, 494, ^64. and the husbanding of it, ibid. Medlars how they
may be kept a long time. 408 Medlars without stones. 36^ Sweet M^lars, 365
Spiced Medlar^. 361 Where Medlars grow best, and what their facultie^ be. 382
Melilot. 252 Melons, 192. their gathering and goodness. ibidem Certain
observations about Me^^as. ^93 Mercury. 20^ Mes^ing or Mas^ing, 549-550
Me^^salem, borne the 8. day of the Moon, a good day, and happy day. 33
M^^^oile. 206 The manner of ordering of Milk, and well dressing of it. 64
Milk of Nurses does increase by using the fomentation of the decoction of
Cabages. 166 To increase Milk of Kine. 500 Milk of As^es, for such as are in
a consumption, 147. and to make the body white, an example. ibidem Milk of
Goats is lean, and for what diseases it is good, 119. Their Milk is more
wholesome than Sheep Milk, 118. Milk distilled, and the virtues thereof,
469 Mille^ how it mu^^ be sown and dressed. 559 Mille^ grows we^l in a
sandy ground. 11 Mints, why of old time for bidden to Captains in war. 244
Myrrh distilled. 545 Oil of Myrrh. 563 M^tle-tree, and his nature. 289
Mi^k^ns, their (...) and nature. 725 The Months of the year, and their
disposition foreshewed. 28 The Moon how it increases and decreaseth. 30 of
the Influenc^^^ thereof. ibid. what power every quarter of the year has over
beasts, plants, and fruits. 32 foreshewing snow in the Winter. 25 of the
Critical days thereof. 31
Mortar of wisdom. 447 Motherwort grows in ill-tilled and rough grounds. 200
To Mow. 49. To hunt Mowles, and to kill them. 315 Moys^ parted the sea, the
26. day of the Moon. 34 Mugwort. 250 Mulberies early and late, 362. how kept a
long time, 409. white ones that never grow red or black. 363 Mulberietrees
their seed, where it must be sown. 339 of two sorts, and what earth they love,
their properties. 383 how to graft them. ibidem and how they are planted. 341
Mulcheepers, Mulets, Mules, their nature, food, and diseases. 251 Mules and
Mulet^ the diversities of their generations. ibidem rubbing their ^ares more
than ordinary, a sign of rain. 25 of Auuergne good for the plough. 89 they
exceed all other beasts. 540 a good Mulet is an evil beast. ibidem
White Mullen. 205 Muskadell. 364 Music invented by Sheephe^rds. 110 Mushrums
eaten, the remedy against their mischi^uousnesse. 61 Mustard, and how it must
be made. 281 Mustard of diverse countries. ibidem
N
(...), born in the ninth day of the Moon an indifferent day. 33 Narcissus,
and why so called, 239 Nature is never idle. 531 Nauewes, and Nau^^s, and their
virtues, 158, 568, 186. being lowne, they put forth by the end of three days.
161 The Neat-heard his charge and conditions. 90 Necess^^^ bege^^eth skill, and
awakeneth care. 5 A good Neighbor requisite. 5 (...) stinging, and dead, 209.
they make flesh to be soon (...). ibid. New Wine not ver^e wholesome, 617.
what it is. 622 Neco^iana, with h^s marvelous virtues, 215. an heat be of
di^ination, 2^^. the Quintessence thereof, and two excellent ornaments made of
the same, 222, 223. distilled. 453 Nigella. 252 Nightingales male and female,
to know one from the other, 719. to cure them, being melancholicke, 718. how
they must be handled and ^ed. 717 Mad Nightshade. ^^2 No^, the first inuentor
of making and drinking of wines, 410. borne the tenth of the Moon, a
prosperous day. 33 Normans would be entreated peaceably. 23 The North hurtful
to the Farme-house. 5 The Nurserie. 18 The Orchards Nurserie. 334, 339
O
Oaks, and their kinds, 556. males and females, ibid. Oaks are the most noble
and dea^est of all other trees. 649 At what time Oaks would be planted. 652
How to sow Aco^nes, for the growing of Oaks, 655, 656 To have Oaks green at
all times. 363 Oaks grow a hundred years, stand at one stay a hundred years,
and are decaying a hundred years. 6^6 Oak of lerusalem. 246 Oate-meale, made
of Oats, and the making thereof, 558, 575 Oats, and their manner of
husbandry, 558. distilled. ibid. Oil Olive, of three sorts, 427. how it must
be made, prepared, and kept, 426* 428. the virtues thereof, ibid. Oil. an
enemy to plants. 429 prepared three ways. 424 of many sorts, and their
virtues. 431 hot and cold. 432 distilled, their faculties and lasting. 479 of
diverse herbs, and their qualities. 433 the manner of pressing them out of
fruits. 429 three things must be considered in them. ibid. made by impression.
431 the time fittest to distill them. 474 the order to be kept therein. 474,
475, 478 distilled, and a discourse thereupon. 469 of Roles of two sorts, 433.
ibid. and a new way to make the same. ibid. of Linseed 368 of ^^uing things, or
their parts. 458 of G^a^acum. 48^ of Nauets. ^86 of Virgins. 427 of Foxes, how
made. 434 of Serpents. ibid. of Egge^, 4^5. of Wheat, ibid. of Hay. ibid. of
Brimstone. 436
^^ Oil Omphacine. 427 (...) To thaw O^^^ when it is frozen. 428 (...) Where
to keep and lay up Oiles. 17 (...) Olives and Oliue-trees. 295 (...) Olives
how kept long. 409 the gathering and profit of them. 296 preserved. 4^^ in what
ground they delight most. 388 their nature. ibid. to plant and graft them. 388
to geld them. ibid.
^^saruellous things of the Oliue-tree. 296 (...) liue^rees grafted upon the
Vine. 388 planted in what season. 37 grafted. ibid. being barren, how to make
them to become fruitful. 389 must be kept from Turtle-doues and Stares, 390
they hinder not Vines. 597 full of moss. 339
(...) ^range-trees, what ground they crave, 376, how to plant, sow, and grant
them. 302 (...) ^ranges preserved, 421. distilled, 464. and how kept, 409 (...)
^^ganie, or bastard Maricrome. 245 ^^rpin. 206 ^^esser Orpin. ibid. (...) ^he
Farn^ers (...). 16 (...) ^xen more profitable for the Plough than Bulls, 90.
and how they must be gelded. 91 (...) ^he Oz^^r plot. 11
P
PAlma-Chris^^. 211 Palmer-wormes, and how to kill them. 314 Pantrie. 579 (...)
^aper endures every thing. ^9 (...). ^88 (...) ^ild ^arsneps. 495 (...)
^rtridges. 84 (...) ^assion, what manner of Wine it is. 622 (...) to make
bread, and how to handle and dress it, 577 (...) ^asture ground. 18 (...)
^aunsies, and their ve^^ues. 240 (...) ^tac^-plumtree. 372 (...) ^each-trees
how planted, and where. 338 how grafted, 362, eately. 384
(...) ^eaches to keep long, 409, red. 363 spiced ones. 362 without stones.
364 written, 363. distilled. 465
(...) ^o have fruits half Peaches, and half nuts. 360 (...) ^each-apples,
^66. and Spanish Peaches. 372 (...) ^^^^ckes are proud, lecherous, and jealous,
how they must be fed. 81 their roust. 17 their flesh better than the Turkies. 83
(...), a fish, and how to take them. 516 (...) ^are- plums, how planted. 338
(...) ^^res how to keep long. 527 early and late ones. 365 how to have them
without stones. ibidem of Augusta. 362
(...) ^tre-trees are the most precious of all others, except apple trees. 380
and what earth they love. 381
soften Pearlet. 288 Marvelous Peason. ^88 Peason ^at the lean ground, 563:
to cause to be such as will be soon boiled. ^94 Pellitorie of the w^ll. ^09
Water Pepper. 169 Penniroyall. 248 A Penthouse for plough gear. ^18 Percipier.
^92 Perrie, and how it is made. 417 Pers^ley, and his virtues, ^81: and why so
called. ibidem Peruincle. 204 Presages of Pestilence. 667 Peta^ites, or
L^gwot^. 20^ Female Petum grows of the seed of the male, 334, and his
virtues. ibidem The sum of Petum appeaseth hunger and thirst. 221 Pharao,
borne the nineteenth of the Moon, a dangerous day. 32 Natural Physic must
be well known to the datie-woman. 39 To separate the Phlegm in artificial
distillation. 451 The people of Picardie would be handled very (...)* 23
Pigeons of the doue-house, and how they must be fed. 86 which be the beast, 87.
and that they have young ones thrice a year. 88 coming home late to their
cote, and ^^sage of rain. 25
Pikes taken in fresh water. 507 Pimpernell. 212 Pine-trees and Pine-apples and
their properties. 292 Pine-trees, how planted, ibidem. they crave a sandy and
light ground. 392 Pionie. 204 Pipes for the conueying of water from springs. 8
Pistaces brought by Monsieur du Ballay B. of man's, 297* 298. what carth they
crave. 339 The Pits called Aronques, in Prouence and Lang^^docke. 6 The
Plane-tree. 306 Plantane of three sorts, and their their temperatures, 208 495.
a sign that water will be found there under ground. 7 To Plant trees to have
exquisite fruits, 360. trees, and in what season, 367. a tree without roots,
400. and remove herbs, 165. and to (...) them. ibidem
Plants and how they must be husbanded, whether they be of timber-wood, or
other, 657. of sciences and shoots, 341. of stones, 338. of vines when and
where to be planted. 598* 599
Tokens foreshewing Plenty. 28, 29 Ploughs, Charrets, and Carts. 18 Ploughs of
diverse sorts, according to the country and soil. 540 The arders of Ploughing
before it be sown: 537 Ploughing, an art that an householder cannot want. 4
Ploughing with oxen is not but of necessity, 90. but it is be^^. ibidem To
Plough for the second arder and third, and so to sow. 54^ Laxatiue and sleeping
Plums. 393 To have Plums ready at all times. 362 Plums of Brignoles, 39^
Plum-trees how planted. 3^7 in what places they delight. 392 what distance must
be given in setting them between the one and the other. 39^ when they grow
undisposed and languishing 393
The people of Poicto^ given to be wily and watie. 49 A Pole of measure. 518
Polenta, what, and how made of old. 575 Polygonum. 159 Pome-Adams. 377
Pomi^^ones, what kind of Hawks. 211 Pomegranates, how to keep, 408* their
nature, 304. re^ ones, 365. without kernels. 305 Pomegranate trees, and their
plants, 341. where to be planted, and their nature, 394. how they must be
husbanded and grafted, 304. to keep them that they lose not their flowers. 305
Poplar trees, in what season planted, ^6^. being grafted upon Mulberrie ^rees,
they bring forth white Mulberries. 363 Pop^ins. 256 Poppies, and the properties
thereof, 189. the kinds thereof. ibid. Wild Poppie of two sorts, and their
virtues. 170 Pooles how they must be dressed and kept. 508 and the wild soul
haunting the same. 506 that are famous. ibid. near to the Farme-house. 21
necessary in dry and scorched places. 6
Fish- Pooles. 514 The Portall on the backside of the house. 18 Pre^^^^ of
rain must be known to the Farmor. 24 Presages of all things that the
householder must have ^ore-knowledge of. 26 Preserving, what it is, and what
the word does signify. 279 Preserving of fruit. 421 Preserues of diverse sorts.
420 of fruits, how they must be made. 423 and conserve of Gentian. 279
To Preserve herbs of all sorts. 279 Princes, their pleasure in Summer in
wattie places. 6 Priuies stinking more than ordinary, a sign of rain. 25
Priuet. 240 To Propagate four manner of ways, and the time most fit to
propagate. 343 Prouence, how fruitful, 12. the inhabitants of Prouence
haughty, and cannot abide to be reproved. 23 Pump^^^^, 192. their goodness
and gathering, 193. observations concerning them. 194 Laxatiue Pumpions. ibid.
Sweet smelling Pumpions. 195 Pulse, when, how, and where, they must be sown,
570. they must be reaped in the wan^ of the Moon, 31. aduertisements
concerning them. 569 Pursela^e, and the virtues thereof. 223 Pyes, male and
female, do sit their eggs. 86 Pyes distilled. 457 The Pyrene mountains
abound with marble. 5 Purchase by statute, the surest of all others. 3
Q
QVailes are birds rather of the earth than of the air, they make no nests,
85. their feeding, ibid. their flesh causes giddiness and headache, 85. their
flesh causes also falling sickness. ibidem Quarellous persons not fit to be
made farmors. 22 Quilles gathered of dead geese, not so good as those which are
gathered from the live ones. 77 Quin^es of diverse sorts. 375 made into gellie.
420 spoil other fruits growing near them. 408
Quince trees, how planted. 34^, 376 Quintes^nces, how they may be extracted.
450. and 669
R
RAdishes contrary to wine, and their other virtues. 187 Rain foreshewed by
asses. 25 Signs of Rain. ibidem To R^ke lands that are to be sown. 544 Ra^^.
and the marks of a good Ram. 110 Small Ramp^ons. 495 Ravens croking and
beating their wings, a sign of rain. 25 Against field Ka^s. 508 To hunt water
Kats. ibidem To cause Rats and Mice to die suddenly. 315 Reason must be
preferred in all things. 15 Rest makes a man slothful. 150 Rest harrow, an
enemy to the husbandman. 210 Restorati^es of diverse sorts. 460 Distilled
Resto^ati^es. 459 A divine Restoratiue. 430 Rice, in what place it grows. ^1
Rivers, bad neighbou^^ to dwelling houses. 6 Rivers, using to ouerflow, are
very hurtful. 5 The Robinet or Robin red breast, and the ^^orie of him. 729
Rocket, and the virtues thereof. 182 Roames to tread and press grapes in. 17
Roats of potherbes. 164 Rosemarie. 247 Rosema^ie fit to build garden arbours.
2^6 Rosemarie in conserve, 280. and distilled. 454. and 461 Roses of diverse
sorts, and their temperature. 283 in conserve. 280 are distilled three ways.
454 distilled per descensum. 467 water compounded, 310. 461
Prouence Roses. 283 Rose at bours. 282 Rub^rbe distilled. 462 Rue, and its
marvelous virtues. 243 Lambs Ru^net, good against all manner of venom. 116
Rye, and husbanding thereof. 548
S
SAcres, hawks so called. 713 Saffron, how it must be husbanded, ^11. a venom
to the heart. ibidem Sage, 158* 245. good against the trembling of the members.
56 Compound water of Sage. 460 Salm^^, a very delicate fish, 507, and how to
take him. 575 Salomons seal. 208 Salt turning moist, a sign of rain. 25
Samuel, bo^ne the 11. of the Moon, a favorable day 33 Sandy grounds, what
fruit they bear, and how they must be tilled. ^1 Sanicle, and the great
virtues thereof. 202 Sapa, or boiled wine. 622 Saps of grafted trees must join
one with another. 32 Sa^i^ tree. 285 Saul, borne the 21. day of the Moon, a
happy day. 34 Sau^rie, 245. being sown, it puts not forth till thirty
days after. 161 Saxi^rage. 200 Scabious. 201 Scallions, and their faculties.
180 (...) to plant, and the manner to do them, 343. and to propagate them.
ibid. (...) swallowed by an Horse. 147 (...) their biting of Neat. 10^ (...),
and the marvelous faculties thereof. 203 (...) distilled. 468 (...), what kind
of corn, and the husbanding thereof. 550 (...), to choose. 543 (...) Seeder,
159. and the time to sow them, 160. how old and what manner of ones they must
be, ibid. and in what time they must put out of the earth, 161 (...) distilled.
468 (...)- wheat, how it must be chosen. 543 against Serpents. 315 ^^bandmen^
S^ruants, how they would be entreated, 23 (...), 559. oil and cakes thereof.
ibid. (...). 109 (...), how they must be watered, and how often a day, 112 where
they must ^eed. ibid. when they must be shorn. 113 they are cold of nature.
111 their going to rutte, and what forage is best for them. ibid. how they are
kept from the Wolf. 116 their diseases and cures. ibid.
(...) of a good Sheep. 110 (...) ^epheards their manner in times past. 111
they must be gentle. ibid. what (...) they have invented. 110 their folds in
Summer. 113
he fashion of the Sheep fold, and how and whereof it most be made, 110. and
where it must be seated. 18 (...) that spoil Vines, 607. biting Neat, 10^.
biting a Ho^^e. 147 (...), what kind of corn. 551 ^^^^wormes, and the profit
of them, 486. how to order them, 489. their diseases. ibid. (...)-grass good
for medicine. 201 (...). 552 (...). 2^0 (...) to plant Gardens. 263 (...). ^69
(...). his planting and virtues. ibid. (...). 495 (...) swallowed by Neat, 102.
and how to kill them, 314 (...) ^noiles spoiling Bees. 405 (...) distilled. 458
(...), and the tokens fore-shewing the same. 25 (...) ^^dome and Gomo^^ha sunk
the 17. of the Moon, a b^d day. 33 (...) ^^mmer, and the presage of the
constitution thereof, 22 (...) ^^rell, and his properties. 171 (...) ^o So^e
corn in the end of the Moon. 31 (...) ^o Sow Wheat in my^e, and in the
increase of the Moon. 541 ^^wes farrowing. 106 pigges. ibid. eating their
pigges: ibid.
(...) ^he place for the Swine-coat. ^8 (...)-bread. 209 (...). 247
(...)-thistle. 168 (...) ^parrowes male and female, 86. crying early, a sign
of rain. 25 (...) Sparrowes, and their nature. 725 Sparrowhawkes of all sorts.
(...) wherein they differ from Buzzards. (...). the manner of taking and keeping
them. ibid. their diseases and remedies. ibid.
Speech unprofitable, makes a man contemptible. (...) Simple and true Speech
causes a man to be much esteemed. 23 A Spence to keep victuals in. 17
Spelt-corne, and how it must be husbanded. 552 Spices distilled. 478 Spiders
falling, without any violent cause, a sign of rain. 25 A Spider swallowed by
a Horse. 146 Spinach, male and female, and why so called, 274. the great profit
coming thereof. ibid. When Spinach must be sown, 161. it grows up three
days after. ibid. The Spinke a very beautiful and lively bird, her feeding,
721. All Spinkes have not like volces. ibid. The Square, an Instrument for
measuring. 521 Stables for Horses. 16 A round Stairs. 17 Cow- Stalls must be
kept clean. 62 All manner of beasts Stalls, how they must be seated. 15
Stallions to cover Mares. 81 Stallions to bege^ Mules and Mulets. 151 Stars
sparkling, are signs of great floods of water. 241 Starthisti^e. 200 The
Ste^le-gl^sse is the bewraier of the countenance. 624 Young Stocks and wild
plants must be removed, 339. and how they must be husbanded, 340. young or
wild ^^ocks to graft upon, and how they must be prepared. 344 Stomach weak.
219 A Stone in the gisserne of a Capon, that makes men apt to carnal lust. 74
In what place Stones do ordinarily grow. 9 Cherrie- Stones distilled. 453
Storks, and their marvelous nature. 79 Storks distilled. 458 Fresh Straw, and
the benefit thereof. 205 Strawberries, 195. their marvelous harmelesnesse, and
other properties, ibid. distilled. 45^ Succorie. 168 Suits, and matters in law,
how and by whom to be ordered. 21 Sun and Moon, two great and admirable
lights of the world, 30 when and how it betokens fair weather, 26. when and
how it betokens rain and tempest, 25. when it betokens Snow in Winter. 25
The South (...) unwholesome. 5 The (...) of the seven Books. 2^3 Swallows
distilled. 453 Swannes, and how many are requisite to be together, 78, 79.
their nature. ibid they foresee their own death, and man's. 79 Swine cannot
abide hunger. 106 more greedy than any other beasts. 104 how to feed them, and
their natures. ibid^^ subject to the plague, and many other diseases. 107 their
cures. ibide^ to fat them. 291
in what quarter of the Moon the would be ^illed. 10^ how to salt them. 109
their playing and running hither and thither, a sign of rain. 25 honored of
the Egip^yans for showing them the tilling of the earth. 108
T
Tobacco. 215 Tale-(...) are not to be harkened unto. 38 Tamaritke. 290 Tansay.
251 Great wild Tare^. 564 Tarts. 587 The Teeth of horses declare their age. 136
Signs of Tempest and Thunder. 26 Terragon is made of Lineseed, and how. 18^
What Things are requisite in building of the farm. 3 White Thistle. 203 Every
Thing at his height, does decrease in the and. 4 Ladies Thistle. ^00 Blessed
Thistle, and the marvelous virtues thereof. 199 The hundred headed Thistle,
and his marvelous (...) 203 The Tazell, his late given names, and his
properties. 310, 311 The Tazell closing and shutting together, presageth rain.
2^ To Thresh corn, and the flower of the same. 5^6 Throstles what manner of
birds they be. 726 sold very dear amongst them of old tim^. 85 they are of
two sorts. 727 their nature and food ibidem leaving the valle^^, they foreshew
rain. 25
Thyme, 244. mountain Thyme. 248 Ti^^ing of the ground, with diverse sorts of
beasts, according to the country. 539 Tillage diverse, according to the
diue^sitie of the soil and country. 527 The Tilling of the ground, and
precepts touching the same. 531 The Tune and presages of the entrances of the
^oure quarters of the year. 26 What manner of hawke the (...) is, 711
Torm^ntill, 50^. and why so called. ibidem T^^^eises, and how to bant to them.
5^5 The heat be (...) bona. 252 Tourtaine, the garden of France, 10. 40^ the
people thereof lovers of their profit. 10 Trees and shrubs, with a ^^^scourse
thereupon. 282 Trees are of two sort, ingenerall. 659 in what soil they would
be planted. 6 of the place and ch^^^hing of them in general. 368 to set the
female ones again. 367 grafted, in what sea^on they must be transplanted 366
transplanted are the better. 344 growing of stones. 337 planted without roots.
400 given to be over fruitful, how to moderate. 404 to cause them to bring
forth early fruit. 406 how to husband them when they begin to grow 403 how to
plant, ^ow, and graft them, to come by such fruit as is exquisite, 360. to dig
and pick them, 402. to prune, make clean, and bare them at the foot. 31. 35.
401. 402 that are bruised with cattle. 399. 400 full of moss, become lean.
402 how to cure them. 404 yellowness, and the laundise, and the evil in them.
405 and worms troubling the same. 406 to (...) them that loo^^ their flowers.
405
A dead dog, or other ca^^ion, applied to the root of a T^ee that is sick,
does set it in ^^ength again. 402 Of fruit- Trees in particular. 370 The best
season of planting and replanting of great Trees. 368 To kill worms in Trees
that hurt their roots. 400 To make those (...) which me barren to bear fruit,
405 Trees bringing forth grapes. 366 Trees delighting to grow in the water. 660
Trees of Soloigne are small, and staruelings. 654 Precepts of planting fruit-
^rees. 360, 400 Water- ^rees, and their kinds and nature. 334 To make wild
Trees to grow of seed. 656 What soil is best for while Trees, their natures,
properties, and differences. 659 The best season to plant Trees for timber. 651
To have green (...) of all sorts at all times. 363 Tre^^ile shut^ing in it
self, is a sign of rain. 25 Tri^km^dame. 172 Trough^ at the Well side to
water cattle at. 15 Watering Trough^. ^ Trouts, the fish, how to take them.
516 The Turkies rowst. 17 Turnips, the fo^d of the inhabitants of Limosin and
Sauoy, 1^6. how they must be husbanded, and what their properties be. 187 (...)
to go up to the Garners. 17 (...)-tree. 306 Oil of Turpentine. 486 Tu^^done^,
their feeding and diseases, 84. their blood good for the wounds and ulcers of
the eyes, (...). as also is their dung. ibid. Herb Twopence. 212
V
VAlentia, the vale of Swannes. 78 Val^^ian, and the ve^tues thereof. 199
Variety of Countries causes a diverse manner of laboring the earth. 1 (...),
the manner of making of it. 620 Veri^^ce of Apples. 3^0 (...) male and female,
^97. their nature and virtues, ibid. good for the sight. ibid. Ver^aine a sign
that there will be good water found, if there be a Well dug. 7 Wild Vines of
the herbs called (...). 287 How Vin^^ newly planted, would be husbanded.
(...) Vines of diverse sorts, according to their colors and other qualities.
600 in what grounds they must be planted. 192 two things to be considered in
the planting of them. ibid. they must be planted upon the South. 6 at what time
to be removed. 39 how to choose their plants. 595, 596 plants, where, when, and
how, they must be planted. 599 must not be planted of diverse plants. 598 to
make them newly planted, to take root, ibid. the manner of planting them is
diverse, according to the (...) of countries and grounds 597 to cause them to
hud quickly. 606 how to handle them that have too many branches. 607 when they
must be cut. 35 growing upon trees, and after the fashion of a^ ^ours. 395
^^es well husbanded, are of great increase and profit, 591 ^^make barren Vines
fruitful. 607 ^^rtaine observations concerning Vines, how to graft ^^them, and
the manner of proceeding therein, 605, 606 ^^nes being grafted, yield great
reuen^e. 259 ^^hat man^re is good and evil for Vines. 599 ^^manure Vines, is a
precious thing. 595 ^^make that Oxen and Kine do not touth Vines, 607. for
those ca^tell are very noisome to them. ibid. othing must be sown amongst
Vines. 598 ^^ow to keep Vines from the frost, 606. their diseases, and
remedies thereof. 607 ^^he black Vine plant, 600. four kinds of it. ibid.
^^he white Vine plant, and the kinds thereof. 601 ^^he husbandry of the Vine,
both young and old, and their sundry earings. 602 ^^he inhabitants of Paris
do husband their Vines negligently. 592 ^ manure the new Vine, 602. to prune
and weed it, and the rest of the earings belonging to it. 599 ^^he Vine hates
the Colewort above all things. 598 ^he laxatiue Vine. 606 ^^reacle Vine. ibid.
^^ates of the Vine. 461 ^he Vine Nurcerie. 594 ^^uill Vine-dressers described
by their effects. 599 ^^Vineyard in a strong ground. 11 (...) delight in stony
places, standing toward the South. 5^6 ^^ineger what it is. 456 the manner of
making of it. 618 of Squilles. 619 of Apples. 380 distilled. 456 and the
virtues thereof. ibid. quickly distilled. 451 certain observations concerning
it. 618 made without wine. 61^ to cause it to become wine again. 618
Sweet Vinegar. 619 Dame Violets. 238 Marian Violets. ibid. March Violets. 236
A Viper having stung a Horse. 147 Vitis signifying a Vine, whence so called.
623
W
WAsers. 584, 585 Walnut-trees, and their Nuts, how profitable, 386
Walnut-trees, when they are to be planted and removed, 3^5. and how they must
be alone, and why. ibid. Walnut-trees grafted, 385. they naturally hate Oaks,
ibid. the more beaten, the more fruitful, 386. without fruit and leaves till
Midsummer, 364. they foreshew plenty. 385 Walnuts without shells. 362 to cause
them to have a very tender shel. 364 386 how planted. 385 how to keep them
green. 408 do cause Capons to roast quickly. 387 preserved. 422 of hard
digestion, causes headache and shortness of breath. 387 distilled. 452
How to have gross Walnuts. 362 Presages of War. 667 The Warren, situation
thereof, and profit, 3. 644* and of the storing of it, 645 To Water herbs. 159.
399 Water the common drink of all living creatures. 6^2 of diverse sores
distilled, with a discourse thereupon, 438 and who was the inuentor. ibidem of
all sorts, distilled of many herbs in particular. 452^ 453 compound distilled
three manner of ways. 460 distilled in Mary's bath. 442 distilled in the
bladder. 443 of licours. 455 distilled of flesh. 458 distilled for fukes. 465
distilled of living creatures. 458 of eggs, 458. of the vine, 461 of crumbs of
bread. 466 of lard. 467 of Rubarb distilled. 462 of cowes milk. 466 of a
capons broth. ibidem of oats, making drunk like wine, 558 of calves feet. 462
of lig^^^ vit^. 465
To take away the heat of distilled Waters. 45^, 452 (...) aine Water meet to
be gathered into cestern^. 6 The best Waters. 9 Fresh Water^ spring out of cold
places. 5 Sweet Waters in particular. 463 Salt or sea Water, how it may be made
fresh. 456 Allome Water. 462 Purgative Waters. ibidem The virtues of distilled
Waters, 452, 453. and their durablenesse. ibidem Rose Waters distilled per
descensu^: 468 Compound Rose Water. 462 Musk Rose Water. 463 Sweet Water.
ibidem Counterfeit Water of Nasse. 464 Water imperial. 462 Treacle Water. 461
A whiting Water. 466 (...) of all sorts, and the notes of that which is good,
331 oil thereof, 485. and his virtues (...). 476
Weathers horns bring forth Asperagus. 183 To Weed gardens. 161 Well. much in
request, and how to judge where to find water. 7 of what manner they be that
have good water. 8 in Gardens. 18 going with wheels. 6 that are never dry. 7
Wesels, and how to kill them. 314 Whay. 65 Wheat must be sown in mire, and
in the increase of the Moon. 542 it loves a strong ground. 11 how to choose
it, and other co^ne for bread. 571
Wheat starch, of what manner of flower, and how to he made. 574 Whirle-winds
and their nature. 26 Wigs 585 Willow, when, where, and how they must be planted
etc. 661 Willowes distilled. 465 Willow plots. 503 The North Wind good to keep
(...) dangerous for the farm house. 17. 5 The North Wind enemy to trees. 297
Signs foreshewing Wind. 25 Duckes signifying Wind to ensue. 78 Southern Winas
very incommodious for Languedoc, Gascoigne, and Prouence. 12 A small Wine to
drink in the house. 39 In what place such small Wine must be kept. 2^ The
boiled Wine called de^rutum. 622 Wine defined, with a discourse and reason of
the definition. 621, 622. Wine the looking glass of the mind, 625 goes
barefoot. ibidem by what men it was first invented. 410, 622 and why it was
called (...) in Greek, and (...) in Latin. 622 with a discourse upon the
invention, nature, faculties, differences, and necessities thereof. 620 of the
consistence of every of them. 635 their differences according to the property
of the country. 637 of all sorts, and their qualities and virtues, 528. 529 to
cause it being turned to have his taste again. 616 troubled and mustie. 617
what profit it brings to man's body, 625. and al^o what discommodities.
ibidem how much water must be put amongst it. 267 hurtful for children, and
for what age it is fit. 628 hurtful to hot and dry bodies, but good for moist
ones. ibidem. and 632 the vices and accidents happening to (...), and how to
order it, in the vault. 603 at what time it is wont principally to turn.
ibidem to try if it have no water. 380 without smell. 637 to keep them from
spending their strength 429 against poison of venonious beasts falling into it.
617 provoking sleep. 606 of anise, (...), pepper, bay tree, asarum, and sage.
615
Good Wines grow in hot places. 5 Wine applies it self to the nature of the
drinkers. 626 Differences of Wines according to their colors and properties
629 Mungrell Wines. 635 New Wines not wholesome, 623, and 624. New Wines hotter
than old in this country. ibidem Old Wine hotter than new. ibidem Boiled Wine
serving in steed of honey or sugar. 422 Mere Wine hurts the sound body. 624
^ine called Oligoph^rum, when, and what seuers it is profitable for. 632 Weak
Wines. 636 A Wine against the biting of serpents. 361 Signs of plenty of
Wine. 605 Winter chertie Wine. 288 Pomegranate Wine. 616 Winter cherries. 288
Winter, with prognostications of the constitutions thereof. 27 W^ad, 308. the
manner of making of it, 309. and when it must be lowne, 36 Woodcocks. 78 Women
impatient. 71 Women having their terms cause Pompions to die. 195 Young Wood
husbanded, thriueth much better than that which is neglected. 553 What is to be
considered before the planting of Wood, 449. what manne^ of soil it craves.
559 Woods how they must be planted. 7 to transplant. lop, and make them clean.
654 ^n the backside of the house toward the North 6. or toward the South, if
it be a hot country ibid. of timber trees, their s^^^ation and disposition.
650 in what season they must be planted. 651 timber to build withal, when best
to be cut. 35
The pleasure and profit that comes by wild Wood planted. 657 Wood for the
fire s^well. 10 Wood that turns into stone. 9 To distill Wood, and the manner
of proceedings therein. 480. 481 Wolves will do nothing to sheep, if the
foremost have Garlic hanging about his n^^ke. 116 Wolves howling near to
houses, a sign of rain. 25 Wolves enraged. 678 The biting of a Wolf how
dangerous and infectious. 116 Worms creeping out of the earth, a sign of
rain. 25 How dangerous it is to eat the Worm that is betwixt the claws of a
sheep foot. 116 Wormwood. 247 Oil of Wormwood. 434 To Write and read, is
not necessary for a Farmor. 22
Y
OF the Year, and also a prognostication of the constitution thereof by the
twelve da^es, 26* 23
FINIS.
A Table of the principal things newly added to this Volume.
A
AGrimonie, the virtues. 205 Angling, and the whole art: of the dying of
fishing Lines, 510. of the Corkes, Floats, and Hooks, 511. to faften Hooks,
to plumbe the Line, three fashions of Plummets, that the Angler must have a
Musketbullet to sound the depth of the water, what apparel the Angler must
have, and the best seasons to angle in, 512. of Winter and Summer angling, the
best manner of angling, and the haunts of F^^^es, 513. of Ba^ts, and sit times
for every bayt, 513. how to preserve bayts to angle with, in what bayts every
fish delights, and how to use them. 514 (...) ^Apples how to keep. 408 (...)
^Ash-trees hurtful to corn, 330. his use, profit, and goodness. 662 (...) Of
the Ash ^eyes. 664 (...) Arra^^^ grounds generally are of two sorts,
particularly of di^e. ^. and the several natures of the soyles, 528, 529.
largeness of arrable grounds and the benefits, 5^9. arrable land^ must be
cast according to the soil, 530. that stones in arrable ground are of great
use. 532 (...) the choice. 170
B
BA^ley how to sow and order after the English fashion, 555. Barley growing on
the Inames, the worthiness of Barley, 556. to make Barley bread of the English
fashion, 557. Barley to boil, and the use. 557 Bee^^s, and the English
ordering. 562 Bees how bred, 320. how to buy, 320. and how to kill, 328 B^^ch
tree, and the use. 667 Borage to sow. 175 Bottomes of Hay-mowes good meanure
for Meadows, 494 Bread, the kinds and best corn to make it of, 572, 574, 575*
the diverse kinds of bread in England, 577. bread for horses made in England.
ibid. (...) to sow. 175
C
CAlamint, and the kinds. 244 Cattle how to feed. 62 Cattle how to feed
after the English manner. 93 (...) sticks. 424 Clodding of grounds. 541 Colts
when to handle, and how. 129 Conie-Clappers how to cast and fashion, 645.
ground fit for Conies, 645. Conies must feed at liberty, 646. ^ame Conies not
sweet, 647. trappes in Conie Warrens how to place and make. 648 Of Conserues,
422, how to conserve fiuits, 424. conserve of flowers. 425 Cords. 147 Corn
better kept in the ear, than in the Garner. 546 Corn in the sweat all to
thresh. 546 Country house is a Farm, Meese, or Field inheritance, 2 Crown
imperial, the use and ordering. ^4^
D
DAtes how to make leache of. 425 D^inke of all sorts, made after the English
manner. 588, 589 Dung for Gardens. 156
E
Elm, and the goodness. 650 English practice added to the French. 2
F
FIgge-tree^ growing in cold soyles, to bear fruitfully. 194 Fish in ponds,
how to feed with the best food. 509 Fish Ponds how to make. 505, 506 Flax.
^54 Flower of the night. 241 Flowers for Bees. 316 Foxes by what means they
get their e^^ths. 70^
G
GRound Iuie, the virtues. 207 Goose grass, the virtues. 207 Garden of
pleasure, how to proportion, 234. alleies how trim, 235. quarters to adorn,
235. inward and outward beauty, 277. hedges for borders. 278 Grounds wet how
to draine. 335 Geese, enemies to grass. 493 Grass, when best to cut, how to
make into hay, the windrowes, the hay cocks. 499 Grass sower and har^h,
choice and use of hay, of moist hay, of dry hay, 500* curiosity in hay
making, the grazing is good for hay ground. 501 Garners, how to make, and their
use. 547, 548 Greyhound, 673* diversity of Greyhounds, choice of Greyhounds,
the breeding of Greyhounds, 674. Greyhounds how to place for Teasers. Gosh^wkes
more worth than Sparrow^ hawks, 707. The differences between the Ramage or
Brauncherhawkes, and the I^as hawks, 708. how to enter your Sparrow hawke, all
the diseases of the Sparrow hawk, 709. physic for hawks, the several
impediments of hawks. 710 Ger^aulcons and their kinds, 712. how to keep the
Ger^aulcon, of Ger^aulcons, the white is the best. 713
H
HOrsemans instruments. 123 Horses food. 124 Horse nose-slit naught. 126 Horse
to gueld. 126 Horse keepers office. 126 Horse exercise after water. 128 Horse
to make trot. 132 Horse to make amble. 133 Helpe^ for stumbling. 133 Horse to
make rack. 134 Horse to make gallop. 134 Horse with best ma^kes or signs.
135* 136 Horses age. 136 Hemp. 154 Herbs that will hardly grow, and how to
preserve, to make grow soon, ^59. to remove. 163 Herbs of the East. 229
Herbs of the West. 230 Herbs of the North. 230, 231 Herbs of the South. 231*
232* 233. He^^^opian. 241 Hiues dead, how to order. 316 H^ues made of straw,
318. where to place them. 318 Horses and oxen of France. 539 Hemp, what ground
is best, and the ordering. 566 Of Hounds, 673. Hounds being young, how they are
to be taught and trained. 682 Hunting of Dear at force with Hounds only. 686
Hores, what places are best to find them in. 695 Hobby, a Hawke, and the use.
712 Hawks which be called Long^ winged Hawks, which short. 715 Husbandry,
the manner entreated of. 1
I
INam^, how to prepare to sow corn upon. 556
L
LIllies, and their virtues. 239 Line or Flax how to order after the English
manner 567* 568. to make white thread, to make oil of Line seed. 568
M
MA^^iues, and their collars. 121 Mar^^gon of Constantinople. 241 Mu^^ard, how
to make. 281 Marmalade, how to make of Oranges, Lymons, Cytrons. 420 Meadow^s,
and their differences in England. 491 Marshes salt, and their profit. 492
Ma^^in, how to crop and gather. 550 Malt, and how to make it after the English
manner. 556* 557 Maple, and the use. 663 Me^^ins, and their several kinds. 712
N
NF^s of diverse sorts to take fish with. 507* 508 Nut trees, or Ha^ell trees.
373
O
ORchards, how to enclose. 135 Oil of Oats. 425 Oats a great breeder of
grass. 493 Of the Ox harrow. 544 Oats, and the profit, 558. Oatmeale, how to
make. 558 Oak, the goodness, necess^^ie, and use. 619
P
PEstilence 147 Purs^an, to preserve. 177 Pyoa^^. 242 Pip^ins, how to sow. 336*
337 To Preserve Barbe^ies. 422 To Preserve Filbe^^^or small nuts. 423 Pasts how
to make, and the diversities of colors. 424 Plough^ of diverse fashions. 532
Plowing with English Oxen. 340 Pasterie in the right kind, and the use thereof.
585* 586 Park^, what ground they should consist of, 668* 669. the water for
Parks, the pro^it, and a strange example thereof. 669
Q
QVi^ke^^^, how to plant. 153 Quince cakes, how to make. 423
R
THe best Runnet. 65 Rams that are best. 110 Rot how to cure. 114 ^hewme in the
eye. 147 ^ye, how to sow and order after the English manner. 549
S
(...) St^^^e how to ^eed soon. 103 Sheep, and the diversities. 216 Staggers.
147 (...) ^traines. 148 (...) ^paut^. 148 (...) ^ignes of outward diseases. 148
(...) ^ignes of inward diseases. 148 (...) breaks impos^umations. 171 (...)
^pinage sallad. 174 (...) pouch virtues. 209 (...) ^^uces how to make to d^ayne
meadows. 494 (...) ^^^^^age a great friend to meadows. 496 (...) ^^edes to be
sown in meadows, as sweepings of haybarne flowers, 496. fodderings of
cattle, and sheep, and the special commodity thereof. 497* 498 (...) ^awne
of (...) how to preserve. 506 (...) oil, or mudde of ditches, good dung^ 537
(...) ^eed, wheat of diverse sorts. 543 (...), how to make them hunt well. 681
(...) Of Spany^^, and their use and ordering. 679 (...) Setting- dogs, and
their use. 680 (...) Sythes and Syckles. 545
T
Tobacco virtues. 219, 220 Translator to the English Reader. 2 T^^pan. 241
V
Variety of Countries causes a d^uers manner of laboring of the earth. 1
Violets to preserve. 236
W
WAlking horses nor good. 131 Warts. 148 Water-Spanyels, their use and
ordering. 682 Weeding why not to use. ^59 Weeds how to destroy. 334 Winnowing
of corn. 548 Woad-ground, 309. the making of Woad, 309. the virtues. 320
Y
Y^llowes. 14^
FINIS.
A Table of the Diseases and Remedies described in the seven Books of the
Farme-House.
A
Afterbirth of women, newly brought in bed, 54, 183, 206, 207, 210, 214, 247,
249, 251, 287, 360 How the Age of a man may be a great while prolonged. 428 An
evil Air, and (...) means to drive it away. 199, 449 Anthrax, or Carbuncle.
58 Apostemes, 120, 214. of all sorts, and the healing of them, 56, 57, 122. to
ripen them, 155. cold Apostemes, 120. Apostemes of the breast. 109 Apostemes in
Oxen. 102 Apoplexy. 42, 239, 251, 456 To keep Apparel. 247 Appetite lost,
182. how to recover it again. 291 (...) in horses. 139
B
Back, and ache of the back. 434 Barbes, a horses disease. ^40 Barrenness in
women, the remedies, 52, 82, 245, 246, 249, 251, 288 To bring women to Bed
without pain, 243. to be brought in bed before ones time, 54. difficulty to
be brought in bed. 54 To keep Bees from flying away, and to drive them, 252
Belcking, 249. at the mouth. 48 Be^^ie, and the flux thereof, 69. the
co^^iuenesse of the belly, 71. ache in the belly, 434. co^^iuenes^e, 206, ^
209, 428. to loosen it mightily. 287 Bellie-ache, flux of the belly, and the
belly bound in Oxen, 96. pains of the belly in horses. 129 Untimely Birth.
204 Bitings of Dogs that are mad, 61, 189, 199, 244, 387, 391, 395, 678 of
venomous Beasts. 205 of the Viper. 75 of Serpents. 61, 102, 250, 362, 677, 690
of the Wolf. 7^ of Shrowes. 102, 147, 171 of Scorpions. 102 of Flies upon
horses. 143
Bitings or wounds made by the wild Bore, are dangerous, 690 The Bladder. 457
B^^sters. 213 Bl^^d cluttered, 201. flux of blood, 50. bleeding at the nose,
45. to purify the blood. 182 Bloud-suckers* 61 Blondie fluxes, 118, 122, 171,
172, 176, 195, 196, 201, 203, 206, 209, 211, 224 The Body to make it sound and
well disposed, 428, 462 Bots in horses. 14^ Breath, and difficulty of
breathing, 110, 247. shortness of breath, 114, 115, 178, and, 5^ 8. an ^ll
breath, ^4^. a stinking breath, 199. to cause one to have a good breath, 239,
246. shortness of breath in horses. 202 The Brea^^s, 209, 214. the breast^
ouer-ha^d, 244, 39^. to trusse into a round and ^lose ^athion, the flagging,
withered, and hanging breasts, 47^ (...) also sut them when they are in^^amed,
^8. for the canker in the breasts, 60, 144, 219, 437, to resolve and wast the
tumo^^s of the breasts. 18^ (...), and black spots. 59, 207, ^^4 Buboes to
cure. 120 Burning. 60, 75, 178, 206, 207, 208, 214, 239, 240, 286, 288
Burstings, or ruptures, 55, 207. bu^rsting of the vessels of the body, 207.
rupture or bursting of some of the inward parts. 237
C
CAnkers of all sorts, 60, 144, 198, 200, 205, 207, 214, 387. Cankers growing
in the mouth. 387. Cankers growing in the ^ares of dogs. ibid. A plague
Carbuncle. 201, 210, 220 Carn^^^^^ in the bladder. 210 Cathars. 10, 69, 95,
203, 207, 262 Chast^tie, and to make men chaste. 239, 243, 291 Cheese to keep
from being spoiled and rotten. 244 The Child dead in the womb, and the mane^
of drawing it forth, 205, 207, 210, 21^, 248, 285, 287. the child not borne out
his full time. 246 Chops, 214, 435. of the lips, 177, 668. of the hands, 177
Chops growing in the feet of horses. 143 Chosicke, and the cure thereof, 49,
144, 152, 180, 183, 184, 16^, 207, 213, 244, 288 To Conceive, and to make to
conceive. 245, 246, 248 The false Conception in the womb. ^35 Conserve for the
heart. 47 For such as are in a Consumption. 75 Contraction of ligaments. 163
Co^^^sion. 263, 212, 248, 251 The Co^^^, a horses disease. 145 An old Cough,
119. a hard Cough. 245 Cough^ of all sorts, and the remedies for the same, 75,
178, 212, 247 in Oxen. 95, 100 in Sheep. 114, 115 of Mules. 152
Counterpoysons. 293, 304 The Courbe, a horses malady. 145
D
^Easnesse. 45, 178 ^To make a faite Die, or color, 249 Difficulty of Urine
in Horses, 141 ^^pe and comfort Digestion. 244, 246, 249 ^^ses beginning in the
increase of the Moon, are of long continuance. 32 prognosticated, 36 of Oxen.
93, 102 of Horses, in diverse sorts, and the means to cure them, 136, 152,
their urine scalding them. 137 of Sheep. 114 of Lambs. 116 of Goats. 119 of
Asses. 150 of Mules and Mulets. 152 diverse of Swine. 107 of Dogs, and remedies
for the same. 12^, 677 of several Birds, and their cures. 748 of Fishes. 181
(...) of humors. 200, 207 (...) falling down upon the eyes. 207, 213 (...)
Dog, and the remedies against his bitings. 61 ^^ Draught-gut fallen down. 54,
202, 209, 213, 140 (...) Ox hi^ Draught-gut hurt. 96 (...), and Hydropicall
persons, 49, 104, 171, 178, 183, ^89, 207, 209, 211, 213, 230, 239, 247, 250,
280, 285, 286, 287 (...) sinesse, and the remedies against it. 41, 244, 245 ^^
unkennesse, and how to prevent it. 166, 371, 203
E
Ears, the pain and diseases thereof, 44. silthie and perulent, 178. wormie,
197. noise in them, 188, 20^, 397. exulcerate. 209 (...). 211 (...). 99 ^^ was
with la^^be, 116. having the sniuell, 114. troubled with corns. 115 ^^^eake
Eyes, 120. their diseases and remedies, 4^, 44, 84, 1^7, 213, 243. the web in
the Eye, 74, 198. spots of the Eye, 199. the Eyes full of spots, 696. bleared
Eyes, 192. weeping Eyes, 452. fissulated Eyes, 461. to clarify the Eyes, 252.
Distillations and (...) falling down upon the Eyes, 207. redness of the eyes,
195, (...). and other griefs of the same. 460, 461 The Eyes of Oxen, and their
diseases, 98, 99. Oxen having weeping Eyes. 101 ^^lotses their blea^ed Eyes,
138. and other their griefs, 139
F
FAintings. 47 Falls. 209 Fallen from on high. 57 Falling sickness, 42, 148,
182, 203, 204, 211, 240, 245, 248, 375, 453, 454, 460, 668 The Falling
sickness is gotten by eating of Goats flesh, 119 Fars^^ in Horses. 143, 201
Feet, and the stench of the fee^. 53 Fevers. 200, 387 Fevers of all sorts. 252
Fevers continual, 39 quotidian. 203 tertian. 40, 198, 203, 208, 210, 211, 213,
387 hot. 177, 188, 191, 298, 208 quartane agues, 40, 173, 199, 200, 202, 203,
210, ^^3, ^57 long and lasting. 253 coming of obstructions. 197 pestilent. 201
of the Ox. 100 of the Horse. 128 of the Sheep. 115 of the Swine. 107 the
Goats ague called continual, because they never are without it. 119
The Fig a disease in Horses. 129 A Fire without smoke. 419 Fistula. 193, 206,
213, 435, 458 The Horse his Fistula. 144 A Flea in the ^are, 237. to kill
fleas. 248 Phlegm, and flegmatike diseases. 212 Flesh, and to keep it from
putrefying in Summer. 246 To drive away Flies and Gnats. ibid. Flowers of
women, to stay them, 52, 204, 206, 213, 237, 246, 690. to cause them. 172, 203,
348 Flux of blood. 176, 209, ^9^, 690 of blood of all sorts. 297 of blood at
the nose. 45, 75, 178, 204, 206, 208 of blood by a wound. 204, 206 to stay them
of all sorts. 204, 285, 287
The Flux of the belly. 74, 120, 203, 213, 29^ The Flux of the belly and
blood. 207 The Flux of the belly in Oxen, 94. in Horses, 224. and in Hens.
^9 Fr^^kles, in the face. 199, 201, 208, 212, 239 Frensies, and frantic
persons. 42, 116 Frets in little children. 248 Fundament fallen. 205
G
GAlling of Horses their backs. 141, 145, 197 Gang^^ne. 434 Garlic eaten, and
how to take away the stench and ill savor thereof. 179 Garments, and how to
keep them from vermin. 239 Garrot, a Horses malady. 145 Giddiness in men's
heads. 183 Goomes, 19^. to cleanse them. 246 The Goomes of Horses exulcerated.
140 Gowt. 55, 147, 202, 209, 214, 237 For all manner of Gowts, and ioint-aches.
56 Gravel, 74, 183, 188, 203, 205, 259, 288, 371, 461, 555, 563. 648, 668, 693
G^ipings, 249, 288, 389. in the belly. 201, ^49 Wom^ns Gripings or throws
after childbirth. 54 Guts falling down, and the rupture, 54, 202, 211, 213,
240, 288, 207. the rupture in a horse. 145
H
Hair, and to keep it from falling, 189. to color that of the head and
beard, 456, 457. to make it red, 285. or black, 247. the Hair fallen. 75 The
falling of the Hair called Tine^. 61, 197, 201, 214 Ha^ting in a Horse. ^44
Hands wrinkled, 46. shaking. 246 Hand-wormes. 213 Heart, the pain and grief
thereof, 169, 203, 251. faintness of the Heart, 128, 200, 239. beating of the
Heart 47 Heart-ache. 169 The Heart-^ore, a disease that kills horses
suddenly. 139 Headache, and pain of the head, 40, 85, 176, 178, 193, 211, 199,
221, 244, 246, 248, 252, 286 Hemorrhoids, and their cure. 51, 168, 178, 198,
206, 214 Hicket. 48, 244, 249 Horse cloyed. 206
I
IAundise, 49, 78, 104, 143, 169, 172, 173, 195, 202, 205, 237, 326, 457
Iaundise in trees. 405 Such as have the Iaundise, are called (...), 183, 206,
209 Iauar, a disease in horses. 142, 143 Inflammations, 196, 204, 208. of the
mouth, 200. of the eyes, 214. of the secret parts. 213 (...), and the a^h of
the (...) 434 (...), 201, 204, 205, 208, 213, 295, 297. in sheep, 114. in
dogs. 678
K
KIngs evil, and remedies for the same, 42, 104, 198, 211, 2^4, 253 Knots or
nodes in whatsoever part of the body* 59
L
LEanenesse through long sickness, 704. the Mulets leanenesse. 152 Le^pers,
and leprosy. 204, 205, 291, 453 Liver obstructed, 55, 203, 205, 212, 251, 284,
287. hot, 49, 169. hard, 252, 253. weak, 698. to comfort it. 203 Lungs, and
such as have their lungs inflamed, 251, 371, 381, 563, 699. weak lungs, 202.
diseased lungs, 201. Lungs replete with stegme, 200. to cleanse the lungs, 212.
vlce^ated lungs. 203, 236 Lyce and Nits, 173, 180. to drive lyce out of the
head, 208. to kill lyce, 61. Ox lyce. 103
M
Madness of dogs to prevent, 120, 122, 1^8, 180, 199, 200, 244, 387, 391,
678. madness of Wolves, 678. madness of amorous Mares. 147 The signs of a Mad
dog. 678 The Matrix replete with humors, 212, 213. to cleanse it, 249.
ouer-cooled, 210. vn^uly, and out of order, 287, 250, out of place, 211. hard,
194. pained after childbirth, 184, 334. suffocating, 53. fallen down, 53, 210.
inflamed, 53. 197. having the collicke, 197. troubled with the flux, 373.
exul^erated, 212. to cast out the false conception therein. 251 Meas^^d Hogs.
107 Measeth in children. 186 Megrim. 178 Melancholy, and melancholicke
persons, 245, 248, 251, 372, 380 Members, or parts of the body ouer-cooled.
456 Memory, and to strengthen it, 251 To make men Merry. 252 Milk, and to
cause Nurses to have good store, 48, 188, 168, 249, 250. to take it away from
them, 47. to make that it crudle not. 244 Tartarie Milk makes drunken. 457
Mith^idate sovereign against the plague. 387 To Molli^ie parts that are
ouer-hard. 252 The Mother, or secret parts of women, 52, 53, 120, 201, 203,
245, 246, 251 For the Mother vn^uly and out of order. 250, 251 To kill Mothes
amongst clothes. 434 A stinking Mouth, 46. a fore Mouth. 461 Mow^es on the
heels. 99, 178, 201, 295
N
THe Nail, or Cathaire, 56. Nails of all manner of sorts, 116. the Nail in
Oxen, 102. Nails, and ulcers of the same, 57. broken, or bruised. 214 No^^ me
^angere. 60, 214 Stinking (...). 45
O
OBstructions, 239. obstructions or stuffings of the nosthrils, 208. to open
obstructions. 210
P
THe Pal^mie, a horses disease. 145 Palenesse of color in women. 632 Pa^sie.
189, 204, 237, 239, 247, 293 Pa^mon, what disease it is in ho^^es 145
Pestilence in sheep, with the remedy against it, 114, 115. in swine. 207
Physic invented by shepherds. 110 The Pin and web in a horses eye. 137
Plague, and the remedies thereof, 39, 173, 197, 199, 201, 203, 204, 210, 247,
250, 304, 386, 452 Pleurisy, and remedies for the same. 46, 207, 380, 690
French Pocks. 201, 436 Common Pocks, 200, 201, 290, to take away the pits and
prints that the Pocks leave behind them, 466. the Pocks in children. 57, 58,
186, 204, 295 Pol^pus exul^erated. 208, 214 Poison, 203, 210, 219, 247, 376,
58^. Poison of all sorts, 199, 200. Poison of a Toad, 203. counter-poysons. 304
Pthisicke. 293 Pus^ules. 214 To keep the body from Putrefaction. 285
R
Redness of the face. 42, 195, 246, 287, 379, 469 (...), and the heat and
burning in them, 176, 181, 194, 200, 283, 435 Rhewmes. 213 Ringwormes, 56, 197,
201, 207, 209, 210, 212, 213, 228, 246, 295, 297, 469, 698 Rubi^s in the face.
465 Lambs Runne^ good against all sorts of venime. 116
S
A Sawsie face. 469 Scabs, 60, 697, 698. in Horses, 143. in Sheep, 114, 429.
in Calves, 63. in Oxen, 100, 102. about the pasternes of Mulets, 152, in Swine,
107. in Dogs, 678. about Horses heels. 142, 145 Scaldings. 240 Schirrous
tumors. 57, 198, 287 Scia^i^a, 54, 55, 120, 189, 198, 199, 203, 205, 207, 212,
219, 239, 245, 249, 434 Serpents, and the remedies against their bitings, 61,
245. to kill them, 248. Serpents gotten into the body. 61 Shaking and
trembling of the parts. 55, 246 Shing^^^, 207. in Sheep. 115 Shiuerings of an
Ague. 247 weak, and the remedies therefore. 43, 85, 173, 213 (...)
prognos^^^ating diseases. 29 (...), and the pain thereof, 56, 293, 699.
diseases of a sinews, 434. weak sinews, 189. to comfort the (...) the
sin^wes ouer-co^^ed, 434. relaxed si^^wes (...), 454. oppressed or br^ised
sinews, 55, 248, (...) sinews p^ickt, wounded, or cut. 55, 214 (...) to take
away ^ka^^es. 212 (...). 312 (...) ^eepe, and to cause to sleep, 41, 42, 168.
to take away (...). 244, 245 (...) l^st. 244, 252 (...) (...) gotten into the
body. 61 (...)* 189 (...) (...) and enchantments. 199, 25^ (...) ^ins in
horses. 145 (...) (...), and to recover the speech lost. 239 ^ing, and to
procure spetting, 200, 212, 247. to get up ^nes spettle with pain and much
ado, 207. Spetting (...) blood, and how to stay it, 47, 169, 176, 204, 209,
211, 237, 371 (...) Spleen, the diseases and remedies thereof, 49. the ^^^leene
obstructed, 202, 205, 209, 219, 286, 287, 290. ^^ardnesse of the spleen. 119,
182, 202, 212, 253 (...) in the face, 201, 206, 208, 212, 2^9, ^04. red, 4^,
188, (...) ^97, 198. white, 17^. spots of the body. 293, ^35 (...), 2^3. in
horses, 139. in dogs. 122 (...) th of the arme-pits. 171 (...) ler^ their
stinging, and the remedy. 61, 176, 247 (...) nach, the griefs and remedies
thereof, 49, 434, 461. (...) comfort it, 184, 186, a weak stomach, 246. g^awing
^^ormes in the stomach. 293 (...) in the bladder or reins, 51, 120, 172, 180,
188, 194* ^^00, 101, 103, 205, 110, 251, 285, 288, 37^, 382, 457, 461, 563,
648, 667, 693, 698 (...) angles in horses. 139 (...) in horses. 52, 137, 171,
205, 206, 291 (...) of the mother. 201, 249 (...)- burning in the face. 201
(...). 220 (...) the hornie swelling in horses. 145 (...) ^ating, and to
procure sweating. 200, 201, 293, 454 (...), 220, 248. of diverse sorts, 56. In
horses flanks, 144. for swellings under the saddles of horses that are
bruised, a marvelous remedy, 197. swellings in the cuds of horses, 114.
swelling in Swine. 107
T
T^^^ bad. 189 ^ermes of women. 52, 204, 20^, 246 (...), and the diseases
thereof, as the raging ache, and others, with their remedies, 45, 172, 184,
188, 19^, 299, 204, 208, 246, 2^0, 252, 285, 293, 467. loose, black, red, and
stinking teeth, 45, 46. the horse his toothache, 140 (...) (...) ^wolen in an
Ox. 101 (...). 177 ^ornes, and how to draw them out of the body. 207, 252 The
Throws or mother in women. 54 Women's Travail, to comfort, help, and ease them
therein. 176, 181, 188, 196, 199, 205, 212, 237, 240, 285, 397 Tumo^^, 104,
116, 214, 252. hot, 204 hard, 690, cold, 198. pestilent tumors, 204. old tumors
in horses, 145. to ripen tumors. 249 Young black by reason of some ague. 213
V
Ulcers that are old, 197, 207. hollow and filthy, 202, 207, 239, 457.
malignant, 201, 207, 213, 214 to (...) old and malignant ones, 21^, ulcers of
the mouth, 197, 199, 203. of the ears, 209. inward, 207. of the lungs, 205. of
the ^eme^, 459. coming of the pocks, 58, 203. ulcers in Oxen. 102 A low and
base Votte, 148. to have a good voice. 176 To stay Vomiting, 48, 204, 213, 249.
to cause vomiting speedily, 449. to provoke vomit, 285. to the curing of a
quartane and tertian ague. 298 Urine of all sorts, and to procure the making of
urine, (...), 97, 171, 176, 180, 182, 194, 197, 199, 203, 205, 208, 210, 211,
212, 246, 248, 251, 371, 397, 453, 679, 690 Horses hardly able to make their
Urine. 141.
W
WArts, 60, 206. hanging Warts. ^16 Against Witchcraf^. 199 Fuke^ for Women,
etc. 208, 304, 465 Worms amongst Bee^. 398 Worms, and how to kill them, 157,
200, 201, 203, 205. 207, 220, 245, 247, 251, 285, 372, (...), 690. worms in
little children, 180, 210, 244, 246, 561, 693. worms menting horses, 146. to
cause the worms that trouble dogs, to fall from them, 677, 678. to kill them
that destroy trees, 405, 406. to keep flesh from all manner of worms, 197. to
cause them to come out of the earth in great abundance. 386 The flying (...) a
disease in horses. 142 To kill earth W^rmes, that eat the roots of herbs. 401
Wounds in dogs. 678 Wound^, 198, 200, 207, 214* against all sorts of wounds,
204. against the inflammation thereof, 28^. wounds fresh and new, ^7, 207, 209,
214, 220. old, 58, 214. maligned, 201. wounds in the arms and legs, 219. in
the noble and ^nner parts, 207, 208. in the head, (...). in the guts, 288.
wounds with Dagges, 59. to draw y^on out of a wound, 199. for to consider of
inward and outward wounds, 202, 205, 207, 211, 212. an excellent balm for
green wounds and cuts* 57, 204, 437 Wring^^^^. 249 Windiness in the stomach
or belly. ibid.
Y
THe Yard swollen, and the cure thereof. The Yard of an Ox grown hard.
FINIS.

