THE ANCIENT ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORIES OF THE FIRST SIX HUNDRED YEARS AFTER
CHRIST, written in the Greek tongue by three learned Historiographers,
Eusebius, Socrates, and Euagrius. EVSEBIVS PAMPHILVS Bishop of Caesarea in
Palaestina vvrote 10 books. SOCRATES SCHOLASTICVS of Constantinople vvrote 7
books. EVAGRIVS SCHOLASTICVS of Antioch vvrote 6 books. Whereunto is annexed
DOROTHEVS Bishop of Tyrus, of the lives of the Prophets, Apostles and 70
Disciples. All which authors are faithfully translated out of the Greek tongue
by MEREDITH HANMER, Master of Art and student in divinity. Last of all
herein is contained a profitable CHRONOGRAPHIE collected by the said
Translator, the title whereof is to be seen in the end of this volume, with a
copious INDEX of the Principal matters throughout all the Histories.

ANCHORA SPEI.



Imprinted at London by Thomas Vautroullier dwelling in the Blackefriers by
Ludgate. 1577.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE GODLY, WISE AND VIRTUOUS LADY ELIZABETH,
COUNTESS OF LYNCOLNE, wife to the right noble Edward Earl of Lyncolne,
Lord high Admiral of England one of the Queens Majesty's privy counsel
and Knight of the most honorable order of the Garter: MEREDITH HANMER wishes
increase of honor, continewance of Godly zeal, perfection of wisdom, and
health in Christ Jesus.
THE holy Apostle and Evangelist, Saint John, one that leaned on our Saviors
breaste (right honorable Lady) when he saw a noble woman whom he terms a
Lady, walking in the way of truth, and willingly embracing the gladsome
tidmges of the Gospel, rejoiced exceedingly and wrote unto her an Epistle
wherein he commends her virtues, exhorting her to observe the old
commandment of loving one an other, and to take heed of deceauers: though in
all poynctes I am found far inferior, nay in nothing comparable at all unto
the blessed Apostle, yet your honors virtues do counteruaile, or rather
surpass the other Ladies Godliness, seeinge the seed of Christianity was in
her but newely sown, and true zeal of religion firmly rooted these many
years in your Ladyships mind. Notwithstanding my inferior condition, be it
lawful (though not of worthiness, at least wise of favor) for me to imitate
the blessed Apostle, and to write unto your honor, not any exhortation of mine
own (which peradventure would be very simple) but the exhortation of the
Apostles and Disciples of our Savior, the martyrdomes of Saynctes and such as
served God in truth and upright conversation, the invincible courage and
constancy of zealous Christians, the Godly sayings and sentences of true
professors, the wise and politic gouernemente of commonweals by Catholic
Emperors and Christian princes, the careful oversight of the flock of Christ
by reverend Bishops and learned Prelates, the confutation and overthrow of
heretics with the confirmation of the truth ^y holy counsels and sacred
assemblies, and to say the wholl in one word, as the principal drifte of mine
Epistle, to present unto your Ladyship these ancient Ecclesiastical
Historiographers, to wit, Eusebius, Socrates, Euagrius, and Dorotheus. Whose
histories are so replenished with such godly doctrine, that I may very well say
of their all, as a learned writer reports of Eusebius, that they are able to
persuade any man be his mind never so far alienated from the truth, to
become a zealous Christian. Wherefore my good Lady seeing that as Plato says
running wits are delighted with poetry, as Aristotle writes, effeminate
persons are ravished with music, and as Socrates tells us histories agree
best with staide heads: I present unto your honor these histories agreeing
very well with your disposition, and being the fruits of my travel and
study. Ruffinus says, that he wrote his history to delight the reader, to
occupy the time, and to remove the remembrance of the calamities (meaning the
persecution) which then lately had happened. As for Christian pleasure and
Godly delights, what can be more pleasant then the reading of the
Ecclesiastical histories? toutching the time, I know it full well you spend
it as it beseems your calling, to speak of calamity (unless we behold the
misery and lamentable estate of other Realms and dominions) presentlye there
is given no such occasion, for it can not be remembered that the subjects
within this realm of England had the Gospel so freely preached, Clerks so
profoundely learned, Nobility so wise and politic, all successes so
prosperous, as in this happy raygne of our most virtuous and noble Princess
Queen Elizabeth, and therefore are we greatly bound to praise God for it. Yet
if ye call to memory the corruption of late days, the blindness of such as
would be called Gods people, the lamentable persecution of the English Church,
then may ye read them after calamity. But notwithstanding the premises it is
not my drifte to salve such sores, neither to provide medicens for such
Maladies. God of his providence has continewally been so careful over his
Church that his servants were never left desolate. Though Elias complained that
he was left alone, yet were there thousands which bovved not their knees to
Baal. S. Paul tells us there is of Israel a remnant left. Our Savior
speaking of his Church though it be not of the greatest multitudes yet is it
according unto his Epitheton a little flock. And sure I am there may be found
a righteous Abraham in Chaldaea, a just Lot in Sodom, a godly Daniel in
Babylon, a devout Tobias in Niniue, a paciente Job in Husse, and a zealous
Nehemias in Damasco. There is found wheat among tares, grain in the husk,
corn among chafe, a kearnel within the shale, marrow within the bone, a
pearl within the cockle, and a rose among the thorns. There was a Ionathas
in the court of Saul to favor David, there was an Obadia in the Court of Achab
to entertayne the Prophets, there was an Abedmelech in the Court of Sedechias
to entreat for Jeremy, and in the Court of Diocletian there were many young
Gentlemen, namely Petrus, Dorotheus, Gorgonius with many others which embraced
the Christians and suffered death for the testimony of Christ, as your honor may
read in these Ecclesiastical histories, which I have not therefore commended
unto you for the remembrance of any calamity at all. But as for the Court of
our most gracious Queen (a sight both joyful and comfortable) where there
resortes so many learned Clerks, so many Godly persons, so many grave Matrons,
so many virtuous Ladies, so many honorable personages, having so noble a head
to govern them all: There the Christian is no Phoenix, the godly is no black
swanne, for the Gospel is freely preached, and the professors thereof had in
honor and estimation. Wherefore in so godly a place, to be so virtuously
disposed at vacant times, as to read these ancient histories, will be a
commendation unto your honor, an increase of knowledge, a confirmation of the
faith, a maintenance of zeal, and a lively beholdinge of Christ Jesus in his
members. Here you may see the modesty and shamefastnes of Christian maidens,
the constancy of zealous women, the chaste minds of grave Matrons, the godly
disposition and wise government of Queens and Empresses. Here your Ladyship
shall find zealous prayers, sorowefull lamentations, godly Epistles, Christian
decrees and constitutions. The father admonishing the son, the mother her
daughter, the Bishop his clergy, the Prince his subjects, one Christian
confirming an other, and God exhortinge us all. Many now adays had rather
read the stories of King Arthur: The monstrous fables of Garagantua: the
Palace of pleasure: the Dial of Princes, where there is much good matter: the
Monk of Bury full of good stories: Pierce ploweman: the tales of Chaucer
where there is excellent wit, great reading and good decorum observed, the life
of Marcus Aurelius where there are many good Moral precepts: the familiar and
golden Epistles of Antonie Gvvevarra where there is both golden wit and good
penning: the pilgremage of Princes well penned and Clerckly handeled: Reinard
the Fox: Beuis of Hampton: the hundred merry tales: skoggan: Fortunatus: with
many other unfortunate treatises and amorous toies written in English, Latin,
French, Italian, Spanishe, but as for books of divinity, to edify the
soul, and instruct the inward man, it is the least part of their care, nay
they will flatly answer it belongs not to their calling to occupy their
heads with any such kind of matters, It is to be wished, if not all, at
least wise that some part of the time which is spente in readinge of such
books (although many of them contain notable matter) were bestowed in
reading of holy Scripture or other such wrytinges as dispose the mind to
spiritual contemplation. I am fully persuaded that your Ladyship reads no
vain books, I have seen the experience of your virtuous disposition my self
and known it now of a long time. Wherefore seeinge you have obtained honor
with them that be present, fame for the time to come, riches for your
posterity, an estate for your successors reputation among strangers, credit
amongst your own, gladness for your friends and that which passes all, a
sure affiance in the goodness of God: think it not amiss seeing it agrees
with my vocation, as I began with the Apostle that I now end with exhorting
of your Ladyship to go on still in well doing, and with requestinge of your
honor lovingly to accept the thankful remembrance of the benefits which I
have received at your hands. Let your virtuous disposition and right honorable
calling be a protection and defense that these ancient histories be not
blemished in the hands of Zoylous Sycophants, which as Socrates says, being
obscure persons, and such as have no pith or substance in them, go about most
commonly to purchase unto them selves fame and credit by dispraising of others.
God send your Ladyship many joyful years. From London the first of September.
1576.

Your Honors to dispose and command MEREDITH HANMER.

THE TRANSLATOR UNTO THE CHRISTIAN READER, AS TOUCHING THE TRANSLATION OF THESE
ANCIENT HISTORIES.
AS I am given to understand (good Christian reader) there have been diverse
which attempted to translate these ancient Ecclesiastical histories, yet have
given over their purpose, partly being discouraged with the diversity and
corruption of Greek copies, and partly being dismayed with the crookednes of
Eusebius style, which is by reason of his imperfect allegations, and last of
all, being wholy overcome with the tedious study and infinite toil and
labor. The occasion that moved me to take so great an enterprise in hand was,
that I read them in Greek unto an honorable Lady of this land, and having
some leisure besides the lecture and other exercises agreeable unto my calling,
I thought good to turn the private commodity unto a public profit, and to
make the Christian reader of this my native country partaker also of these
learned, zealous, and pleasant histories. When I took pen in hand, and
considered with my self all the circumstances of these Histories, and found
in them certain things which the autors peradventure might have left
unwritten, but the interpretor in no wise untranslated: I remembered the
saying of Augustine, Diuinitatis est non errare, It belongs to the Divinity,
or to God him self not to err, and that these Historiographers were but men,
yet rare and singular persons. Daily experience teaches us there is no garden
without some weeds, no medovv without some unsavory flowers, no forest
without some unfruitful trees, no country without some barren land, no
wheat without some tares, no day without a cloud, no writer without some
blemish, or that escapes the reprehension of all men. I am sure there is no
reader so foolish as to build upon the antiquity and authority of these
histories as if they were holy scripture, there is an historical Faith which
is not in the compass of our Creed, and if you happen to light upon any
story that sauoureth of superstition, or that seems impossible, penes
autorem sit fides, refer it to the author, take it as cheap as ye find it,
remember that the holy Ghost says, omnis homo mendax. if so, peradventure the
reader to, then let the one bear with the other. Where the places did
require, lest the reader should be snared in error, I have laid down
Censures of an other letter then the text is of, where the author was
obscure, I have opened him with notes in the marge, where I found the story
imperfect, I have noted it with a star, and signified vvithall what my
pen directed me unto. Many Latin vvriters have employed great diligence and
labor about these Greek Historiographers, one translating one piece, an other
an other piece, one interpreting one of the autors, an other tra^slating almost
all, one perusing, an other correcting. Jerome turned Eusebius into Latin, but
it is not extant. Ruffinus took upon him to translate Eusebius. Of him Jerome
vvryteth in Ierom^ Ruffinus
this sort: Ecclesiasticam pulchre Eusebius histo^ texuit, quid ergo de
interpret sentiendum, liberum sit iam cuique iudicium. Eusebius has very
well compiled the Ecclesiastical history, but as for the interpreter, every
man has to think of him what himlist. Beatus Rhenanus, a man of great
judgment, says thus of Ruffinus. In libris a se versis parum laudis meruit,
quod ex industria no^ verba vel sensum autoris quem vertendum susceperit
appendat, sed vel minus vel plusculum tanquam paraphrases, non velut interpres
pro sua libidine plerumque referat. Ruffinus deserved but small praise for his
translations, because of purpose he took no heed unto the words and meaning
of the author which he took upon him to translate, but interpreted for the
most part at his pleasure, by adding and diminishing, more like a Paraphrast
then a translator. I find by perusing of him that he uttered in fevv words,
which Eusebius vvrote at large: that he is tedious where Eusebius is brief:
that he is obscure where Eusebius is plain: that he has omitted where
Eusebius is dark, words and sentences and pages, and Epistles, and in manner
vvholl books. Half the eight book of Eusebius (so has Musculus to) and in
manner all the tenth book, he has not once touched. Ruffinus vvrote the
history of his time in two books, and erred fovvly in certain things, as
Socrates does report of him. Epiphanius Scholasticus translated the Tripartite
history. Ioachimus Camerarius gives of him ohanius.
this judgment. Tantam deprehendi in translatione non modo barbariem sed etia^
inscitiam ac somnolentiam istius Epiphanij, vt mirarer vlli Graecorum non adeo
alienam linguam Latinam, sed ignoratam suam esse potuisse. I found in the
translation of this Epiphanius, not only such barbarous phrases, but also
ignorance and palpable error, that I can not choose but marvel, how any
Grecian could be unskillful, not so much in the strange Latin tongue, as
ignorant in his own language. VVol^gangus Musculus a learned interpretour,
has translated the histories of Eusebius, yet Edvvardus Godsalfus ^sculus.
gives of him this Censure. Hic autem satis correctis exemplaribus, vt
credibile est destitutus innumeris locis turpissime labitur. Est porro adeo
obscurus vt interpres egeat interpret, adeo salebrosus vt lector identidem
inhaereat, adeo lacunosus vt autores ipsi Graeci historiae suae sententias non
fuisse expletas grauiter conquerantur. This Musculus as it is very like,
vvanting perfect coppies, erred fovvly in infinite places. Moreover, he is so
obscure that the Translator has need of an interpretour, so intricate that
the Reader is now and than graueled, so brief that the Greek autors them
selves do grieuouslie complain, that the sentences in their Histories were
not fully expressed. Though the reporter be partial being of a contrary
religion, yet herein I find his judgment to be true, and specially in his
translation of the tenth book of Eusebius. yet not I only, but others have
found it. Iacobus Grynaeus a learned man, corrected many faults, naeus.
explicated many places, printed in the marge many notes, yet after all this his
labor which deserves great commendation, there are found infinite escapes,
and for trial thereof, Ireport me unto the Reader. Christophorson (as for his
religion I refer it to God and to him ^isto^rson.
self, who by this time knovveth whether he did well or no) was a great
Clarke, and a learned interpretour, he has Translated passing well, yet
sometimes does he addicte him self very much to the Latin phrase, and is
carried away with the sound and weight thereof. If any of the former vvryters
had done well, what needed the later interpretours to take so much pains? I
vvoulde have all the premises, and whatsoever has been spoken of these
Latin Translatours by me (although one of them charge an other) to be
taken, not that I accuse them of mine own head, but by beholding their
doings, to excuse the faults that might escape in this English Translation.
I found the Greek coppie of Eusebius in many places vvonderfull crabbed, his
History is full of allegations, sayings ^bius.
and sentences, and Epistles, and the self same authority oftentimes alleged
to the confirmation of sundry matters, that the words are short, the sense
obscure and hard to be translated. Yet the learning of the man, the authority
of his person, and the Antiquity of his time will cause whatsoever may be
thought amiss to be well taken. Socrates who follovved Eusebius ^ates.
about a hundred and forty years after, and continevved the History, vvrote
an eloquent and an artificial style, he uses to allege vvholl Epistles,
perfect sentences, and has delivered the historic very plain. His words are
svveete, his vain pleasant, and his invention very witty. though the
history be large, his books long, and the labor great in writing of them,
yet was I very much recreated with the svvetenesse of the work. Euagrius,
who began where Socrates left, and continevved his pen unto the end
Euagrius
of the first six hundred years after Christ, is full of Dialects, and
therefore in Greek not so pleasant as Socrates. He has many superstitious
stories which might very well have been spared. But in perusing of him I
would have the reader to note the great change that was in his time more
then in the days of the former vvryters, and thereafter to consider of the
times follovving, the difference that is in these our days between the Church
and the Apostolic times. the increase, augmentation, and daily adding of
ceremonies to ceremonies, service upon service, with other Ecclesiastical
rites and decrees, is not the increase of piety and the perfection of
godliness, for our Savior tells us in the Gospel, that toward the Math. ^
later days love shall wax cold, and iniquity shall abound: but the malice
and spite of the Deuell, who with the change of time, alters (as much as
he may) the state of the Ecclesiastical affairs, and thrusts daily into the
church one mischief upon an other. Moreover Euagrius being a te^porall man,
stuffeth his History with profane stories of vvarres and warlike engines,
of battles and loudshed, of Barbarians and Heathen nations. In describing the
situation of any soil, the erection of buildings, and virtues of some proper
person, he does excel. Dorotheus Bishop of Tyrus and Martyr, whom I have
annexed unto Dorothe
these former Historiographers, being well seen in the Hebrew tongue, and a
great Antiquarie, vvrote briefly the lives of the Prophets, Apostles, and
seventy disciples of our Savior. The faults that are therein, I attribute
them rather unto the corrupt coppies, then to any want of knowledge in him.
Such things as are to be noted in him, I have laid them in the preface before
his book. After all these Translations (gentle Reader) not vvithstanding my
great travel and study, I have gathered a brief Chronographie, beginning
with Eusebius, A Chr^nograph
and ending with Euagrius, where thou may see the years of the
Incarnation, the reign of the Emperors, the famous men and Martyrs, the kings
of Iudaea, and high priests of the Jews in Jerusalem, from the birth of
Christ unto the overthrow of the City, the Councels, the Bishops of
Jerusalem, Antioch, Rome, Alexandria, and all the heresies within the first
six hundred years after Christ, divided into Columns, where the year of the
Lord sta^ds right over against every one. The profit that rises by reading of
these histories, I am not able in fevv words to declare* besides the works of
the autors the^ selves, they have brought forth unto us Sentences, Epistles,
Orations, Chapiters and books of ancient vvryters, such as vvrote immediately
after the Apostles, and are not at this day extant save in them. Namely of
Papias Bishop of Hierapolis, Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna, Polycrates Bishop of
Ephesus, Dionysius Bishop of Corinth, Apollinarius Bishop of Hierapolis,
Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, Melito Bishop of Sardis, Serapion Bishop of
Antioch, Irenaeus Bishop of Lions, Alexander Bishop of Jerusalem, Theoctistus
Bishop of Caesarea, A^atolius Bishop of Laodicea, Phileas Bishop of Thumis,
Alexander Bishop of Alexandria, Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, Theognis Bishop
of Nice, Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria, Gregory Bishop of Nazianzum, Cyrill
Bishop of Alexandria, Eusebius Bishop of Dorilaeum, Peter Bishop of Alexandria,
Gregory B. of Antioch. Of Gaius, Cornn^ius, Julius, Liberius, Bishops of Rome.
Of the Councels, as the Synod in Palaestina and Antioch, the Council of Nice,
Ariminum, Ephesus, Chalcedon and Constantinople. Of learned vvriters as,
Quadratus, Rhodon, Africanus, Miltiades, Apollonius, Maximus, Macarius, Origin,
Euagrius, and Symeon. If we be disposed to see the Emperors, their Decrees,
Epistles, Constitutions and Edicts, we may soon find them even from Julius
Caesar the first, unto Mauricius the last, within the first six hundred
years, namely Augustus, Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius, Nero, Galba, Otho,
Vitellius, Vespasia^ Titus, Domitian, Nerua, Traian, Adrianus, Antoninus Pius,
Verus, Comodus, Pertinax, Didius Iulianus, Seuerus, Caracalla, Macrinus,
Heliogabalus, Alexander Maximinus, Gordianus, Philip, Decius, Gallus,
Aemilianus, Valerianus, Claudius Quintilius, Aurelianus, Tacitus, Florianus,
Carus, Diocletian and Maximianus, Co^stantius and Maximinus, Constantinus
Magnus and Licinius, Constantinus the younger, Constantius and Constans, Julian
the Apostata, Iouian, Valentinianus and Valens, Gratian, Valentinianus the
younger, and Theodosius Magnus, Arcadius and Honorius, Theodosius junior,
Martianus, Leo, Zeno, Anastasius, Justinius, Iustinianus; Justinius the 2.
Tiberius and Mauricius. We may see the Bishops how they governed, Ministers
how they taught, Synodes what they decreed, Ceremonies how they crept into
the Church, Heresies how they rose and were rooted out. If we stand upon
the Theater of Martyrs, and there behold the valiant vvrastlers, and
invincible champions of Christ Jesus, how can we choose but be ravished with
zeal when we see the professors of the truth torn in pieces of vvilde
beasts, crucified, beheaded, stoned, stifled, beaten to death with cudgels,
fried to the bones, slain alive, burned to ashes, hanged on gibbettes,
drowned, brained, scurged, maimed, quartered, their necks broken, their
legs savved of, their tongues cut, their eyes pulled out and the empty
place seared with scalding iron, the vvrapping of them in ox hides with
dogs and snakes and drowned in the sea, the inioyning of them to kill one an
other, the gelding of Christians, the paring of their flesh with sharp
rasors, the renting of their sides with the lashe of the whip, the pricking
of their veins with bodkins, and famishing of them to death in deep and
noisome dungeons. It is a vvonder to see the zeal of their prayers, their
charity toward all men, their constancy in torment, and their confidence in
Christ Jesus. These be they whom S. John in his Apocalypse savve in a vision
under the altar, that were Martyred for the c. 6. 7.
word of God and the testimony of Christ Jesus, which cried with a loud
voice, saying: How long tariest thou Lord, holy and true, to judge and to
aue^ge our blood, on them that dvvell on the earth. And long white garments
were given unto every one of them, and it was said unto them, that they
should rest yet for a little season, until their felovve servant and their
brethern that should be killed as they were, were fulfilled. The Angel
tells him who they were that were arrayed in long white garments, and
whence they came, saying: these are they which came out of great tribulation,
and have vvashed their long robes, and made them white by the blood of the
Lamb, therefore are they in the presence of the throne of God, and serve him
day and night in his temple: and he that sits in the throne will dvvell
among them. They shall hunger no more, neither thurst, and God shall wipe
away all tears from their eyes. Very comfortable words. But the
executioners, the tyrants, and tormentours hearts were so hardened, that
neither voices from above, nor signs in the ^er threatening vengeance and the
wrath of God to light upon them, neither the svvetting of stones, nor the
monsters that the earth brought forth could mollify their stony minds. The
sea ouerflovved the land, the earth opened and left dangerous gulphes,
Earthquakes ouerthrevve their Towns and Cities, fire burned their houses, yet
vvoulde they not leave of their fury. They were as S. Paul says, turned
into a reprobate sense, they left no villainy unpracticed, in the end many of
them fell into frenzy and madness, they ran them selves upon naked swords,
they brake their own necks, they hanged them selves, they tumbled them
selves headlong into rivers, they cut their own throtes, and diversely
dispatched them selves. This is the vial full of the wrath of God, which
the Angel in the revelation povvred upon the waters, and the voice that
followed after may very well be spoken of them: O Lord which art and vvast,
thou art righteous and holy, because thou have given such judgments, for they
have shed out the blood of Saints and Prophets, and therefore have thou given
them blood to drink, for they have deserved it. The aforesaid Martyrs gave
forth godly sayings, divine precepts for the posterity, they sealed their
doctrine with their own blood, they spared not their lives unto the death,
they are gone before, they shevved us the way to follovv after, these (good
Christian reader) with other things are to be seen throughout these
Histories. The Chapiters in the Greek were in many places very small, if I
should have follovved the Greek division, then had I left much vvast paper, I
have sometimes joined two or three together, some other times taken them as
they lay, yet where I altered the division, I noted in the marge the number of
the Greek Chapiters. There is no reign of any Emperor, no story almost
vvorthie the noting, but thou have in the marge the year of the Lord for the
better understanding thereof. Whatsoever I found in the Greek, were it good
or bad, that have I faithfully without any parcialitie at all laid down in
English. Wherefore if ought be well done, give the praise unto God. let the
pains be mine, and the profit the Readers.

PSALM. 113. Non nobis Domine, non nobis, sed nomini tuo da gloriam.
The life of Eusebius Pamphilus out of Saint Jerome.
EVSEBIVS Bishop of Caesarea in Palaestina, one that was very studious ^esides
the works with^^ named, ^usebius ^rote four ^ooks of the ^^e of Con^antine:
a^^inst Hicro^^es 8 books: against fatal ^^stenie one ^^oke, all which I have
^^ne. more^^^er Socrat. ^. 2 eccle. ^. cap. 16. (...) says he ^ote three ^oks
against ^^rcellus ^^d there he ^eageth ^^e pieces ^ereof.
in holy scripture, and a diligent searcher together with Pamphilus martyr of
the divine library, wrote infinite volumes, and amongst others these which
follow. Of Evangelical preparation 15 books, as preparatiues for such as
were to learn the doctrine of the Gospel. Of Euangelical demonstration 20
books, where he proves and confirms the doctrine of the new Testament,
with a confutation of the adversary: Of divine apparition 5 books: Of the
Ecclesiastical history 10 books: Of Chronicall Canons a general recital
with an Epitome thereof: Of the disagreeing of the Evangelists: ten books
upon the Prophet Esaias: against Porphyrius who wrote then in Sicilia (as some
do think) 30 books, whereof only twenty came to my hands: One book of
Topiks: An Apology or defense of Origin in 6 books: The life of Pamphilus in
three books: Of martyrs certain other books: Upon the 150 Psalms very
learned commentaries, with sundry other works. He flourished chiefly under the
Emperor Constantinus Magnus, and Constantius his son, and for his
familiarity with Pamphilus martyr, he was called Eusebius Pamphilus. So far
Jerome.

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF EVSEBIVS PAMPHILVS BISHOP OF
CAESAREA IN PALESTINA.
The proeme of Eusebius to his Historye.
THE successions of the holy Apostles, together with the times The argument of
this Eccle siasticall history.
from our Savior unto us hither to continevved, and those things which are
said to be done, according unto the Ecclesiastical historye, what they are,
how great, and who decently have governed the Church, specially in the
most famous provinces: also who in all ages have set forth the heavenly
doctrine, either by preaching, or by vvriting: and again what men, how
many, and when through desire of noueltye, and error, falling into
extremityes, have published them selves Authors of knowledge falsely so
called, and cruelly rent a sunder as ravening wolves, the flock of Christ:
moreover what evils forthwith have fallen upon the vvhole^ation of the
Jews, because of their conspiracye against our Savior: and again hovvmany,
by what means, and in what times the word has been of the Gentiles striuen
against, and what singular men in all times, have passed and gone through
bitter conflicts for his name sake, even by sheding of their blood, and
suffering of torments, and beside* all this, the martyrdomes done in our time,
together with the merciful and comfortable aid of our Savior, toward
every one lovingly exhibited: I determining to publishe in vvriting, will not
begin of any other Where Eusebius beginne^ his histo^* The difficulty the^
of.
place my entrance, then of the first order in doing or dispensation of our
Savior and Lord Jesus Christ* but truly the circumstance it self, even in
the beginning craves pardon, being greater then our strength can sustain. I
confess in deed that which we promise, to be absolute, and that which we
profess to omit nothing, to be a thing incomprehensible. For we first
taking this argument in hand, endeuoringe to tread a solitary and untrodden
way, praying that God may be our guide, and the power of our Lord and
Savior, our present helper and ayder: yet can we no where find as much as
the bare steps of such as have passed the same path before us, having only
sma^^ shows and tokens, vvherevvith diverse here and there in their several
times have left unto us particular declarations as it were certain sparcles,
vvhilest that they lift their voices from far, and from above, from whence,
as from an high place and invisible, crying as out of a certain vvatchtovver
horn, what way we ought to go, and how to direct without error and
danger the way and order of our talk. whatsoever things therefore we
think profitable for this present argument, choosing those things which of
them are here and there mentioned, and as it were culling and gathering the
commodious and fit sentences of such as have written of old, as flovvres out
of medovves bedecked with reason, we will endeavor in shevving the way of
historye, to compact the same as it were into one body, being also desirous to
retain from oblivion the successions, although not of all, yet of the most
famous Apostles of (...) Savior, according unto the Churches most notable, and
yet fresh had in memory. I suppose The necessity.
verily that I have taken in hand an argument very necessary, because that I
have fou^^ no where any Ecclesiastical ^ter, which in this behalf unto this
day, has employed any part of diligence. I hope (...) it will be a very
profitable work for the studious, the The vtility
is earnenestly set to know the utility of this historye. And of these
things heretofore, when that I compiled certain Chronicall Canons, I vvrote
an Epitome, but the more ample declaration thereof, I thought good to reserve
until this present* and the beginning (as I said) will I take of the
dispensation and divinity of our Savior Christ, higher and deeper to be
considered, then that which concerns his humanity, for it is requisite for
him that comitteth to vvriting an Ecclesiastical historye, thence to begin,
even from the chief dispensation of Christ, and deuiner then it seems to
many, in so much that of him we are termed Christians.

T. V.



CAP. I.
A summarye recit all of things concerning the divinity and humanity of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

BEcause therefore the consideration of the manner in Christ, is two fold, the
one consisting as a head on the body, by the which he is understood God, the
other to be pondered with paces, by the which he has put on man, like unto us,
subject to passions for our saluations sake. We shall make a right rehearsal of
those things which follow, if that first we begin the declaration of the whole
history from them which are principal and most proper pillars of this doctrine.
In the mean space the auncientrie and dignity of Christian Antiquity, shall
against them be declared, which suppose this religion new, strange, of late,
and never heard of before: but to declare the generation, dignity, essence,
and nature of Christ, no speech can sufficiently serve. sithence that the
holy Ghost in the prophets has testified: His generation who shall be able to
declare? for Esai. 53. John. 10.
the father no man has known, but the son, neither at any time has any
known the son vvorthely, but the father alone which begat him. This
light going before the world, and all worlds the intellectual and essential
wisdom, and the living word of God, being in the beginning with the father,
who but the father alone has rightly known? which is before every creature
and workmanship, both of visible and invisible things, the first and only
son of God, chief captain of the celestial, rational, and immortal
hoaste, the Angel of the great counsel, Esai. 9.
and executour of the secret will of the father, maker and worker of all
things together with y^ father, which after the father is cause and auctor of
all things, the true and only begotten son of God, Lord, md God, and King
of all things which are created, receiving dominion and rule of the father hy
the same divinity, power, and glory, for according to the mystical divinity
concerning him in the scripture. In the beginning was the word, and the
word was with God, Ioh. 1.
and God was the word* the same vas in the beginning with God* all things
were made by it, and vvithoutit was nothing made that was made. The same
does Moses, the most ancient of all the prophets testify, for describing by
inspiration of the holy spirit the substance and disposition of the universal
world, he shows the framer and workman of all things, God, to have
granted to Christ him self and none other, that is his divine and only
begotten word, the framing of these inferior things. For unto him, conferring
about the creation of man: God said Genes. ^.
(says he) let us make man after our own likeness and similitude. And with
this saying agrees an other prophet thus speaking of God in Hymns, and
saying: He spoke and they were Psalm. 32.
made, he commanded and they were created. By which words he brings in
the father a maker, commanding as universal captain with his kingly beck,
but the word of God next to him (not an other from that which amongst us is
preached) observing in all things his fathers ordinances: as many therefore
from the first original of mankind as appeared just, godly, virtuous, and
honest livers, either about the time of Moses that great worshipper of the
great God, or before him as Abraham and his sons, or as many in the times
following accounted just, and the prophets also which conceived of God with the
cleansed eyes of the mind, have known this same, and have worshipped him as
the son of God with convenient and due honor: but he not degenerating from
his fathers piety, is appointed a teacher unto all of his fathers knowledge.

CAP. II.
The Son of God appeared unto the fathers in the old testament, and was
present with the aeternall father at the creation of the world. Eusebius
shows his divinity partly by his apparitions and partly by creating the
world.

THe Lord God therefore appearing, conferred as a common man with Abraham,
sittinge in the oak grove of Mambre, he forthwith falling down upon his face,
although with the outward eye he beheld but man, yet worshipped him as God, and
made supplication unto him as Lord, with the same words he confesses that he
knew him when he said: O Lord which Genes 18.
iu^gest the whole earth vvilt not thou judge rightly? For if no reason permit
the unbegotten an ^^mmtable essence of the almighty to transform him self
unto the likeness of man, neither again the imagination of any begotten
suffer to seduce the sightes of them that see, neither the Scriptures to feign
such things falsely: the Lord and God which judges the whole earth and
executes judgment, being seen in the shape of man, what other should be
praised (if it be lawefull for me to mention the Author of all things) then
his only preexistent word? of whom it is Psalm. 106.
said in the Psalms: he sent forth his word and healed them, and delivered
them out of all their distress. The same word next after the father Moses
plainly sets forth saying: The Genes. 19.
Lord rayned brimstone and fire from the Lord, out of heaven upon Sodom and
Gomorha. The same does the sacred Scripture call God, appearing again unto
Jacob in the figure of man, Genes. 32.
and saying unto Jacob: Thy name shall no more be Jacob, but Israel shall be thy
name, because thou have vvrastled and prevailed with God. at what time Jacob
termed that place the vision of God, Genes. 32. He preuen*eth the ob^ection:
per^aps they ^vere Angels ^vhich ap^eared unto ^en. ^^sus other^vise I^ho^^a. ^
Seco^daryly ^ot in digni^e but in per ^n and order. ^^sue 5.
saying: I have seen God face to face and my life is preserved. Neither is it
lawefull once to surmise that the apparitions of God in the Scriptures may be
attributed to the inferior Angels and ministers of God, for neither the
Scripture if at any time, any of them appeared unto men concealeth the same:
calling by name neither God, nor Lord, but Angels or messengers which may
easily be tried by innumerable testimonies. This same also does* Jesus the
successor of Moses call graund captain of the great power of the Lord, being
as prince of all supernatural powers and of celestial Angels and Archangels,
and the famous power and wisdom of the father, to whom * secondaryly all
things concerning rule and Reign are committed, when as he beheld him in no
other form or figure then of man, for thus it is written: And it happened
when Joshua was in Jericho he lifted up his eyes and beheld a man standinge
over against him, having a naked svvorde in his hand, and Joshua coming unto
him said: art thou on our side, or on our adversaries? and he said unto him, I
am chief captain of the host of the Lord, and now am come hither. And Joshua
fell on his face to the earth and said unto him: Lord what commaundest thou
thy servant? and the captain of the Lords host said unto Joshua: loose thy
shoe from of thy foot, for the place where thou stand is an holy place and
the ground is holy. By these words thou may perceive the self same, not to
be different from him which talked with Moses, for there also the Scripture
has used the same words: when the Lord savve ^xod. 3.
that he came for to see, God called him out of the midst of the bushe and
said: Moses, Moses, and he answered, what is it? and he said come not
hither, put thy shoes of thy feet, for the place where thou stand is holy
ground, and he said unto him: I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham,
the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. And that it is a certain essence
living and subsisting with the father and the God of all things before the
fundations of the world were laid, ministering unto him at the creation of all
creatures termed the word, and the wisdom of God (notwithstanding the
aforesaid) wisdom her self in her proper person thus by Solomon plainly and
pithely speaking, is to be heard: I (says wisdom) have framed or fixed a
Proverb. 8.
tabernacle, counsel, knowledge, and understanding. I have by calling allured
unto me. Through me Kings do raygne, and Potentates put in practice just
laws. Through me mighty men, and Princes are much made of* Through me Princes
bear rule on earth. to this she adds: The Lord him self fashioned me the
beginning of his vvayes, for the accomplishing of his works. I have been
ordained before the fundations of the world were laid, and from the
beginning, or ever the earth was made, before the vvelspringes flovved out,
before the fundations of the mountains were firmley set, and before all
hills begat he me, when he spread and prepared the heavens, I was present,
when he bound in due order the depth under heaven I was by. I was
vvherevvith he daily delited, rejoicing continually in so much that he rejoiced
at the perfect finishing of the world. that he was before all things, and to
whom (though not to ^ll men) the heavenly word was declared, it follows
that in few words we entreat.

CAP. III.
Why before the incarnation the word was not preached and published among all
people, and known of all as after the incarnation?

FOr what cause therefore the word of old, unto all men, and unto all
nations, even as (...) was not preached, thus it shall evidently appear* that
old and ancient age of man (...) not attain unto this most wise and most
absolute doctine of Christ, for immediately the ^r^t man, from his happy estate,
being careless of the commandment of God, fell into this ^^^all and frail
life, and changed those heavenly delights and pleasures of old for this
cursed earth* and consequently his posterity, when they had replenished the
whole world, appearing far worse (one or two excepted) have chosen certain*
savage and brutishe manners, and with all this bitter and sorrowful life, and
cast in their minds nether city nether common weal, nether arts, nether
sciences whatsoever* and retained amongst them not as much as the name either
of laws or judgments, and to be short not once as much as the vewe of virtue
and philosophy, but living among beasts, spent their time in wilderness, as
^^eldish men and void of humanity, corrupting the reasonable understanding
agreeable with nature, the reasonable seeds of man's mind with their wilful
malice, yelding them selves wholly to al abominations, so that sometimes they
infect each other, sometimes they sleye each other, sometimes they devour man's
flesh, presuming to wage batle with God after the famous battle of the foolish
Giants, determining and imagining in Genes. 11.
their mind to wall heaven and earth in one, and being moved through the
madness of their mind they went about to conquer God the gouerner of all
things, whereby they have thus sore incensed him against them selves. God the
duerseer and ruler of all things, revenged them with floodes and destructions
of fiery flames, as if they had been a certain wild, vmnanured thickett,
ouerspreadinge the whole earth: also with famyne and continual plagues, with
battle and thunderboltes from above he cut them of, and subdued that severe
and most bitter maladye of their souls: by restrayning them with more sharp
punishments and imprisonments. When malice was now flowen unto the brimme and
had ouercast al with the cover thereof, ouershadowing and ouerdarkening the
minds of mortal men, as it were a certain soking slumber of drunkenness:
that first begotten wisdom of God, and the same word that was in the
beginning with God by his superabundant loving kindness, appeared unto the
inhabiters on earth sometimes by vision of Angels, sometimes by him self, as
the helping power of God unto some one or other of the ancient worshippers of
God, in no other form or figure then of man, for otherwise their capacity
could not have comprised the same. After that now by them the seed of piety
was sown and scattered amiddes the multitude of men, and the whole nations
which from the Hebrews linealy descended had now purposed to prefer godliness
upon earth: he delivered unto them of old by his servant Moses, after strait
institutions certain figures and forms of a mi^ticall Sabbath and
circumcision, and entrances unto other spiritual contemplations, but not the
perfect and plain mysteries thereof. When as the law was published and set
forth as a sweet (...) unto all men, then many of the Gentiles through the law
makers, every where yea and philosophers changed their rude, brutish, and
savage senses unto meek and mild natures, so that thereby there ensued
amongst them perfect peace, familiarity, and frendshipithen again to al men
and to the Gentiles throughout all the world, as it were now in this behalf
helped and fit to receive the knowledge of his father, the same schoolmaster
of virtue, his fathers minister in all goodness, the divine and celestial word
of God through man with corporal substance not different from ours, showed him
self about the beginning of the Roman empire, wrought and suffered such
things as were consonant with holy Scripture which foreshewed there should be
borne such a one as should be both God and man, a mighty worker of miracles,
an instructor of the Gentiles in his fathers piety, and that his wonderful
birth should be declared, his new doctrine, his wonderful works, besides
this the manner of his death, his resurrection from the dead, and above all his
divine restitution into the heavens. The Prophet Daniel beholdinge his kingdom
in the spirit to be in the The Kingdom of Christ, Daniel. ^*
latter age of the world, whereas otherwhere deuinely yet here more after the
manner of man describes the vision of God. I beheld (says he) until the
thrones were placed, and the au^^^ent of days sat thereon, his garments were
as the white snow, the hears of his head as pure vvoll, his throne a flame
of fire, his chariots burning fire, a fyry stream slyded before his face, a
thousand thousands ministered unto him, the judgment was set, and the books
were opened, etc. Again: And again after this I beheld (says he) and
behold one coming in the clouds like the Son of man, and he came still
unto the ancient of days, and he was brought ^^^ore him, and to him was
given principality, and honor, and rule, and al people, tribes, and to (...)
shall serve him, his power is an everlasting power which shall not pa^^e,
his kingdom (...) never be destroyed. These things truly may be referred to
none other then in out (...) God that was the word, being in the beginning with
the father, and named (...) reason of his incarnation in the latter tin^es,
(...) ^^eause we have in out (...) prophetical expositions touching our Lord
(...) Christ, and therein has (...) things which concern him, at this present
we wylbe content with the premises.

CAP. IIII.
That Jesus and the very name of Christ from the beginning was both known and
honored among the divine Prophets, that Christ was both a King, an highpriest,
and a Prophet.

THat the name both of Jesus and also of Christ among the holy prophets of old
was honored, now is it time to declare. Moses first of all knowing the name of
Christ to be of great reverence and glorious, delivering types of heavenly
things, and pledges and mistical forms (according unto y^ commandment
prescribed, saying unto him: See thou do all things after the Exodus 25.
fashion that was shevved thee in the mount. Naming man (as he lawfully might)
an highpriest of God, called the same Christ, and to this dignity of high
priesthood although by a certain prerogative excelling all others among men,
yet because of honor and glory he put to, the name of Christ. So then he deemed
Christ to be a certain divine thing. The same Moses also, when, being inspired
with the holy Ghost he had well forseene the name of Jesus, judged the same
worthy of singular prerogative: for this name of Jesus appeared not manifest
among men before it was known by Moses, and this name he gave to him first, and
to him alone whom he knew very well by tipe and figurative sign to receive the
universal principality after his death. His successor therefore, before that
time called not Jesus, but otherwise to weete (...) in this place I suppose to
be corrupted commonly in the greek it is red (...) the Hebrews call him
Iehoschua* ben Nun. ^. The son of Nun. Number. 11. and* 14. Deuteronomy. ^. Iosu. 24.
Ause: He called Jesus, the which name his parents had given him: thereby
attributing to that name singular honor far passing al princely scepters,
because that the same Jesus Naue was to bear the figure of our Savior, and
also alone after Moses to accomplish the figurative service committed unto him,
and thought worthy to begin the true and most sincere worship. Moses to these
two men after him thus surpassing all people in virtue and honor, attributed
for great honor the name of our savior Jesus Christ to the one as high
priest, to the other as principal ruler after him. After this y^ prophets
plainly have prophesied and namely of Christ, and of the peeuishe practice of
the Iewishe people against him, and of the calling of the Gentiles by him. The
testimonies of the prophets touching Christ. ^am. 4. Psalm. 2. Psalm. 2.
Jeremy thus said: The spirit before our face, Christ our Lord, is taken in
their nets, of whom we speak before under the shadovve of his wings we
shall be preserved alive among the Heathen. David also being amazed because of
his name, expostulateth the matter thus: Why (says he) have the Gentiles
raged, and the people imagined vain things? The kings of the earth stood
forth, and the princes assembled together against the Lord and against his
Christ. To these he adds in the parson of Christ saying: The Lord said unto
me thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee. Ask of me and I shall
give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the ends of the earth for
thy possession, Kigs Priests and prophets among the Hebrevvs, because of their
an^oynting evere called Christ's. (...) types and (...) of Christ being (...)
King and Prophet.
The name of Christ therefore among the Hebrews has not only honored those
that were adorned with the high priesthood, anointed with figurative oil
prepared for that purpose: but also princes whom the Prophets by the precept of
God have anointed and made figurative Christ's: because they figuratively
resembled the divine word of God, and the regal and princely power of the
only and true Christ governing all things. And moreover we have learned
certain of the Prophets typicalye by their anointing to have been termed
Christ's. Al they had a relation unto the true Christ, the divine and heavenly
word, the only highpriest of all, the king of all creatures and the chief
Prophet of the father over all other Prophets, the proof hereof is plain: for
none ever of all them that typicaly were anointed, were they Princes, or
Priests, or Prophets, have purchased unto them selves such divine power and
virtue as our savior and Lord Jesus Christ sole and singular has showed.
None of all them how famous so ever they were found, among their own
throughout many ages by reason of their dignity and honor have bestowed this
benefit upon their subjects, that by their imaginatiue appellation of Christ
they should by name be consecrated Christians in deed. Neither has the honor
of adoration been exhibited by the posterity unto any of them, neither after
their death has there been any such affection, that for their sake any
prepared them selves to dye for the maintenance of their honor, neither has
there been any tumult among the Gentiles throughout the world for any of them,
the power of the shadow was not of such efficacy in them, as the presence of
the verity by our savior declared, which resembled nether the form or figure
of any: nether linealy descended according unto the flesh from the Priests:
neither was exalted by the might of men unto his kingdom: neither prophesied
after the manner of the ancient Prophets: neither obtained any preeminence or
prerogative among the Jews: yet for all this, Christ, being by the divine
spirit adorned with all these dignities though not in types yet in truth it
self, and enioyinge all the gifts of those men (whereof mention is made) he
has been more published and preached, and has powered upon us the perfect
ornature of his most reverent and holy name, not turning henceforthe unto
types and shadows such as serve him, but unto the naked truth, the heavenly
life, and undoubted doctrine of verity, his anointing was not corporal, but
spiritual, by participation of the unbegotten dyetie of the father, the which
thing Esai declares when as in the person of Christ he breaks out into
these words: The spirit of the Lord upon me, wherefore he anointed Esaias. 61.
me to preach glad tydinges unto the poor, he sent me to cure the contrite in
heart, to preach deliverance unto the captives, and sight unto the blind.
Not Esaias alone but David also touching the person of Christ lifts up his
voice and says: Thy throne o God lasts for Psalm. 44.
aye, the scepter of thy kingdom is a right scepter; thou have loved
righteousness and hated iniquity, wherefore God, even thy God has anointed
thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows, of the which the first
verse terms Christ, God, the second honoreth him with regal scepter, thence
consequently passing unto the rest he shows Christ to be anointed not with
oil of corporal substance but of divine, that is of gladness, whereby he
signifies his prerogative and surpassing excellency and difference seuering
him from them, which with corporal and typical oil have been anointed. And
in an other place, David declaring his dignity says: The Lord Psalm. 110.
said unto my Lord, sit thou on my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy
footestole. And out of my womb before the day star have I begotten thee.
The Lord swore, neither vvil it repent him, thou art a Priest for ever after
the order of Melchisedech. This Melchisedech in the Genes. 14 Heb. 4. 7.
sacred Scriptures is said to be the Priest of the most high God, so
consecrated and ordained neither by any oil prepared of man for that purpose,
neither by succession of kindred attayning unto the priesthood as the manner
was among the Hebrews. Wherefore our Savior according unto that order and not
others (which received signs and shadows) is published by performance of the
oath, Christ and Priest. So that the history delivers him unto us nether
corporally anointed, among the Jews, nether borne of the priestly tribe, but
of God him self before the day starr, that is being in essence before the
constitution of all worldly creatures, immortal possessinge a priesthood that
never perishes by reason of age, but lasts world without end. Yet this is
a The offi of Christ proved ^ consent the serui^ of the fa^ full Saint
great and an apparent argument of his incorporeall and divine power, that
alone of all men that ever were, and now are, among all the wightes in the
world, Christ is preached, confessed, testified, and every where among the
Grecians and Barbarians, mentioned by this name, and hitherto among all his
adherentes honored as King, had in admiration above a Prophet, glorified as the
true and the only high Priest of God, surpassing all creatures, as the word
of God, consisting in essence before all worlds, receiving honor and worship
of the father and honored as God him self, and which of all other is most to
be marueled at, that we which are dedicated unto him honor him not with tongue
only, and garrulous talk of whispering words, but with the whole affection
of the mind, so that willingly we prefer before our lives, the testimony of
his truth.

CAP. v.
That the Christian religion is neither new neither strange.

I suppose these things to have been necessaryly placed by me in the beginning
of this history, In the g^ both the chapter^ were o^
lest that any surmise our Savior and Lord Jesus Christ to be a new vpstarte
by reason of the time of his being in the flesh. Now again lest that any so
deem his doctrine as new found and straung, delivered by such a one so
thought of, and nothing differing from other in (...) doctrines, let us then in
few words entreat and reason of this the which we may take for undoubted. For
when as the coming of our Savior Christ was now fresh in the minds of all
men, The (...) an nat^
and that a new nation neither small, nether weak, neither such as was
conversant and situate in corners of fountaynes and welspringes, but of all
other most populous and most religious secure as toutching danger, and of
invincible mind aided continually by the divine power of God, at certain
secret seasons suddenly appeared, the same I say being bewtified among all men
by the the title and name of Christ, the which one of the Prophets being
astonished and fore seeing to come to pass with the single eye of the divine
spirit, utters thus: who has heard such things* or who has spoken
after this manner? has the earth traueling brought forth in one day? has ere a
nation spronge up suddenly and at one time? in an other place also he has
signified the same Esaias 62.
to come to pass, where he says: They that serve me shall be called after a
nevve name, which shall be blessed on earth. Although presently we plainly
appear to be vpstarts, and this name The life of Christians very ancient.
of Christians of late to have been notified unto all nations: yet that the
life and conversation of Christians is neither new found neither the invention
of our own brain, but from the ancient creation of mankind, and as I may
say rectified by the natural cogitations and wisdom of the asicient godly
men, we will thus by godly examples make manifest unto the world. The nation of
the Hebrews, is no new nation, but famous among all people for their
antiquity, and known of The fathers of the old te stamentwere Christians.
al. They have books and monuments in writing containing ancient men. Though
their nation were rare and in number few, yet they excelled in piety, and
righteousness, and al kind of virtues, some notable and excellent before the
flood, and after the flood others as the sons and Nephews Isuppose this Atar
to be Their mentioned in the 11. of Genes. ^ The definition of a Christian.
of Noe, as Atar and Abraham, in whom the children of the Hebrews do glory as
their chief guide and forefather, if any affirm these famous men set forth by
the testimony of righteousness though not in name yet in deed to have been
Christians, he shall not err therein, * for he that vvil express the name of a
Christian must be such a man as excels through the knowledge of Christ and
his doctrine, in modesty and righteousness of mind, in constancy of life, in
virtuous fortitude, and in confessing of sincere piety toward the one and
the only universal God. They of old had no less care of this then we,
nether cared they for the corporal circumcision no more do we, nether for the
observation of the Sabaoths no more do we, nether for the abstinence from
certain meats and the distinction of other things which Moses first of all
instituted and delivered in signs and figures to be observed, no more do
Christians the same now, but they perceived plainly the very Christ of God to
have appeared to Abraham, to have answered Isaac, and reasoned with Israel,
that he commoned with Moses, and afterward with the Prophets, we have
entreated before. Whereby thou may find the godly of old to have sorted unto
them selves the surname of Christ, according unto Psalm. 104. Christ's that
anointed.
that of them spoken: se that ye touch not my *Christ's, nether deal peruersly
with my Prophets. It is manifest that the same service of God, invented by the
godly of old about the the time of Abraham, and published of late unto all the
Gentiles, by the preaching of the doctrine of Christ is the first, the eldest,
and the auncientest of all, but if they object that Abraham a long time after
received the commandment of Circumcision, yet before the receipt thereof by the
testimony of his faith has been accounted righteous, the Scripture declaring
thus of him: Abraham believed God and ^nes. 15. (...). 4.
it was imputed unto him for righteousness, and he being the same before
circumcision heard y^ voice of God, which also appeared unto him. The same
Christ, then the word of God promised unto the posterity following that they
should be justified after the manner of Abraham's justification, saying: and all
the tribes of the earth shall be blessed in thee. again, thou shall be a great
and a populous ^ (...). 4. ^nes. 12. ^nes. 22.
nation, and all the nations on earth shall be blessed in thee. this is manifest
in so much that it is fulfilled in us, for he through faith in the word of God,
and Christ which appeared unto him was justified, when as be forsook the
superstition of his native country, and the error of his former life, confessed
the only God of al, and worshipped the same with virtuous works, and not with
the Mosaical ceremonies of the law which afterward ensued, unto him in this
case it was said: In thee shall al ^es. 22.
the tribes and all the nations of the earth be blessed, The same manner of
sanctimony was seen excercised of Abraham in works far excelling the words
vsualy received among the Christians alone throughout the world, what then
hinders but that we may confess the sole and the same conversation of life,
the same manner of service, to be common unto us (after the time of Christ) with
them which have sincerely served God of old? so that we show the same to be
nether new, nether strange, but (if it be lawful to testify the truth) the
auncientest, the only, and the right restoration of piety delivered unto us by
the doctrine of Christ, of these things thus far.

CAP. VI.
Of the time of our Saviors coming unto the world.

Now that we have conveniently proposed hitherto as by way of preface, this
our Ecclesiastical (...). 5. after ^reeke.
history, it remains then that we begin after a compendious sort from the
coming of our Savior Christ in the flesh, and that this may take effect, we
pray God the father of the word and the revealed Jesus Christ our Lord and
Savior, the heavenly word of God to be our helper and fellow laborer to the
setting forth of the true declaration thereof. It was Jesus Christ was borne
the 3963. year of the world, in the 3. year of the 134 Olympiade, the 42.
year of Augustusth^ 34 of Herod^ Luc. 2. Josephus. Act. 5. Josephus antiquit.
lib. 18. cap. 1.
the two and forty year of the raygne of Augustus the Emperor, after the
subjection of Egypt, and the death of Antonius and Cleopatra where last of all
the Ptolemaees in Egypt ceased to bear rule, the eight and twentieth year,
when as our Savior and Lord Jesus Christ, at the time of the first taxing, (
Cyrenius then President of Syria) was borne in Bethleem a city of Judea,
according unto the prophecyes in that behalf premised. The time of which
taxing under Cyrenius, Flauius Josephus an ancient historiographer among the
Hebrews makes mention of, adding thereunto an other history of the heresye
of the Galilaeans, which sprung up about the same time, whereof amongst us also
Luke in the Acts of the Apostles mentions writing thus: After this manner
started up on Judas of Galilee in the days of tribute and drew away many of
the people after him, he also him self perished and as many as obeyed him
were scattered abroad. The same does Josephus (before mentioned) in his
eyghtenth book of Antiquities confirm thus, by word: Cyrenius of the number
of Consuls which enjoyed other principalities, and by the consent of all men
so prevailed that he was thought worthy of the Consulship and counted great
by reason of other dignities, came with a fevve into Syria, sent for this
purpose by Caesar that he should have there the jurisdiction of the Gentiles,
and be Censor of their substance. And a little after. Judas (says he)
Gaulanites a man of the city Gamala, having taken unto him on Sado^hus a
Pharisee, became a rebel, and affirmed together with this Pharise, that the
taxing of this tribute Joseph lib. 2. Iudaic. bell. cap. 7. callet this
Galilaean Simon and not Judas as Eusebius does.
inferred nothing else but manifest servitude, and exhorted the Gentiles to set
their helping hand to the maintenance of their liberty And in his second book
of the wars of the Jews, he writes thus of him: About that time a certain
Galilaean by name Judas, seduced the people of that region, misliking with
this, to wit: that they sustained the payment of tribute, unto the Roman
empire, and under God that they suffered mortal men to bear rule over them. So
far Josephus.

CAP. VII. Cap. 6. after the Greek.

That according unto the prescript times foreshewed by the Prophets, the
Princes of the Jews which unto that time by succession held the
principality, surceassed and that Herod the first of the Aliens became their
King.

When Herod the first of them which unto Israel are counted strangers,
received Christ was borne vvhe as the scept taken from Judah was held of
H^rode the Id^maean. Genes. 19.
rule over the Jewishe nation the prophecye written by Moses in that behalf
was fulfilled, which said: There shall not want a Prince in Judah, neither a
leader fail of his loins, until he come for whom it was kept and reserved,
whom he pronounced to be the expectation of the Gentiles. Then were not these
things come to an end which concerned this prophecy, at what time it was
lawful for this nation to be governed by their own Princes which lasted by
line of succession, even from Moses unto the raygne of Augustus the Emperor
under whom Herod the foreyner became ruler over the Jews being granted
unto him by the Romans, who as Josephus writes, was by father an Idumaean,
by mother an Arabian, and as Aphricanus one not of the vulgar sort of
Historiographers writes by the report of them which diligently read him: The
son of Antipater, and the same to be the father of on Herod Ascalonites, on
Herod A^tipater the father of H^rode Ascal^nites.
of the number of them which ministered in the temple of Apollo. This Antipater
being a child was taken by Idumaean thieves, among whom he remained because
his father being poor was not able to redeem him, and being bred and brought
up in their manners, he became very familiar with Hyrcanus the high Priest of
the Jews, this had then a son borne called Herod, which raygned in the
time of our Savior. The principality of the Jews being at this point, then
present was the expectation of the Gentiles according unto the rule of prophecy
when as their Princes by succession from Moses, ceased to bear rule and to
raygne over the people. before they were taken captive Judges.
and led to Babylon, their Kings began to reign, from Saul who was the first,
and from David. Kings.
Before their Kings Princes bare rule whom they called Judges, beginning the
government after Moses and his successor Jesus oth^^vvise calle^ Iehosua.
Priests. Pompeye Aristobul^
Jesus. After their return from Babylon there wanted not those which governed
the state, wherein the best ruled, and the state wherein few bare authority.
Priests had the preeminence until that Pompeye the Romayne captain had by
main force besieged Jerusalem, polluting the holy places by entering into the
sanctuaries of the temple, and sending him which had continewed the succession
of Kings from his progenitors unto that time ( Aristobulus by name) Prince and
Priest, captive, together with his sons to Rome, committed the office of high
Priesthood unto his brother Hyrcanus, so that from that time forth the Jews
became tributaryes unto Hyrcanus.
the Romans. Anon after that Hyrcanus (unto whom the succession of the
high priesthood befell) was taken of the Parthians, Herod the first foreyner
(as I said before) took of the Romayne senate and the Emperor Augustus the
government of the Jewish nation, under whom when as the presence of Christ
was apparent, the salvation of the Gentiles long looked for, took effect. and
their calling consepuently followed according unto the prophecye in that behalf
premised. since which time the Princes and Rulers of Judah ceasing to bear
rule, the state of highpriesthoode (which among them by order of succession,
after the decease of the former befell unto the next of blood) was forthwith
confounded. Hereof thou have Josephus a witness worthy of creditte, declaring
how that Herod after that he had received of the Romans, the rule over the
Jews, assigned them no more Priests which were of the priestly progeny, but
certain base and obscure personages, the like did his Son Archelaus, and
after him the Romans bearing rule, committed the same against the priestly
order. The said Josephus declares how that Herod first shutt up under his
own seal the holy robe of the high Priest, not permitting the high Priests to
retain it in their proper custody. So after him Archelaus, and after Archelaus
the Romans did the like. To this end be these things spoken of us, that we
show what effect (toutching the prophecye of the coming of our Savior
Christ Jesu) ensued, but most plainly of all other the prophecye of Daniel
describing the number of certain weeks by name unto Christ the ruler ^Daniel.
9.
(whereof we have in an other place entreated) foretells, that after the end
and term of those weeks, the Ievvishe anoyntinge should be abolished. This is
plainly proved to have been fulfilled at the coming of our Savior Jesus
Christ in the flesh. these things I suppose to have been necessaryly observed
of us, for the trial of the truth toutching the times.

CAP. VIII.
Of the disagreing imagined to be among the Evangelists about the genealogy of
Christ.

IN so much that Matthew and Luke committing the Gospel to writing, have
diversely delivered unto us the genealogy of Christ, and of diverse are thought
to disagree among them selves, so that every one of the faithful through
their ignorance in the truth, endeavor to commente on those places: now
therefore concerning the premises, let us propose a certain history which came
to our hands, the which Aphricanus (of whom we mentioned a little before) in
an Epistle to Aristides, remembered, writing of the concordancye of the
genealogye of Christ, set forth in the Gospels, making there with all, a
relation of the wrested and false opinions of others, the historye after his
order of discourse, he has in these words delivered to the posterity. * The
names of the kinredes in Israel are numbered, either after the line of Cap. 7.
after (...) greek. ^hricanus (...)st. ad Ari^e^. he lived ^he time Origin.
^eb. lib. 6. (...). 30. ^onnes by ^ure, and ^nes by (...) Law. ^n argu^t of
the ^rection.
nature, or after the rule limited in the Law. after the line of nature, as
by succession of the natural seed, after the rule in the Law, as by his
succession which raised seed unto his barren brother deseased. * For as yet
the hope of the resurrection was not made manifest, they imitated the promise
to come with mortal resurrection, * lest the name of the deseased with his
death should quite be cut of, for of them which are led with this line of
generation, some succeaded as natural children their fathers, some begotten by
others have after others been called, yet of both mention is made as well of
them which truly, as of them which resemble the name of generation. Thus
nere another of the Gospels is found false, howsoever it does number, be it
according unto nature, or the custom of the Law. The kinrede of Solomon and
of Nathan is so knit together, by reviving of the deseased without issue, by
second marriages, by raising of seed, so that not without cause, the same
persons are posted over to diverse fathers, whereof some were imagined, and
some others were their fathers in deed, both the allegations being properly
true, though in Joseph diversely, yet exactly by descente determined. And that
that which I go about to prove may plainly appear, I vvil declare the orderly
succession of this genealogye, making a recital from David by Solomon. The
third from the ^th. 1.
end is Matthan found, which begat Jacob, the father of Joseph, but from
Nathan the Son of David, Descending according unto the Gospel of Luke, the
third from the end is (...) 3.
Melchi, whose Son is Hely, the father of Joseph. For Joseph is the Son of
Hely, the Son of Melchi. Joseph being the proposed mark to shoot at, we
must shevve how either is termed his father, deriuing the pedegrevv of Jacob
from Solomon, of Heli from Nathan. and first how Jacob, and Heli, being two
brethren* then their fathers, Matthan and Melchi, borne of diverse kinreds may
be proved Graundfathers to Joseph. Matthan therefore and Melchi, marying the
same wife, begat brethren by the same mother, the Law not forbidding a
widow either dimissed from her husband, or after the death of her husband
to be coupled unto an other man. First therefore Matthan and Melchi husbands
to one and the same wife, be gate several sons, to wit. Matthan begat
Jacob: and Melchi his son Heli. Jacob brother to Heli, on his sister the vvil
of Heli begat Joseph. * Math. 1. * Math. 1. * Luke 3.
Matthan descending from Solomon, begat Jacob of Esttha, for that is said to
be her name. After the death of Matthan, Melchi (which is, said to have
descended from Nathan) being of the same tribe, but of an other race, having
married this widow to his wife, begat Heli his son. Thus do we find
Jacob and Heli of a different race, but by the same mother to have bed
brethren. of the which Jacob taking to wife his sister the wife of Heli,
his brother deseased without issue, begat on her the third, to wit Joseph:
by naiuro^and the order of generation unto him self. VVhereupon it is
written: Jacob begat Joseph, by the Law unto his brother Hely deseased,
whose son Joseph was, for Jacob being his brother raised seed unto him,
wherefore nether that genealogy which concerns him, is to be abolished, the
which Matthew the Evangelist reciting: Jacob (says he) begat Joseph. and Luke
of the other side: which was the son (says he) as it was supposed (for he
adds this with al) of Joseph, which was the son of Heli, which was the
son of Melchi. And the word of begetting, he ouerskipped with silence un to
the end, with such a recital of sons, making relation unto Adam which was
of God. neither is this hard to be proved, or to small purpose proposed. The
kinsmen of Christ according unto the flesh, either making appare^t or simply
instructing, yet altogether teaching that which is true: have delivered these
things unto us: how that the Idumaean the eues inuading the city Ascalon in
Palaestina, took captive together with other spoils out of the temple of
Apollo, adjoining unto the vvalls, Antipater, son to one Herod* that was
minister in that temple. When the priest was not able to pay ransom for his
son, this Antipater was brought up after the manner of the Idumaeans, and
became very familiar with Hyrcanus the high priest of the Jews. and having
been in embasye with Pompeye in Hircanus stead, he restored unto him the
kingdom which was taken from his brother Aristobulus, assigned him self
governor of Palaestina, and proceaded forvvardes in felicity. When this
Antipater was enuyed for his great felicity, and was traitorously slain,
there succeeded him his son Herod, which at length of Antonius and Augustus,
by decree of the Senate, received rule over the Jews, whose sons were
Herod, and the other Tetrarches. These things are common among the greek
historyes. And when as unto that time the genealogies of the Hebrews, yea of
them also linealy descending of Proselytes, as Achior the Amanyte, and Ruth the
Moabyte, likewise as many as fell, being delivered from out of Egypt, and
mixed with the Israelites, were recorded among their ancient monuments:
Herod, whom the Israeliticall genealogy auayled nothing, being pricked
Herod burned the genealogies of the Hebrews to make him self a gentleman.
in mind with the baseness of his birth, burned their ancient recorded
genealogies, supposing thereby to derive him self of noble parentage, if none
other helped by public records were able to prone their pedegrewes from the
Patriarchs, or Proselytes, or such as were cleped strangers horn, and mingled
of old among the Israelytes. Very sewe studious in this behalf do glory,
that they have got unto them selves proper pedegrewes or remembrance of their
names, or other wise records of them, for the retayninge of their ancient
stock in memory, which these men mentioned of before, have attained unto,
being called because of their affi^i^^e, and kindred with our Savior after the
name of the Lord, and (...) Dominici.
trauelinge from the Nazarites and Coc^oba, castles of the Jews into other
regions, they expounded the before said genealogy o^^ of the book of
Chronicles, as far for the as it extends. Paralip.
Now so ever then the case stand, either thus (...) otherwise, no man, in my
judgment can find a playner exposition. Whosoever therefore he be that rules
him self aright, he will be careful of the self same with us, although he
want prefe, to prefer a better, and a ^ruet exposition. The Gospel in all
respects utters most true things. About the end of the same epistle he
has these words: Matthan descending of Solomon, begat Jacob, Matthan
deceased, Melchi which Aphricanu^ epist. ad Aristidem.
descended of Nathan, on the same woman begat Heli then were Heli and Jacob
brethren by the mothers side, Heli dying without issue, Jacob raised unto him
seed, by be getting of Joseph, his own son by nature, but Heli his son
by the law th^s was Joseph* son to both. so far Aphricanus. Since that
the genealogy of Joseph is thus recited, after the same manner, Mary is termed
to be of the same tribe, together with him* For by the law of Moses, the
mingling of tribes was not permitted, which commands that matching in
marriage, be made with one of the same people, and family, lest the lot of
inheritance due to the ki^red, be tossed from tribe to tribe. of these things
thus much.

CAP. IX.
Of the slaughter of the Infantes by Herod, and the lamentable Tragedy
toutching Cap. 8. after he greek.
the term and end of his life.

When Christ was borne in Bethleem of Ievvrye, according unto Prophecyes for
eshewed, and times already declared: Herod (because of the wise men which came
from Matthew. ^.
the East, enquiring: where the King of the jews should be borne, that they
had seen his star, and therefore had taken so great a iorneye in hand, to
the end they might worship God which was borne) was not a little moved,
supposing his principality to be in peril, and his rule to go to wrack, and
ruin* for he inquiring of the Doctors of the Law among the jews, where they
looked that Christ should be borne, had no sooner perceived the prophecy of
Micheas, foretelling the birth of Christ to be in Bethleem, but with one
edicte, he commaundes the Herod com naundeth he infantes ^ be slain, ^nno
Christi Augusti 44 ^useb in Chronic. Matthew. 1.
sucking babes in Bethleem, and in all the borders thereof, as many as were two
year old and under (according unto the time that he had exactly enquired and
known of the wise men) to be slain, supposing certainly thereby (as it was
very likely) to destroy Jesus, in the same peril with his equals of the same
age* but the babe Jesus prevented this deceatefull pretense of his, being
conveyed into Egypt, his parents also being forewarned by the appearing of an
Angel, of that which should come to passe^ his the holy Gospel does declare.
Moreover I think it not amiss to let the world understand, how that the
de^ine vltion without any delay at all, apprehended the bold enterprises of
Herod against Christ, and his equals, while breath was yet in his body,
showing as it were by certain preambles, what was like to be fall him after
his death. And how he stained his princely affairs, which in his own censure
seemed prosperous, by his interchangeable domestical calamities, that is: by
the truell slaughter of his wife, of his children, of his The domesti all
tragedies nd crueltye ^f Herod.
nearest kinsfolks, of his most familiar friends, so that it is impossible
presently to repeat the whole. The matter it self so shameful, that it
ouershadowed every tragical action. The which Josephus has prosecuted at
large in his historyes, how that for his conspiracy and crafty counsel which
he intended against Christ, and the other infantes, an heuye scourge from above
apprehended him, bexing him to the death. it will seem pertinent to the
purpose presently to hear the words of the historiographer him self
describing in the 17. book of the Antiquities of the oseph. Anti. ud. lib. 17.
ca. ^. 9. Anno Christi 6. Au ^sti 47. Euse Chronic.
Jews, the lamentable end of his life in these words: Herod's desease vexed
him, more and more, God executing justice on him, for the things which he had
impiously committed. It was a slovve or slack fire, yet yelding not so great
inflammation outwardly to the beholders, as vexation inwardly to the internal
parts, he had a vehement desire, greedely set to take some thing, yet was
there nothing that sufficed him. moreover inward rotting of the bowels, and
specially a grievous flux in the fundament, a ravve, and a running ^leume about
his feet, and the like malady vexed him about his bladder. his priuey me^bres
pu^rified, engendring worms which svvarmed out. a shrill stretched vvinde,
he had great pain in breathing, and a gross breathe, having throughout all the
parts of his body such a crampe, as strength was not able to sustain. it
was reported by them which were inspired from above, and to whom the gift
of Divination was granted, that God enioined the Prince this punishment, for
his great impiety. These things the aforesaid Josephus in his commentaryes
has made manifest unto us, and in the second part of his historyes, the like
he notes unto us, writing thus: From that time forth, sickness ^oseph. bell.
^d. lib. 1. cap 1.
invaded his whole body, and brought him subject to diverse passions. it was
a hott burning fever, an intolerable itche, ouerrunning the outvvard parts of
his body, a continual pain in the fundament, hydropical svvellings in the
feet, an inflammation of the bladder, putrefaction of the priuities, which
engendered svvarmes of^ice. besides this, often, and difficult dravving of
breath, with the crampe, contracting the synevves throughout all the members
of his body. so that the wise men reported these deseases to be nothing else,
but sure, and certain plagues, or punishments. he, although struggling with so
many sores, yet for all that, wholy set to save his life, hoped for health,
and imagined after remedies. Passing over Iordane, he used for help the ho^^
bathes, nigh Calliroe, which run unto the (...) Asphaltitis, which also by
reason of their svveetenesse are drinkeable. The Physicians there, thought good
that his whole body should be supled, with v vhot oil, and he being dimissed
into a vessel full of vvhot oil, his eyes so dasled, and dissolved them
selves, that he came out, as dead. When the servants, by reason of these
circumstances were sore troubled, he remembered his plague, and despaired
thencefoorth of any recovery at all, commanding vvithall fifty In the greek
he vvri teth (...) de valuing fix half pence the hundredth part of an At ticke
pound.
pieces of silver to be divided among his soldiers, but his chief captains,
and most familiare friends to receive great sommes of money. And taking his
journey thence he came to Hiericho, al mad, by reason of melancholy that
abounded in him, for he grevve to that pass that he threatened to him self
death, and went about to practice an horrible offense. For gathering together
the famous men in every village throughout all levvrie, he commanded them to
be shut up into one place called Hippodromus, calling unto him vvithall, his
si^ ^lome and her husband Alexander. I know (says he) the Jews will
merrily celebrate as holy day the day of my death, yet may I be lamented of
others, and so have a glorious Epitaphe, and funeral, if that you will
execute mine advise. Those men therefore, which are kept in close prison
(soldiers being circumspectly set on every side) see that you immediately
slaye, as soon as breath departs out of my body, so that thereby al Ievvric,
and every house, will they, nill they, may revve, and lament my death. And
again a little after he says: When as through want of nourishment, and
griping coughe, joined vvithall, his sickness sore increased, and now being
quite overcome, he coniectured that his fatal course was then to be finished.
For taking an apple in his hand he called for a knife (for he was accustomed
to pare, and so to eat) then beholding on every side whether any was ready to
hinder his enterprise, lifted up his right hand to do him self violence.
Besides these, the same Historiographer writes Antipater slame by the
commau^deme^t of his father Herod. The death of Herod. Math. 2.
that a third son of his, besides the couple before stain, before the end
of his life, by his commandment was put to death, so that Herod left not
this life without extreme pain. Such was the tragical end of Herod,
suffering just punishment, for the babes destroyed in Bethleem, practiced
purposely for our Saviors sake. After whose death, an angel came to Joseph in
sleep, as he remained in Egypt, and commanded that he should return
together with the child, and his mother, into Ievvrie, in as much as they were
dead, which sought the childs life* unto these the Evangelist adds, saying:
When that he heard, that Archelaus reigned in Iudaea in his fathers steed,
he feared to go thither, and being admonished in his sleep from above, he
departed into the parts of Galilee.

CAP. X.
What successors Archelaus left behind him, when that he had reigned ten
years Cap. 9. after the greek.
after his father Herod. How that Christ suffered not the 7. year of Tiberius
as some did write, for Pilate then did not govern Iudaea.

How that Archelaus was placed in the kingdom of his father Herod, the
foresaid Herod. Archelaus. An. Christiti Augusti. 48. (...). Chr^ Phil^p.
Herod ^^l Lysanias. Joseph. Ant lud. ^^^8. ca. ^
Historiographer does testify, describing the manner: that by the testament of
Herod his father, by the censure of Augustius Caesar, he took to his charge
the government of the Jews, also how that ten years after; he lost the
said principality, and that his brethren Philip, and the younger Herod
together with Lysanias governed there several Tetrarchies. The same Josephus,
in his 18. book of ludaicall Antiquities, declares that about the 12. year of
the reign of Tiberius, (after the fifty and seventh year of the reign of
Augustus) Pontius Pilatus was appointed president of Ievvrie, in the which he
continewed welnigh whole ten years, unto the death of Tiberius. The dreaming
san^^^ of certain Heathen (...) suited.
Then manifestly is the falsehood of them confuted, which of late have
published lewd commentaries, against our Savior, where even, in the beginning,
the time after their supputation laid down, and being well noted, confuteth
the falsehood of these ^ayning fools. These commentaries do comprehend those
things, which against the passion of Christ, were presumptuously practiced of
the Jews, within the fourth Consulship of Tiberius, the seventh year of his
reign, at which time it is showed, that Pilate was not gouerner of Iudaea, if
the testimonte of Josephus be true, which plainly shows in his foresaid
histories When (...) began rule.
that Pilate was appointed procurator of Iudaea the twelfth year of Tiberius
his reign.

CAP. XI.
When Christ was baptized, and began to preach, what high priests there
were in his time. Cap. 10. after the greek.


ABout these times then, according unto the Evangelist (The ^luetenth of
Tiberius Caesar, Luke 3.
the fourth of the procuratorship of Pontius Pilate, Herod, Lysanias and
Phillip ruling the rest of ^udaea, in their Tetrarchies) the Savior, and our
God, Jesus the anointed of God, beginning Christ being 30. year old was
baptized and began to preach. Christ did not preach full 4. years.
to be about thirty years of age, came to the baptism of John, and began to
publish the preaching of the Gospel. the sacred Scripture do declare, that he
finished the full time of his teaching, under the high priesthood of Annas, and
Caiphas, signifying, that within the years of their public ministry, he
ended yt course of his doctrine. for beginning about the high priesthood of
Annas, and lasting unto the principality of Caiphas, yet in this space, there
we^^ not four years fully expired. for the legal rites by his edict being in
manner abrogated, it followed then, that the succession of progenitors, by age
and line unto that time usually observed, should thenceforth be of no force.
Nether were then those things, which concerned divine worship, with due
administration executed, for diverse severally, executing the office of high
priesthood, under Romayne princes, continewed not in the same, above one
year. Josephus, some where in his books of Antiquities, writes Joseph lib.
18 Antiq. cap. 4. Annas. Ismael. Eleazar.
four high priests, by succession to have been after Annas, unto the time of
Caiphas. saying thus: Velerius Gratus (Annanus being removed) ordayneth Ismael
the son of Baphus, high priest. And the same Ismael, not long after being
deposed, he appoynteth Eleazar, the son of Annanus, high priest in his place.
the year after, this Eleazar being rejected, he commits the office of high
priesthood to Simon, the son of Camithus. And him (who enjoyed this honor,
no longer Simon. Caiphas.
then one year, Josephus (which was also called Caiphas) succeeded. The whole
time of our Saviors preaching, is showed to have been comprised, in the
compass of 4. years. four high priests also, in the same four years, to
have been from Annas, to Caiphas, executing the administration of the yearly
ministry. The holy Gospel does very well set forth Caiphas, to be high priest
that year, in the which the passion of our Savior Christ, was finished, that
the time of Christ's preaching might not seem to repugne with this
observation. Our Savior, and Lord Jesus Christ, not long after the beginning
of his preaching, chose 12. Apostles, whom of all the 12. Apostles. 70.
disciples. Math. 10. Luke 10.
rest of his disciples, by a certain singular prerogative, he called Apostles.
Afterward he appointed other seventy, whom he enjoined by two and by two, to
pass unto every place, and city, where he him self should come.

CAP. XII.
Of the life, doctrine, baptism, and martyrdom of John Baptist. The testimony
of Josephus toutching Christ.

NOt long after, the holy Gospel reports the be headding of John Baptist.
wherwithall Josephus Math. 14.
by name, accords, making mention of Herodias, with whom Herod married
(being his brothers wife) puttinge away his own wife lawefully married, which
was the daughter of Aretas, King of Persia. Herodias being separated from her
husband which was alive, In the greek ^oppy of Eu^eb. Aretas is ^ayd to be ^^ng
of Per^ia, which I suppose to be corrupted ^or he was ^ing of Arabia as
Ioselius repor^th Antiq. ^ud. lib. 14. ^p. 2. This battle mentioned (...)
Josephus. ^ntiq. lud. ^. 18. cap. 9. Ca. 11. after ^e greek.
(for the which he slew John) Herod warred against Aretas, so that his
daughter was ignominiously rejected. * In the which battle (then being
fought,) he reports all Herodes hoaste, to have utterly perished, and these
things to have chanced unto him, for the death of John, maliciously executed.
The same Josephus when he had confessed John Baptist, to be a very just man,
bears witness also, with those things which concern him, in the Gospels,
he writes further, that Herod was deprived of his kingdom for Herodias, and
together with her, condemned, and banished into Vienna a city of France, and
the same he declares in his eyghtenth book of Judicial Antiquities, whereof
John Baptist he writes thus, * Certain of the jews were persuaded, that
the host of Herod was utterly foiled, because that God had justly plagued
him, which this punish me^t, revenging the death of John, commonly called the
Baptist. for Herod had slain him being a just man. This John commanded the
Jews to embrace virtue, to execute justice, one toward an other, and to
serve God in piety, reconciling men by baptism, unto unity. for after this
sort, baptism seemed unto him a thing acceptable, if it were used not for the
remission of certain sins, but for the purifiyng of the body, the soul (I
say) being cle^sed, before by righteousness. and when a^ diverse slocked
together (for thy were greatly delited in hearing of him) Herod feared lest
that so forcible a power of persvvadi^g which was in hi^, should lead the
people into a certain rebellion, he supposed it far better, to bereave hi^ of
his lif, before any nouelty were by hi^ put in ure, the^ that change, with
danger, being come in place, he should repent him and say: Had I wist, Thus
John because of Herod's suspicion, was sent bound to Machaerous the ward
(mentioned of before) and there beheaded. When he had thus spoken of John in
the same history, he writes of our Sauiout in this sorce: There was at that
time one Jesus, a wise man, if it be lavvefull to call him, a Josephus An tiq.
Iud. lib. 18 cap. 6. testifies thus of Jesus Christ.
man, a vvcrker of miracles, a teacher of them which embrace the truth with
gladness. he drevv after him many, as well of the Jews, as Gentiles. This same
was Christ. And though Pilate, by the judgment of the chief rulers, amongst
us, delivered him to be crucified: yet there vvanted not them which from the
beginning loved him. he appeared unto them alive, the third day after his
passion, as the holy Prophets have foretold, yea these, and an innumerable
more marvelous things of him, and to this day the christian people, which of
him borovv their name, cease not to increase. Now when as this Historiographer,
by blood an Ebrue borne, has of old delivered in writing these, and the like
things, concerning John Baptist, and our Savior Christ, what refuge now
remains, but that they be condemned for impudent persons, which of their own
brain, have feigned comentaryes, contrary to these allegations, and of these
things also thus much.

CAP. XIII. Cap. 12. after the greek.

Of the disciples of our Savior, that there were more then 12. Apostles, and
70, disciples.

THe names of the Apostles are apparent unto every one out of the holy
Evangelists, but the The cataloge of the 70. disciples is to be seen in the
end of this volume written by Dorotheus in greek, and translated by the same
tra^ slator. Galat. 2. 1. Corinthians. 1. Clemens. Galat. 2. Act. 1. Barnabas.
Sosthenes. Cephas. Mathias. Barsabas. Thaddaeus. 1. Corint. 15
cataloge of the 70. disciples, is no where to be found. Barnabas is said to
be one of the number whom the Acts of the Apostles remembered, and no less,
did S. Paul writing to the Galathians. Among these they number also Sosthenes
which together with Paul wrote to the Corinthians. The history also of Clemens,
in the fifth of his Hypotypose on affirms Cephas to he one of the 70. of whom
Paul said: when as Cephas came to Antioche, I vvithstoode him to his face,
because he was culpable. This Cephas was of the same name with the Apostle.
And Mathias who of the Apostles was elected in the rowme of Judas, the traitor,
and Barsabas also, who is said by the same lot to have been worthily
preferred to the number of the 70. disciples. Also Thaddaus whom Thomas by the
commandment of Jesus sent to cure Agbarus, is counted one of the number,
concerning whom I will forth with declare a certain historye which came to
our hands. Thou shall find by diligent observation, that there were more then
70. disciples of our Savior. for prouf whereof thou may use the testimony of
Paul, which says, that after Christ's resurrection from the dead, he appeared
first to Cephas, then to the twelve, After them to more then five hundred
brethren at once, where of (he says) some to have fallen a sleep, but more
to have remained alive, at that time when he wrote these things. Afterward to
have appeared to James, which was of the disciples, and one of the brethren of
Christ. last of all, as though besides these, there were more Apostles after
the manner of the twelve (such as Paul him self was) he adds saying: he was
seen of all the Apostles. but of this so far.

The Translator toutching the doubt rising about him whom Paul reprehended at
Antioche, whether he was Peter the Apostle, or Cephas, one of the seventy.
WHereas Eusebius in the former chapter, affirms Cephas, to be one of the
number of the 70. disciples, and the same to be reprehended by Saynct Paul at
Antioche, it seems repugnant to the plain words of holy Scripture,
delivered unto us by the holy Ghost. The adversaries of the truth, thought
better to err with Eusebius, by saying that Cephas was rebuked by Paul, and
not Peter, rather then that they would grant Peter (whom they term the
Prince of the Apostles) to be controlled of Paul, supposing hereby a presiding
to ensur against the prymacye of the Pope, or liking of this opinion as a bare
shift to stop the sclannderous mouth of Porphyrius, which here took occasion
to reprehende the Christians for their sedition, but let us confess the
truth, and shame the devil. Galat. ^.
The words of Saint Paul are these: (...) when Peter came to Antioche, I
vvithstoode him to his face. and a little after: (...) I said unto Peter in the
presence of them all. Augustine, and Jerome had great con^^^tion about the
interpretation of this place but ner^ ^^^her denies the party to be Peter ^^t
(...) give unto the historiographer, the credit d^^ unto him, he might call
Peter, Cephas, as our Savior said in the Gospel unto Peter: thou shall be
called Cephas, which is a Syrian word, sounding in greek, or latin, Ioh. 1.
nothing else but Peter, or Petra a rock. In that he calls him an other from
the Apostle, I do not see how it can stand. Jerome denies any other Cephas
known of us, saving Peter. The conclusion is this: Eusebius calls the person
reprehended by Paul, Cephas: The holy Ghost in the Scripture calls him Peter.
Eusebius says, he was an other from the Apostle: The holy Ghost in discourse,
calls him Peter the Apostle, (in the same chapter) to whom the Apostleship
of Circumcision was committed, and most like to be the Apostle, for there (that
is at Antioche) he was first placed Bishop.

CAP. XIIII. Cap. 13. after he greek.

The history concerning the Prince of the Edessaeans. The epistle of Agbarus
unto Christ, and the epistle of Christ unto him again.

THe history toutching Thaddaeus (of whom we spoke before) was after this
sort. After that The fame of Christ went throughout ^e whole world. Agbarus.
the divinity of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, was made manifest unto al
men, through the working of miracles, he drew unto him an innumerable sort of
strangers, far distant from Iudaea, affected with sundry diseases, and every
sort of maladyes, hoping to recover their health. of which number, king
Agbarus, gouerner of the famous nations inhabiting beyond the river Euphrates,
grievously diseased in body, incurable by man's cunning, hearing the renoumed
fame of Jesus, and the wonderful works which he wrought, agreeable unto the
same, published of all men: made petition unto him by letters, that he would
voutchsafe to deem him worthy of deliverance from his disease. Jesus (though
not presently) yelding unto his petition, voutchsafed to answer him by an
epistle, that shortly he would send one of his disciples which should cure
his disease, promising with all that he should not only cure his disease, but
as many of them as belonged unto him, which promise not long after he
performed. for after his resurrection from the dead, and ascension into heaven:
Thomas one of the twelve Apostles, sent his brother Thaddaeus, Thomas the
apostle sent ^haddaeus ^to Edessa.
accounted among the 70. disciples of Christ, by divine inspiration, into the
city Edessa, to be ^ preacher and Evangelist of the doctrine of Christ, by
whom all things, which concerned t^^ promise of our Savior, were performed.
The reader has an approved testimony of these things in writing, taken out of
the recorded registery, of the princely city Edessa. for there are found
enrolled in their public registery, things of Antiquity, and which were done
about Agbarus time, yea and preserved unto this day. There is no reason to the
contrary, but that we may heart the letters themselves, copied out of their
registery, and translated by us, out of the Syrian tongue into these words.

The epistle of Agbarus unto our Savior.
AGbarus gouerner of Edessa, unto Jesus the good Savior, shevving himself in
Jerusalem, sends greetinge. I have heard of thee, and thy cures, which thou
have done, without Agbarus wri ^th to christ.
medicens, and herbs, for as the report goes, thou make the blind to see,
the lame to go, the leapers thou clensest, foul spirits, and devils, thou
castest out. the long diseased, thou restorest to health, and raysest the dead
to life. When that I heard these things of thee, I imagined That Agba^^
gathered miracles.
with myself one of these two things: either that thou art God come from
heaven, and do these things: or the Son of God, that bring such things
to pass. Wherefore by these my letters I beseech thee, to take the pains, as
to come unto me, and that thou vvilt cure this my grievous maladye, vvhervvith I
am sore vexed. I have heard moreover, that the Jews murmur against thee, and
go about to mischief thee. I have here a little city, and an honest, which
will suffice us both.


These things he wrote after this manner, being a little lightened from above, I
think it also not amiss, to hear the letters of Jesus, sent back to Agbarus
by the same bearet.

The epistle of our Savior unto Agbarus, though brief, yet pithy.
AGbarus, blessed art thou, because thou have believed in me, when thou savvest
me not* for ^^rist vvri^^ to Ag^us.
it is written of me, that they with see me, shall not believe in me, that
they with see me not, may believe, and be saved. concerning that thou vvrotest
unto me, that I should come unto thee, I let thee understand, that al things
toutching my message, are here to be fulfilled, and after the fulfilling
thereof, I am to return again, unto him that sent me* but after my
assumption, I will send one of my disciples unto thee, which shall cure thy
maladye, and restore life to thee, and them that be with thee. Unto these
epistles, there were also these things added, in the Syrian tongue: When Jesus
was taken up, Judas (which also is called Thomas) sent unto him Thaddaeus the
Apostle, one of the seventy, who, when he came, remained with one Tobias,
the son of Tobias. when that fame was spread of him, and that he was made
manifest, by the miracles which he wrought, it was signified unto Agbarus,
and said: the Apostle of Jesus is come, of whom he vvrote unto thee. Thaddaeus
by that time, began through the power of God, to cure every sore, and
sickness, so that al men greatly marueled. Agbarus hearing of weighty, and
wonderful works, which he wrought, that he cured in the name, and power
of Jesus, forth with suspected the same to be he, of whom Jesus had vvritte^,
saying: After my ascentio^ I vvil send one of my disciples unto thee, which
shall cure thy malady. And when he had called unto him Tobias where Thaddaeus
hoasted, he said unto him: I hear say that a certain mighty man came from
Jerusalem, which lodged with thee, and cures many in the name of Jesus. who
made answer, and said: ye Lord, there came a certain stranger, and hoasted
at my house, which has done vvonderfull things. to whom the King said:
bring him unto me. Tobias returning unto Thaddaeus, said unto him. Agbarus the
governor sent for me, and commanded that I should bring thee unto him that
thou may cure his disease. Thaddaeus answered: I go, for it is for his
sake that I am sent thus mightily to work. Tobias stirring betimes the next
day* took with him Thaddaeus, and came to Agbarus. as he came even at his
entrance there appeared unto Agbarus in the presence of his chief men, a great
spectacle in the countenance of Thaddaeus the Apostle, at which sight Agbarus
did reverence unto Thaddaeus, so that a^ they which were present marueled.
they savv not the sight save Agbarus alone which questioned with Thaddaeus
and said: art thou of truth a disciple of Jesus The conference which
Thaddaeus had with Agbarus.
the son of God, which made me this promis^ (...) ^^il send unto thee one
of my disciples, which shall cure thy disease, and show life unto thee, and
all thine, to whom Thaddaeus made answer, because thou have greatly believed
in the Lord Jesus which sent me, therefore am I sent unto thee, but in case that
thou believe in him as yet* thy hearty petitions according unto thy faith thou
shall obtain. to whom Agbarus: I have continevved so believing in him (says
he) that I could have found in my heart mightily to destroy the Jews which
crucified him, were not the Roman empire a let unto my purpose. Thaddaeus
said again. Our Lord and God Jesus Christ fulfilled the vvil of his father,
which being finished, he is ascended unto him. Agbarus ansvvered: and I have
believed in him and in his father. to whom Thaddaeus: therefore (says he) in
the name of the selfsame Lord Jesus I lay my hand upon thee* which when he had
done, he was fortvvith cured of his malady, and delivered of the pain that
pressed him sore. Agbarus marueled at Agbarus is cured by Thaddaeus.
this, that even as it was reported unto him of Jesus, so in truth by his
disciple and Apostle Thaddaeus, without Poticarye stuff and virtue of herbs
he was cured. And not only he, but also Abdus, the son of Abdus grieved
with the govvte, and falling at the feet of Thaddaeus, recovered Abdus is h^
led of the govvte.
his former health by his laying on of his hands* he cured also many others of
his fellow citizens, vvorking marvelous and miraculous things, and preaching
the word of God. To whom Agbarus said again: Thou Thaddaeus through the
power of God do these things, and we have thee in admiration. I pray thee
moreover that thou expound unto me the coming of Jesus, how he was made man,
his might, and by what power he brought such things as we heard to pass.
To vvho^ Thaddaeus: at this season (says he) I will be silent though I am set
to preach this word, but to morovv call together to my sermon all the people
and fellow citizens, the vvil I show unto the^ the word of God, and sovv the
word of life, and teach the manner of his coming how he was made man, of his
message, and to what end he came, being sent from the father. moreover of his
miracles and mysteries uttered in this world, and power in bringing things
to pass. besides this his nevve preaching, and how base, selender and humble
he seemed in outvvard appearance. how he humbled him self and died, and
abated his divinity, what great things he suffered of the Jews, how he was
crucified, and descended into hell, and rent that hedge and mid^^all
^^u^^seuered before, and raised the dead that of long time had sleep how that
he (...) d^^^e^ded* b^t ascended unto the father accompanied with many* how
that he s^^^^hin glory (...) right hand of God the father in heaven, and last
of al how he shall ^^e again vv^^ glory and p^^^e^ ^^^udg both the quick and
dead* when the morning was come, Agbarus commanded his citizens to be
gathered together and to hear the sermon of Thaddaeus. which being ended, he
charged that gold coined and uncoined should be given him. but he received it
not saying: In so much that we have forsaken our own, how can we receive
other men's?


These things were done the three and forty year, which being translated word
for word out of the Syrian tongue, we thought not amiss to printe in this
place.

The censure of the Translator, toutching the aforesaid Epistles.
BE it true or be it false, that there were such epistles, it forces not
greatly, as the effect and contents thereof is not to be preferred before all
other writing in truth: so of the contrary, it is not to be rejected for
falshoode and forged stuff. Jerome with other grave writers, affirms such
circumstances to have been. Eusebius whose creditt herein is not small,
reports the same to have been taken out of their records in the city of
Edessa, regestred there in the Syrian tongue, and by him translated out of the
Syrian, into the greek tongue. I sidorus and Gelasius, the first of that name,
bishop of Rome, about the year of our Lord 494. together with 70. other
Bishops, decreed that the Church of God should receive the same epistles, for
no other then Apocrypha, one thing I may not here run ouerwith silence, but
admonish the Reader of, how that late writers, namely Damascenus, and that
fabulous Historiographer Nicephorus have added unto this history fabulous
reports, how that Abgarus, governor of Edessa, sent his letter unto Jesus,
and with all a certain paynter which might vewe him well, and bring unto him
back again the lively picture of Jesus, the which painter (as they report)
being not able (for the glorious brightness of his gracious countenance) to
bring his purpose to effect: our Savior him self took an handkerchef, and
laid to his divine and lively face, and by the wiping of his face, his picture
was therein impressed, the which he sent to Abgarus. Nicephorus patcheth other
fables thereunto: first he says, that the King of Persia sent a paynter unto
Jesus, which brought unto him the picture of Jesus, and also of Mary his mother.
Again that the Edessaeans in the time of Iustinianus the Emperor, being
besieged and brought to such a narrow straicte, that there remained no hope of
deliver ance, but a present foil and overthrow, in the same lamentable
plight, to have run unto this picture for a refuge, where (as they say) they
found present remedy. believe it who will. Eusebius, who searched their records,
who laid down the copye of the Epistles, who translated faithfully all that
he found there, toutching Christ, neither saw, neither heard, of any such
thing, for he promised in the preface to his history, to omit nothing that
should seem pertinent. if the other writers found it, why did not Eusebius
find it? if the other writers thought expedient to publishe the same, why did
Eusebius omit it? nay it was not there found at al, but forged. therefore
recount them for fables. the first that reported them, was a hundred years
after Eusebius.

The end of the first book.
THE SECOND BOOK OF THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORYE OF EVSEBIVS PAMPHILVS BISHOP
OF CAESAREA IN PALAESTINA.
CAP. I.
Of the ordayning of Disciples, after the ascension of Christ.

IN the former book, as by way of proeme, we have published which necessaryly
That went ^ore in the ^ book ^vhat fol^^^eth now ^e second.
did concern the Ecclesiastical history, jointly contriuing the declaration of
the divinity of the word of salvation, of the ancient principles of our
doctrine, of the antiquity of Gospelike policy among Christians, of his late
appearing among men, of his passion, and election of the Apostles. Now it
remains that we vewe those things, which ensued after his assumption. so that
partly we note them out of the sacred scriptures, and partly out of profane
historyes, knitting to our historye those things which we have firmly
committed to memory. First of all the Apostleship is allotted unto Matthias, in
the rowme Act. 1. Mathias c^ sen to be a^ Apostle. Act. 6. 7. Deacon^ Act. 7.
Stephen signifies a crown. Matthew. 1.
of Judas the traitor, which (as it is manifest) was one of the disciples of
the Lord. there were also seven approved men ordained Deacons, through prayer
and laying on of the Apostles hands, for the public administration of the
Churches affairs joined with Stephen, which first after the Lord, as soon as
he was ordained (as though he were appointed for this purpose) is stoned unto
death, by them which slew the Lord, and for this cause, as the first of the
triumphing Martyrs of Christ, according to his name he bears a crown. After
him followed James, called the brother of Christ, and counted the son of
Joseph. This Joseph was thought to be the father of Christ, to whom the virgin
was betrothed, which before they came together, was found to have in her
womb of the holy Ghost, as the holy Gospel declares. This James whom of
old they priueledged for his virtue, with the syrname of Iustus, is said to be
the first which occupied James the first bishop of Jerusalem Clemens. ^ 6.
Clemens. 7.
the bishoplike Seae at Jerusalem. Clemens in the 6. of his hypotyposeon
writes thus: Peter (says he) and James, and Ihon, after the assumption of our
Savior, though they were preferred by the Lord, yet challenged they not this
prerogative unto them selves, but appointed James the Just, Bishop of
Jerusalem. The same Clemens in the 7. of his Hypotyposeon, also makes mention
of him thus: the Lord after his resurrection, endued with knowledge James
the Just, Ihon, and Peter. They delivered the same unto the rest of the
Apostles, the Apostles afterward unto the 70. disciples, of which number
was Barnabas. There were two Iameses, the one termed Just, which James
bishop of Ie^sale^ throw down from a pinnacle (...) the temple and bray^^ Act.
12. Lib. 1. cap*
was thrown down hedlon^ from the pinnacle, and brayned with a fullers
clubbe.* the other beheaded. Of him that was ^d Just, Paul made mention,
saying: I savve none of the Apostles save James, the brother of the Lord.
Those things which the Lord promised the King of the Osroenians, then were
performed. Thomas by divine inspiration sent Thaddaeus unto the city Edessa, to
be their preacher, and an Evangelist of the doctrine of Christ, as a little
before out of the records we have alleged. But he after his coming, and
having cured Agbarus, by the word of God, and astonished all them with his
strange miracles, and works, which he wrought, brought them to the
worshipping of the divine power of Christ, and ordained disciples of the
doctrine of our Savior. From that time unto this day, the whole city of the
Edessaeans addicted unto the name of Christ, show forth no small argument of
the great goodness of our Savior toward them. But these things be premised,
taken out of their ancient historical records. and now let us return unto
the sacred Scripture. The first and the greatest persecution being raised of
the The perse^tion of the postles by the Ievve^ Act. 8. The disp^ on of the
ciples. Paula pe^^ cutor, Act. 8. Phillip p^^ cheth in S^ maria. Act. 8. Simon
Magus a sor^^ rer. Simonia^
Jews against the Church at Jerusalem, about the time of the martyrdom of
Stephen, and all the distiples, the 12. only excepted, being dispersed
throughout Iudaea, and Samaria, certain of them, as the holy Scripture bears
witness, came unto Phaenices, and Cyprus, and Antioche. but these as yet dated
not to deliver unto the Gentiles, the word of faith, but showed it only unto
the Jews. At that time also Paul raged against the Church, entering into the
several houses of the faithful, and giving forth precepts, that both men and
women should be imprisoned. And Phillip one of the ordained Deacons with
Stephen, and of the dispersed came to Samaria, and being plenteous as toutching
the divine power, first of all preached unto the inhabitants there the word of
God. The grace of God so mightily prevailed with him, that he drew unto him by
his preaching Simon Magus with many more. Simon at that time was so famous,
holding in awe them that were bewitched with his sorcery, so that they supposed
him to be the great power of God. which then being amazed with the miracles
wrought of Phillip by divine power, came and grew so far forwards to men's
seeming, that he dissembled even unto the baptism, y^ is through faith in
Christ. Which at this day is wonderful in them that hitherto walowing in that
most detestable heresye, tread the trace of their forefather, encroatching
upon the Church, as a pestilent and ^^ysome disease, infecting them which can
not thoroughly discern the incurable, and intractable venyme, lying Simonia.
hid within them, but diverse of them (their implety being revealed) were
thoroughly known, and rejected, of which number Simon himself being
apprehended of Peter, received the sentence Act. 8.
of damnation, due to his desert. When that the preaching of the Gospel daily
proceeded with increase, it came to pass, by reason of some domest^^^^
affairs, that there came from the land of the Aethiopians, the thief
governor of the qeene, which after the custom of their country, held the
kingdom, for as yet the people of that country, have to their Prince a Queen.
This same An Aethi^ an Eunuc^
being the first of the Gentiles, obtained of Phillip, the holy mys^eeyes, by
the inspiration of the heavenly word, was made the first fruits of the
faithful throughout the world, and as it is reported ^he Eunuch ^uerted by
^hillip, prea^eth the ^ospell to ^e Aethiopi ^s his con^ymen. ^sal. 68. ^ul a
prea^er. ^ct 9. ^alat. 1.
after his return unto his native soil, he preached the knowledge of the
universal God, giving life unto men, and the coming of our Savior. So that
in his doing, the prophecy was fulfilled which says: Aethiopia shall stretch
her hand before unto God. About this time Paul the chosen vessel, is declared
an Apostle not of men, nether by men, but by revelation of Jesus Christ, and
God the father which raised him from the dead, and is vouchsafed worthy of this
vocation, by a vision, and a voice revealed from heaven.

CAP. II.
The report of Pilate, the censure of Tiberius the Emperor, and the Romayne
Senate, concerning Christ.

WHen as the wonderful resurrection of our Savior, and his assumption into
the heavens, was now made manifest unto many, and the ancient manner among the
heathen Princes had so prevailed, that if any nouelty by any were enterprised,
the same forth with should be signified unto him that held the Princely
scepter, lest that he should be ignorant of any thing which was done: it came
to pass that Pilate, made Tiberius the Emperor privy of those things, which
concerned the resurrection of our Savior Jesus, and were published throughout
Palaestina, adding thereunto his marvelous works, whereof he was credibly
informed, and how that now after his resurrection, he was of many taken for a
God. The report goes, that Tiberius ^iberius ^ould have ^d Christ ^nonized in
^e number the Gods. ^he vvise^me of god this behalf
made relation thereof unto the Senate, which rejected his saying, for no other
cause but for that they had not first approved the same, the ancient custom
o^^^rued, that none should be accounted of the Romans, among the number of
Gods: unless he were canonized, by the sentence and decree of the Senate,
which no doubt was done for this end, that the wholesome doctrine of the divine
preaching, should not need the approbation, and commendation of man. Though
this petition toutching our Savior, were rejected of the Romayne Senate, after
it was made unto the^, yet Tiberius, reserving unto him self his former
opinion, conceived no absurdity prejudicial unto the doctrine of Christ. These
things Tertullian, a man well experienced in the Roman laws, and besides,
famous among them which flourished at Rome, in his Apologye which he wrote for
the Christians, in the Roman tongue, and by translation writes thus: and that
we may reason ^ertull. in ^polog.
toutching the original of these laws, it was an ancient decree: that no
God should be consecrated by the King, unless it were first agreed upon, by
the Senate. The like did Marcus Aemilius practice, concerning a certain Idol
of A^burnus, and this is seen for our sake, that the deytye is delivered
amongst you by man's decree. Unless that God please man, he is not made
(...)skomme.
God. So that by this decree, it is expedient for man, that he be favorable
unto God. Tibarius then, under whom the Christian name was spread abroad in
the world, when this doctrine was signified unto him out of Palaestina,
(where it first sprang) communicated the same unto the Senate, declaring
vvithall, that this doctrine pleased him right well. The Senate rejected it,
because they had not allowed the same. But he perseuered in his opinion,
threatening the^ death, that vvoulde accuse the Christians. This was the
wisdom of the divine providence, lightning his mind, that the preaching of
the Gospel should pass at the beginning, throughout the world, without let or
hinderance.

CAP. III.
How that in short space, the Gospel was published throughout the world.

BY the divine power, and helping hand of God, the wholesome doctrine, sodaynely,
as it were son beams, shined throughout the world, and forthwith according
unto the sacred Scripture, the sound of the holy Evangelists, and Apostles,
passed throughout the whole earth, and their words unto the ends of the
world. So that throughout all cities, and villages, after ^al. 19.
the manner of barn floores replenished, forthwith very many, and the same very
populous churches, were established, and they which by ancient succession were
blinded, through old error, and the rooted disease of superstitious Idolatry,
through the power of Christ, by the doctrine of his disciples, together with
the wonderful works wrought by them, were at liberty from their cruel
Lords, and loosed out of their loathsome fetters, wholly abandoning the
Idolatricall worship of many Gods, confessing the one, and the alone God, the
worker of all things, and worshipping him with the rites of true piety,
through divine, and pure religion, gra^^ed in the heart of man, by our Savior
himself. But the divine goodness, and grace of God, spread it self abroad
among other nations, and first of all, Cornelius of Caesarea in Palaestina,
with all his household, by Cornelius the Centurion is conue^ted unto the faith.
Act. 10. The Antiochians vver^ first called Christians. Act. 11.
a divine vision, and the ministry of Peter, embraced the faith of Christ, and
many Graecians of Antioche, heard the preachinge of those which dispersed them
selves at the stoning of Stephen, when as at this time the Church of Antioche
flourished and multiplied exceedingly, and many Prophets of Jerusalem (among
whom were Paul, and Barnabas) frequented thither, and besides them, an other
multitude of brethren, so that the christian name, there sprange first, as of a
fresh, and fertile soil, and Agabus one of the Prophets then present,
foretold them of the famine to come. Paul and Barnabus were chosen messengers
for the ministry of the brethren.

CAP. IIII.
How that Caius Caligula, exiling Herod with perpetual banishment, created
Agrippa king of the Jews. The commendation of Philo Iudaus.

Tiberius when he had raygned about 22. years, died. him succeeded Caius, which
anon committed Anno Christi 39. 40. Caius Caligula. Herod the Tetrarch exiled
with h^ harlet Herodias. Herod Agrippa King of the Ievv^ Joseph An^ lib. 18.
cap. ^ Philo Iudae^
the principality of the Jews unto Agrippa, and together with his kingdom,
the tetrarchies of Phillip and Lysanias, and not long after, the tetrarchy of
Herod, which Herod together with Herodias being condemned for diverse crimes
and enormityes, was committed to perpetual banishement. the same Herod was he
which lived about the passion of Christ. these things Josephus does witness.
About this time Philo did flourish, a man not only excelling our own men, but
also such as passed in profane knowledge, lineally by descent an Ebrue borne,
inferior to none of them which excelled at Alexandria. But what labor and
industrye he has employed in divine discipline, and the profit of his native
country, his works now extant, plainly do declare, and how far forth he
prevailed in philosophical, and liberal arts, of profane knowledge, I
suppose it nothing necessary to repeat. But imitating the trade of Plato and
Pythagoras he is said to have excelled all the learned of his time.

CAP. V.
How Philo, being sent in Embassye for the Jews unto Caius the Emperor,
behaved him self.

What befell unto the Jews under Caius, this Philo has written in five
books, wherein he sets forth the madness of Caius, how he published him
self God, and besides dealt spicefully an innumerable sort of ways. Moreover
what calamities happened unto the Jews in his time, though Philo him self
was sent in Embassye, for his own nation which inhabited Alexandria, unto the
city of Rome, and how that he pleading for the laws of his country people,
gained nothing but gibes, and iestes, returning with great hazard of his life.
Josephus made mention of these things, in the eyghtenth book of his Judicial
Antiquities, thus Joseph A(...). lib. 18. cap. ^ Apion.
by word writing. When that dissension rose among the Jews and Graecians
inhabiting Alexandria, both parties severally, sent three legates unto Caius,
whereof Apion one of the legates for the Graecians of Alexandria, shamefully
entreated the Jews, with many opprobrious, and blasphemous terms, adding
this with all, that they despised the ma^estye of Caesar. And when as all
they which were tributaryes to the Romans, dedicated altars and temples
unto Caius, and esteemed of him in all other respects as God: These only
Jews be they which disdaynefully vvithstoode this honor, done unto him of
men, and accustomed to profane his name. After that Apion had thus spoken
many, and grievous things, to the end he might incen^e Caius against the^ (as
it was very likely to be done) Philo, one of the Jews legates drevv nigh,
Philo.
a man excelling in all things, and brother of Alexander Albarchus, not
ignorant in philosophy, and of hability sufficient, to aunsvvere the
opprobrious crimes, laid to their charge. But Caius excluded him, commanding
him forthwith to depart, and because he was thoroughly moved, he seemed a^
though he went about to practice some mischief toward him: Philo b^ing
^euned, went forth, and unto the Jews which were with him in company, he
^ayd: We ought to be of good cheer, for by ^ight, God should take our part;
Insomuch that Caius is incensed to the contrary. thus far Josephus: And Philo
him self declares at large, in his written Embassye, the things which then
were done. Whereof omitting many things, I will presently toutch that whereby
it may evidently appear unto the Reader, what evils not long after, happened
unto the Jews, for the things which by rash enterprise, they practiced
against Christ. First of all, Seianus in the city of Rome, under Tiberius in
great creditt with the King, endeavored Seianus an enemy unto the Jews. Pilate
vexed the Jews.
with all might possible to destroy all the Jewish nation. And Pilate in Iudaea,
under whom that villainy was committed against Christ, practiced against the
temple, which stood at Jerusalem, that, which seemed unto the Jews unlawful,
and intolerable, whereby he grievously vexed them.

CAP. VI.
What miseryes happened unto the Jews, after that heinous offense which they
committed against Christ.

PHilo does write, that after the death of Tiberius, Caius, having obtained the
empire, vexed many with manifold, and innumerable afflictions, but chiefly
among all others, the nation of the Jews, which in few of his words may be
gathered, writing thus: so grievous (says Philo Iudaeus. The cruelty of Caius
Caligula.
he) was the dealing of Caius Caligula toward all men, but specially bent
against the nation of the Jews, with great indignation, that in other
cities (yet beginning in Alexandria) he vvoulde chaleng unto him self, their
prayers, and supplications, paynting in every place, the figure, and form of
his proper picture, and rejecting all others, successively by might and force
to place him self, and dedicating the temple in the holy city (until that
time undefiled, and free every way,) to him self, and his proper use,
translating and consecrating the name to new Caius as a famous God. And
infinite more mischeeues which can not be told, the same Philo reports, to
have happened unto the Jews at Alexandria, in his second book of virtues.
And Josephus agrees with him, which likewise signifies all the miseryes of
these men, to have had their original, from the time of Pilate, and their
rash enterprise against Christ. Hear then what he shows in the second book
of the Judicial wars, thus writing word by word. Pilate being sent Joseph
bell. ^ud. lib. 2. cap. 8.
from Tiberius, Lieuetenant into Iudaea, covertly conveyed by night into
Jerusalem, the vayled picture of Caesar, which they call his Arms, which
thing, when day appeared, moved the Jews not a little. For they which were
nearest unto them, at the sight thereof, stamped them with their feet, as if
they had been abrogated laws. They judged it an heinous offense, that any
carved image, should be erected in the city. But if thou confer these with
the truth in the Gospel, thou shall easily perceive, how that not long after,
the voice pressed them, which they pronounced before Pilate, saying: We have
no other King but Caesar. Moreover the same historiographer ^oh. 19.
reports an other calamity, to have eftsoon ensued the former, saying: After
this he raised ^oseph bell. ^ud. lib. 2. ^ap. 8.
an other tumulte, for their heaped treasure, which they call Corbon, was
waste upon a conduyte, reaching the space of three hundred furlonges. This
was the cause of the commotion among the Jews, and when Pilate was present
at Jerusalem, they compassed him, crying out unto him. But he foreseeing their
conspiracy, assigned certain armed soldiers, in outvvarde show of apparel,
like unto the common people, which he mingled with the multitude, commanding
^ilate plagueth the Ieves.
that no svvord should be used, but such as of the multitude, clamorously
murmured (a sign being given from the tribunal seat) he caused to be beaten
to death with clubbes. The Jews being thus foiled, many perished of their
wounds, and many in their flight, being trodden of their fellow citizens,
were crushed to death. At this lamentable slaughter the multitude being thus
quayled, was silent. Besides these an innumerable more altercations, to have
been at Jerusalem, Josephus declares, teaching how that from that time,
sedition, wars, and often practices of mischeefs incessantly have shaken not
only the city, but all Iudaea, until at length the utter foil, by their
besieging under Vespasian ouerreached them. Thus has vengeance lighted upon
the Jews, for their horrible fact committed against Christ.

CAP. VII.
How Pilate slew him self.

I suppose it necessary to know this also, how that it is reported of Pilate
(President in the time of Christ under Caius, of whose time we made mention
before) that he fell unto such misery, so ^he death of ^late.
that necessity constrained him to use violence upon him self, and became his
own murderer. The justice of God, as it seemed best unto his wisdom, not
long wincking at his wickedness. Hereof the Graecians are witnesses, which
commit to memory in their historyes the Qlimpiades of times.

CAP. VIII.
Of the famine in the time of Claudius.

WHen as Caius had not fully held the royal scepter, the space of four
years, Claudius Act. 11. Claudij Anno 4. Christi Anno 46. 1 Corinthians. 16. 2. Corinthians. 9. Galat. 2.
the Emperor, succeeded him, under whom a great famine afflicted the whole
world. The same also have they delivered in their Commentaries unto us, which
far dissent from our doctrine. And the prophecy of Agabus the Prophet,
foreshewing in the Acts of the Apostles, the famine that should ouerspred the
world, came thus to pass. Luke in the Acts signifies this famine to be
under Claudius, saying: that the brethren of the Church of Antioche sent
relief, every one after his hability, unto the faithful inhabiting Iudaea, by
the hands of Paul and Barnabas.

CAP. IX.
The martyrdom of James the Apostle.

About that time (that is under Claudius) Herod the King stretched forth his
hand, to Act. 12. Clemens lib. 7. Hypot.
vex certain of the Church, and slevve James the brother of John with the
svvorde. Of this James, Clemens in the 7. of his Hypotyposeon, reports a
certain history worthy of memory, which he received by relation of his
predecessors, saying: He truly which drevv him before the tribunal seat,
when he savv that he would willingly suffer martyrdom, was therewith
moved, and voluntarily confessed him self to be a Christian. Then were they
both brought The tormentor of James suffered martyrdom with him. Act. 12.
together, but he in the way requested James the Apostle, to pardon him,
which after he had paused a little upon the matter, turning unto him,
answered: Peace be unto thee, and kissed him, and so they were both beheaded
together. Then Herod as the holy Ghost witnesses, perceauing the death of
James to have pleased the Jews, lays wayt for Peter, whom, when he had
taken, he cast into prison, whose death he had procured, had not the Angel of
the Lord, by divine apparition, assisted him by night, miraculously lousing
his fetters, and restoring him to the office of preaching? And such was the
will of God concerning Peter.

CAP. X.
How that Agrippa otherwise called Herod, persecuting the Apostles, and
extolling him self, felt the heavy hand of God, to his destruction.

THe enterprises of the king, against the Apostles of Christ, passed not long
unpunished. For immediately after his privy practices against the Apostles (as
it is in the Acts) when he was in Caesarea, upon an high solemn day, arrayed
in a gorgeous, and princely robe, preaching unto the people from his lofty
tribunal seat, the plague of God (as messenger of justice) apprehended him.
and when as the whole multitude in compass, had showted to his praise, that to
their hearing the voice of God, and not of man proceeded from him* the Angel
of the Lord (as the Scripture witnesses) smote him, so that he was consumed
of worms, and miserably finished Act. 12.
his mortal life. And that consent is worthy of memory, which is found between
holy Scripture in this miraculous fact, and the history of Josephus, where he
delivers unto us a manifest testimony of the truth, to wit, in the
ninetenth book of Judicial Antiquities, writing this miracle in these words:
Now was the third year of his Lieuetenantshipp throughout all Iudaea,
Joseph. Anti. lib. 19. cap. 7.
come to an end, when he went to Caesarea, which of old was called the
tower of Straton. there he published spectacles, and stageplayes in the honor
of Caesar, and ordained a solemn feast day, for his prosperous affairs. Unto
this feast frequented the whole multitude of those which were chief in
that province, and advanced to highest promotion, and dignity. The second day
of these spectacles, the king putting on a robe of silver, wonderfully
wrought, at the davvning of the day came to the theater, where his silver
robe, by reflexe of the sun beams being lightened, yielded so gorgeous a
glistring to the eye, that the shining thereof seemed terrible, and
intolerable to the behoulders. Flatterers forthwith, one, one thing, an
other, an other thing, bolted out such sentences, as turned in the end to his
confusion, saluting him for God, and adding thervvithal, be gracious, though
hitherto we have feared thee as man, yet he^ceforth we confess thee to be
above mortal nature. These things the king rebuked not, neither repelled this
impious flattery. But when he a little after looked about, he beheld an
Angel hanging This Angel in Josephus is an Ovvle.
over his head. The same foorthvvith he supposed to be a messenger of evil,
who before was of goodness. Suddenly he felt him self pricked at the heart
with extreme vehemency of pain in his bowels, and heavily beholding his
friends, said: I which seem to you a God, am The oration of Herod Agrippa
a little before his death.
now constrained to end the race of this life. fatal destiny has found
fault, with your fond flatteries, which of late you sounded to my praise. I
which was saluted immortal, am now carried away, ready to yield up the
ghost. I his destiny no doubt is to be borne vvithall, which God has
decreed. For we have lived not miserably, but in that prosperous estate which
is termed blessed. When he had uttered these words he sickned more and more.
Then was he carefully, and circu^spectly carried, unto the Palace. but the
rumor was spread abroad, over all the country, If thou had lived well, no
doubt thou sholdest have died well* thy life was very ill, thine end far
worse. Herod Agrippa king of the Jews seven years. He was called sometimes
Herod, sometimes Agrippa.
that without peradventure, he would dye shortly. The multitude foorthvvith
together with women, and children, covered with sackcloth, after their
country manner, made supplication unto God for their king, so that all sounded
of sorrow, and lamentation. The king lying in an high lodging, and beholding
the people prostrate upon their knees, could not refrain from tears. But
after that he had been vexed, the space of five days, with bitter gnavving of
his bowels, he ended this life, being the fifty, and fourth year, of his age,
and the seventh of his reign. For the space of four years he reigned under
Caius Caesar, governing the tetrarchie of Philip three years. And the fourth
year, that which he took of Herod. the other three years, he passed under
Claudius Caesar. These things I deeply way that Josephus, and others together
with the divine scriptures, has truly alleged. But if any seem to mislyke
with them selves toutching the name of the king, the time it self, and the
Acts do declare him, to be the same, so that either by the error of the
writer, the name was changed, or that he had two names, as many others have had.

The censure of the translatour toutching the doubt raised about the name of
Herod, which was smitten of the Angel with mortality.
EVsebius in this former chapter seems to clear a certain doubt, which may
rise about the name of this king, whether he were called Herod (as Luke
writes in the Acts of the Apstles) or Agrippa, as Josephus every where
terms him. Luke saythi Herod the king stretched forth his hand etc. Act. 12.
Again, Luke says: Herod went down from Iud^^ to Caesarea. Eusebius, and
Josephus do say, that Agrippa after he had continued three years in the
kingdom of Iudaea, went down to Caesarea. Antiq. lib. 19. cap. 7. Luke says:
Upon a day appointed, Herod arrayed him self in royal apparel, and sat on
the judgment seat, and made an oration unto the people, and the people gave a
shoute, saying: The voice of God, and not of man. Eusebius and Josephus say:
Agrippa the second day of these spectacles, or stageplayes, putting on a robe
of silver which glistered etc. The flatterers saluted him for God. Luke says:
The Angel of the Lord smote him. Eusebius says: He beheld an Angel hanging
over his head. Josephus says: he saw an Owl sit over his head, and forthwith
he supposed her to be a messenger of ill luck* last of all Luke says: He was
eaten of worms and gave up the ghost. Eusebius and Josephus say: that he was
pricked at the heart with extreme pain, and bitter gnawing of the bowelles. all
which circumstances ^ende to one effect* the greatest disagreement that I see,
is, in the name. By perusing the histories of Josephus and Eusebius, I can not
perceive, that there were more Herodes, from the birth of Christ (which were
kings of the Jews) unto the utter overthrow of Jerusalem, under Titus, and
Vespasian, (when ^s their kings, and highpriestes were quite cut of) then two:
the first: Herod the Idumaean, who slew the infantes, called also Herod the
great. The second: Herod the Tetrarche, called Herodes minor, whose
beginninges and endinges, the reader may behold in the Chronographie printed
in the end of this present volume. Eusebius (lib. 2. cap. 4. also in his
Chronicon, and Josephus, Antiq. lib. 18. cap. 11. and 14. and bell. Iud. lib.
1. cap. 10. 11.) do write: that Agrippa (toutching whom this present doubt does
rise) being the son of Aristobulus, nephew to Herod the great, brother to
Herodias came to Rome, the year before Tiberius died, and was a suter unto the
Emperor Tiberius, for some office or other. Tiberius upon displeasure
conceived against him, clapped him in prison. This Agrippa after the death of
Tiberius, grew in such favor and credit with Caius Caligula (who succeeded
Tiberius) That he accused Herod the Tetrarche before the Emperor of treason,
for which crime Herod (being convinced) together with Herodias was commanded
to perpetual banishment, and he appointed king of the Jews. This Agrippa was
king seven years, four under Caius Caligula, and three under Claudius. of
Claudius ^e obtained, besides his other dominions as Josephus does witness
(Antiq. lib. 19. cap. 5.) the kingdom which Herod his graundefather had over
Iudaea, and Samaria, and withal the Tetrarchie of Lysanias* his end and manner
of death Luke, Eusebius, and Josephus, have here described to be very
lamentable. the time very well agrees, his death to have been in the fourth
year of Claudius, An. Christi. 46. though they differ in the name, Luke only
calls him Herod, all other writers call him Agrippa. Yet in Josephus (Antiq.
lib. 19. cap. 5.) I find, that this Agrippa had to his brother on Herod.
Agrippa (says he) begged of Claudius, for his brother Herod, the kingdom of
Chalcis. Again Josephus says there met Agrippa certain kings, Pariter and
Herodes frater eius, qui and ipse Chalcidis habebat imperium: and with all his
brother Herod, which also was king of Chalcis. lib. 19. Antiq. cap. 7.
Claudius wrote unto the president of Alexandria, in the behalf of the Jews,
supplicantibus sibi regibus, Agrippa, pariter and Herod, at the request both
of Agrippa and Herod the kings. Antiq. lib. 19. cap. 5. again in the same
place Claudius him self in his edict, says: Petentibus me regibus, Agrippa,
and Herod Charissimis etc. libenter hoc praebui: when as Agrippa and Herod,
our dear princes, made the petition unto me, I willingly condescended
thereunto. I find moreover mention made, that this Herod suruiued his brother
Agrippa. Josephus writes thus Antiquit. lib. 20. cap. 1. Herod the brother of
the late deseased Agrippa, then king of Chalcis, requested of Claudius Caesar,
authority over the temple, the ordayning of Priests, all which he obtained.
a little after it follows: Herod removed Canthara from the highpriesthoode,
and substituted Iosoph the son of Camus. Moreover Josephus says: Antiq. lib.
19. cap. 7. that after the departure of his brother, he conspired the death of
Sylas. this is all, that I find to have been done by this Herod. finally he
died in his bed, his end being come without any manifest or known disease.
Josephus says: Desunctus est Herodes frater regis Agrippae maioris, octauo
anno Claudij principatus, cuius regnum, Claudius Agrippae iuueni dedit. Herod
the brother of king Agrippae the greater, died the. 8. year, of the reign of
Claudius, whose kingdom Claudius assigned unto young Agrippa Antiq. lib. 20.
cap. 5. bell. Iud. lib. 1. cap. 10. 11. We may in no wise think that Luke
erred herein, he might peradventure mean this Herod, who had some doing in
the temple, some dealing among the priests, some authority over the Jews, who
was careful for them, together with his brother Agrippa. but his end has no
affinity, with that of Luke if we may credit Josephus, who no doubt (being a
Jew then living) was most skillful, and best seen in the Jewish affairs*
wherefore to reconcile this dissagrement. let us call him Herod with Luke, and
Agrippa with Eusebius and Josephus. nay less that we seem contrary to our
selves, in taking contrary parts, let us make them friends and joining their
hands together, name the child Herod Agrippa, which Eusebius meant, when he
gathered the summarie of his chapiters saying: (...), how that Agrippa and
Herod persecuting the Apostles. Eusebius also in the later end of the
chapter, supposes the name either to have been changed, by some error of the
writer, or else that he was, (...), called after two names. In as much as
hitherto in this our censure, together with the other writers, we have laid
down the names of the kings which governed the Jews since the birth of
Christ: there remains yet one (which Eusebius lib. 2. cap. 19. toutcheth) to
be spoken of, that the reader may find the history, laid down in an ample,
and perfect manner* the same is Agrippa the younger or lesser. After Herod the
Idumaean, or the great which reigned 37. years (four only after the birth of
Christ) succeeded Archelaus, which continewed king nine years. The third,
after the birth of Christ was Herod the Tetrarche, who reigned 24. years. The
fourth was Agrippa mayor (touching whose name this controuer sie rose) who
reigned seven years. The fifth and the last was Agrippa minor, son to the
former Agrippa, whom the Angel stroke. this Agrippa reigned. 26. years to the
destruction of Jerusalem, and the utter overthrow of the Jews. Josephus
writes of him (Antiq. lib. 19. cap. 8.) that he was but 17. years old when
his father died. This was he before whom Paul pleaded in the Acts of the
Apostles when he said: I think my self happy king Agrippa, because I shall
aunsvvere this day before thee etc. because thou have knowledge of all
customs, and questions, which are among the Jews. In the end Paul said: O
king Agrippa beleuest thou the prophets? I know that thou beleuest. then
Agrippa said unto Paul: almost thou persvvadest me to be a Christian etc. When
all was done, Agrippa said to Festus, this man might have been loosed, if he had
not appealed unto Caesar. Act. 20. He began his reign under Claudius, he
continewed the reign of Nero, Galba, Otho, Vitellius, and part of the reign
of Vespasian, and his son Titus. Josephus commends him for diverse virtues,
he exhorted the Jews to cut of all sedition, and not to venture upon that
most dangerous wars, with the Romans: volens and Romany conseruare
Iudaeos, and Iudaeis templum atque patriam, willing, or being desirous, to save
for the Romans the Jews, and for the Jews the temple, and their native
soil. bell. Iud. lib. 2. cap. 17. He entertained Vespasian, in the time of the
wars at Tiberias. Joseph. bell. Iud. lib. 3. cap. 16. Joining with Vespasian
at the siege of Gamala, he is wounded in the arm with a stone, out of a sling.
bell. Iud. lib. 4. cap. 1. He is sent to Rome by Vespasian (who then was but
general captain) unto Galba the Emperor, and hearing by the way that Galba
was dead, and that Otho succeeded him, went on his journey nevertheless. bell.
Iud. lib. 5. cap. 6. His last end I find no where written* but toutching the
kingdom, the rule, and the government of the Jews, after the utter ruin,
and overthrow of Jerusalem, with the confusion of the Jews: Vespasianus wrote
unto Tiberius Maximus liuetenant of Iudaea, that he should sell all the land of
the Jews, reserving only a place called Massada, unto certain soldiers,
Joseph. bell. Iud. lib. 7. cap. 26. Now (gentle reader) thou may hereby
note the wisdom and providence of God toutching this wicked brood, that as
Josephus (Antiq. lib. 18. cap. 11.) writes: Inter centum annorum spacium,
cuncta Herodis origo consumpta est, within the compass of one hundred years,
all the progeny of Herod was rooted out.

CAP. XI.
Of Theudas the sorcerer and his adh^rentes.

IN so much that Luke in the Acts, brought in Gamaliel, who (when consultation
was about Act. 5.
the admission of the Apostles) said: that about the same time, there rose up
one Theudas^, which came to naught, and as many as harkened unto him: Now
therefore let us allege the testimony of Josephus concerning him. He writes
in the place before cited these words. When Fadus Joseph. Ant. lib. 20. cap. 4.
was Liuetenant of Iudaea, a certain sorcerer, named Theudas, persuaded a
great multitude to follow him, unto the river Iordane, bringing with them,
their whole substance. For he reported himself to be a prophet, and that at
his commandment, the river should divide it self parting in the midst,
yelding unto them a free passage through, and in so saying, he seduced many.
But Fadus suffered not their folly to take effect, for he sent out a troop of
horsemen, which apprehending them vnavvares, slevve many, took many alive,
but Theudas himself being taken, they beheaded, and brought his head to
Jerusalem. After this consequently Josephus reports of the famine, which was
under Claudius in this manner.

CAP. XII.
Of Helene queen of the Osroenians, and of Simon Magus.

AFter this there fell a great famine in Iudaea, where queen Helene bought
much corn of the Aegiptians, and distributed to them that wanted. And these
things accord with that in the Acts of the Apostles, how the disciples of
Antioche, after their ability, sent succor ^ct. 11.
unto the saints inhabiting Iudaea, to be delivered unto the elders, by the
hands of Paul, and Barnabas. But of this Helene (whereof also this
Historiographer mentioned) there remain unto this day certain famous
monumentes, in the suburbs of Aelia. It is said of old that she was These
Adiabeni were a ^tion dwel^g beyond ^phrates Io(...). bell. Iud. ^6. cap. 7.
queen of the nation called Adiabeni. When that now the faith in our Savior,
and Lord Jesus Christ, was published among all people, the mortal enemy of
mankind, endeavoring to withdraw y^ Regal city, from the truth: conveyed
thither Simon (whereof mention was made before) and furthering his deuelishe
enchauntementes: seduced many of them which dwelled at Rome. This does Justinius
also declare, who a little after the Apostles time, was famous as toutching our
doctrine. Concerning whom, I will lay down those things that may seem
agreeable unto the time. This Justinius in the former Apology, which he wrote in
the defense of our doctrine says thus.

CAP. XIII.
Of Simon Magus, and Helena a certain witch his yokemate.

AFter the ascension of our Savior into the heavens, the deuell brought forth
certain ^inus Mar^in Apo
men which called them selves gods, who not only suffered no vexation of you,
but attained unto honor amongst you, by name one Simon a Samaritane, borne in
the village Gitton, who under Claudius Caesar, by the art of deuels, through
whom he dealt: wrought deuelish enchauntementes, esteemed, and counted in
your Regal city of Rome, for a God, and honored of you as a God, with a
picture betvveene two bridges, upon the river Tibris, having this Romayne
superscription. Simoni deo sancto. To Simon the holy god. And in manner all the
Samaritanes, certain also of other nations, do worship him, acknovvledging
him for the chief god. And together with him, one Helena, who at that time
vvandred This Helen was a common harlot Irenaeus lib. 1. cap. 20. calls this
Helen, Selen.
two, and fro, with him, which first of all, had her abiding in Tyrus, a
city of Phaenicia at the receyt of custom, and termed of him, the principal
understanding. Thus far Justinius. Agreeable unto this, is that of Irenaus, in
his first book against Heresies, where he writes of this man, and of his
impious and damnable doctrine, which at this present to recite, I think
superfluous: In so much that severally, if any be so disposed, he may easyly
understand the original, the lives, the fond arguments, and the whole
enterprises of the graunde heretics of these latter times, which of purpose,
are largely published in the foresaid book of Irenaeus. This Simon we learn
to have been the first author of all heresies, and they that of him, hold
Simon the father of heretics.
this heresy unto this day, fayning through purity of life, the chaste
philosophy of Christians renouned among all men: put in ure again the
pestilent superstition of pictures, from the which they seemed once to be
free, falling prostrate before the pictures, and carved Images, of Simon and
his Iil Helena (mentioned of before) worshipping them with incense, and
sacrifices, and sweet odours. They have as yet certain more detestable
secrecies, and him which at the first hears the same, they report to become
astonyed, and that there is a written oracle among them, which brings
astonishment. True it is these men are full of astonishment, ecstasy, and mere
madness, so that not only, they may not be committed to writing: neither also
with modesty be uttered of chaste lips, in so much they ouerflowe in
filthiness, and obscenitie. And what so ever may be imagined more foul then any
filthynes it self: the same has their damnable heresye surpassed, who delude
miserable women, pressed already with all kind of impietye.

CAP. XIIII.
How Simon Magus after his devilish dealing in Iudaea, got him to Rome, where
he was met of Peter the Apostle.

THe malicious power of Satan, enemy to al honestye, and foe to all humane
health: brought The comb^ of light and darkness.
forth at that time, this monster Simon, a father, and worker of all such
mischieues, as a great adversary unto the mighty, and divine Apostles. But the
divine, and supercelestiall grace succored her ministers, that by their
apparition, and presence, the kindled flame of wickedness was quenched, all
pride by them abated, and humbled, which did set it self against the
knowledge of God. Wherefore, neither the striving of Simon, neither of any
other, that then started up, was able to withstand those Apostolic times for
the brightness of truth, and the divine word, lately shining from above,
preuayling on earth, working in his Apostles: victoriously overcame, and
mightily over grew all things. But the before said Sorcerer, having the eyes
of his mind lightened with a divine, and some sudden shining from above,
after that first of all, he was manifestly known to have maliciously deal
against Peter the Apostle in Iudaea: fled alonge iorneye by sea, from the East
unto the West, thinking to get by that flight, to live afterward at hearts
ease. And coming into the city of Rome, he was so aided by his power, which
preuayleth in Simon (...) comes (...) Rome.
this world, that in short time he brought his purpose to such a pass, that
his picture was there placed with others, and he honored as a God. But this
his impietye, did not long prosper, for incontinently, under the raygne of
Claudius, the wonderful providence of the God of all Peter came to Rome der
Clau^
things, and careful over mankind: guyded unto Rome Peter, that great, and
constant Apostle, chief of all the rest for virtuous favor: against this so
great a corruptor of Christian life: who like a valyant Captain, sensed with
the divine armor of God, transported from East unto West, the precious
merchandise of spiritual brightness, the wholesome doctrine, and light of
souls, that is, the preaching of the glad tydinges of the celestial kingdom.

CAP. XV.
The foil of Simon, and mention of the Gospel written by S. Mark. These 2.
cap. in the greek were one.


WHen the heavenly word came thither, Immediately the power of Simon, together
with him self, came to naught, and the flame was quenched. But of the contrary,
such a light of piety shined in the minds of such as heard Peter, that they
were not suffized with once hearing, neither satisfied with the unwritten
doctrine, that was delivered: but earnestly besought Saynct Mark (whose
Gospel is now in ure) that he would leave in writing, The Romans request S.
Mark to write a Gospel.
unto them, the doctrine which they had received by preaching, neither ceased
they, until they had persuaded him, and so given an occasion of the Gospel to
be written* which is now after Mark. It is reported, that the Apostle
understanding of this by inspiration of the holy spirit, was pleased with the
motion of those men, and commanded this Gospel now written, to be read in
the Churches. Clemens in the sixth of his Hypotiposcon, reports this story.
Clemens. Papias.
With him agrees Papias, Bishop of Hierapolis in Asia, who says, that of this
Mark mention is made by Peter, in his former Epistle, which he compiled being
at Rome, and of him the city of Rome figuratively to be called Babylon, the
which is signified when he 1. Pet. 5. Rome figuratively called Babylon.
says: the Church partaker of your election, which is at Babylon saluteth
you, and Mark my son.

CAP. XVI.
How that Mark first of all others, preached unto the Egyptians the
knowleadge of Christ. Cap. 15. after the greek.


Mark is said first of all, to have been sent unto Egypt, and there to have
both preached Mark the ^rit preacher ^f the Aegy^tians.
the Gospel, which he wrote, and first to have settled the Churches of
Alexandria, and so a great multitude of believers, both men, and women, At the
first meeting was gathered together, by a certain philosophical, and diligent
exercise, that Philo thought good to commit in writing unto us, their exercise,
their conuenticles, their diet, and all the other trade of their life* It is
reported that this Philo came to Rome under Claudius, Cap. 16. in he greek.
^hilo came ^o Rome vn^^r Claudius
and had conference with Peter, who then preached unto the Romans, neither is
it unlike. That Commentary which we know to have been compiled by him in his
latter days, contains manifestly the Canons, hitherto conserved in the
Church. And in so much that curiously he has described unto us, the lives of
our religious men, it is very like, that he did not only see those Apostolic
men, of his time, by original Ebrevves, and therefore observed the ancient
rites, and ceremonies of the Jews: but also allowed of them, as godly, and
honest.

CAP. XVII.
Eusebius reports out of Philo, the lives, the manners, the studyes, the
habitation, the assemblies, the judgment of the interpretation of the
Scriptures, of the religious m^n in Egypt, and there about flourishing in his
time.

FIrst of all, this plainly appears, that he passed not the limits of
veritye, by reason of him self, or of any other in reporting those things
which he wrote in that book, by him entitled: of the life contemplative, or
worshippers, saying: that the men and women were called worshippers, either
because like cunning Physicians, they cured, and healed such as came unto them
of their malicious passions: or else because that religiously, they worshipped
the celestial godhead, with pure and sincere worship. But whether he gave them
this name of his proper person, for the aforesaid cause: or whether at the
beginning they were so called, when as yet the name of Christians was not
every where published: I think it not needful curiously to shift out. Yet
first of all this he witnesses: that they renounced their substance, and ^o
Iudaeus
their proper goods: they which deuined of philosophye gave place, they
severed them selves from all the secular cares of this life: they forsaking the
cities, solitarily lived in fields, gardens, or Orchyardes: they accompanied
them which follovved the contrary trade of life, as unprofitable and hurtful
unto them which then lived thus (as requisite it was) to this end, that
with earnest and fervent desire they should imitate them which led this
prophetical life. For in the Acts of the Apostles, whence no doubt this is
rehearsed, it is written that Act. 4.
all the familiares of the Apostles sold their substance, and possession,
distributing to every one, as need required, so that none wanted among them.
For as many, (says the text) as had lands or houses, sold them, bringing the
price thereof, and laying it at the Apostles feet, to this purpose, that
severally every ones want, and necessity, might be supplied. The like does the
same Philo testify, writing thus: In many places this kind of people lives
(for it behooved as Philo of the vvorshipers in Egypt.
well the Graecians, as the Barbarians, to be partakers of this absolute
goodness) but in Egypt, in every province (so they term them) they abound,
and especially about Alexandria. From every where, the best conuaye them
selves, as it were into their native country, into the soil of these
worshippers, as a most commodious place, adioyninge to the lake of Marye, in a
lovver vale, very fit, both for the securitye, and temperature of the aere
Afterward describing the manner of their mansions, he writes thus of the
Churches of that region: Mansions. Churches. Religious houses.
In every village there is a religious house, which they call Semnion, and a
Monasterye, wherein they inhabiting, do celebrate the mysteries of honest, and
holy life, carrying thither nothing, nether meat, nor drink, nether any other
thing, necessary for the sustentation of the body, but the laws, and the
oracles of the Prophets, Hymns, and such like (vvherby knowledge Study of
holy Scripture.
and pietye is increased) there are consummated. And a little after, he says:
All the space that is from morning to evening, is of them spent, in godly
exercise* for, reading the holy Scriptures, they meditate thereupon, handling
allegorically, the divine philosophy of their native country. And they suppose
those types of secretye, which by figures are signified, to be made manifest
by the exposition of the Scriptures. They have certain Commentaryes of
ancient vvriters, who being ringleaders of their opinions, have left unto
their posterityes, monuments of many things Allegorically handeled, which
they using as principal types, do imitate the drifte of their trade. These
things seem to have been uttered by this man, as though he had been an
auditor, unto their exposition of the Scriptures. It is also very like that the
Commentaryes (which he reports to have been among them) were the Gospells,
and the works of the Apostles, and certain expositions of the ancient
Prophets, partlye such as that Epistle unto the Hebrews is, and also the
other Epistles of Paul do contain. To be short, that they newely compiled,
and collected Psalms, thus he writes: They contemplate not only divine
things, but they make grave canticles, and hymns unto God, Psalms and Hymns.
in a more sacred ryme, of every kind of meter, and verse. And many more
things he declares in that book, which we here mention. But those things
seemed necessaryly selected of him, which paynte unto us the sure and certain
notes, of their Ecclesiastical conversation. But if any man suppose these
things now spoken of, not properly to appertain unto the pollycye of the
Gospel, but to be applied unto others, besides these forementioned
worshippers, let him at least wise creditt that, which out of his words we
will allege, and no doubt if he judge indifferently, he shall find an
infallible testimonye. For thus he writes: First of all, The continency of the
vvorshiper^* Abstinence*
they place continency in the mind, as a certain foundation, next, they
build thereupon, other virtues. Not one eats, or drinks before sun set,
adiudging the divine meditating of wisdom, to be a work of light, and the
curious feeding of the carcass, to be a work of darkness, giving unto the
one, the day, unto the other, the lesser part of the night. Many think not
upon meat, no not in whole three days, being ravished with a greater
desire of knowledge, then of food. Many are so delighted, and enamoured with
the food of wisdom, which abundantly, copiously, and plentifully
ministers all kind of learning, that they abstain from meat, twice as
long, and scarce in six days, they receive their necessary food. These words
of Philo, in our opinion, concern without all contradiction, our men. But if
any man as yet stiffly gaynesaye, and look to be further persuaded, let him
creditt more evident demonstrations, which he shall not find among any
others, save only the Christians who religiously* rule them selves, according
unto the Gospel, for he says: Among them Virgins*
of whom we speak, there are women to be found, vvherof diverse are elderly
virgins, vovving chastitye not by compulsion, or necessitye, (as the guyse and
manner is of holy virgins* among To compe^ some to v^ chastity i^ paganism*
the Gentiles) but rather voluntarily, for the zeal, and desire they have to
wisdom, with whose company, these women acquaintinge them selves, despise
corporal lust, desirous not of mortal, but immortal children, which soly
the amiable and godly mind of it self begets. And afterward he sets
forth the same more plainly, for the interpretations (says he) Allegorical
interpretations.
of the sacred Scriptures, are among them Allegorical, and figurative. For
unto these men the whole Scripture, seems like a living creature, so that
the external shevve of words, resemble the superficyes of the body, and the
hidd sense, or understanding ^f the words, seem in place of the soul,
which their religion began to contemplate, by the behoulding of names, as it
were in a glass, observing a passing beautye with the bright beams of
shininge sentences. What need we to add unto these, how that they gathered
together, severally men, and severally Synods. Conference.
women, have their conversation? and what exercise they practice among them?
which as yet are in use among us, and especially, such as we have been
accustomed to use in our fastinges, vigils, Fastinges.
and reading of divine Scripture about the festival day of the blessed
passion, which the aforesaid author has diligently noted after the same manner
as they are observed among us, and delivered it in writing, but especially
describing the vigils of that great feast, and the exercises Vigils.
thereof, with hymns, as the manner is among us. and how that one singing in
verse, and the rest giving diligent ear, with silence, they all close in the
end, and sing with him, the last verse of the hynme. He has written also, how
that in the before said days, they lie upon green pallets, casting Beds
made of leaves, chasse, and grass. Bread and water. Bishops. Deacons.
at all, neither wine, neither any living creature, but their drink, clear
water, and their food, bread with salt, and Hyssope. He writes moreover of
their government, I say of them to whom the Ecclesiastical Liturgies are
committted, of their Deaconshippes, and of the presidency of Bishopes, placed
above all. But if any man be desirous to know these things exactly, let him
repair unto the history of the before said author. Now that Philo writing of
these things, entreated of the first preachers of the Gospel, and the rites
delivered them of the Apostles of old, it is manifest to every man.

CAP. XVIII.
The commendation of Philo, the cataloge of his works, whereof many are not
extant.

THis Philo flowed in words, he was deep of understanding, high, and
profounde in the contemplation of holy Scripture, he compiled a diuerous and
variable exposition of the Scriptures, prosecuting after his order and manner,
as well the tract of the book of Genesis, with the Allegoryes thereof, as the
sum in the chapiters contained, laying down the questions incident, and
solutions to the same, entitling his book: the questions and solutions
incident in Genesis, and Exodus. There are besides extant, of his, several
tractes, of his Problemes. Namely, two books of Husbandry, so many of
drunkenes, and certain others, having their proper, and peculiar title,
whereof one is: what the sobre mind prays or vovveth? also of the confusion
of tongues, of vvandring and finding, of Conuenticles unto discipline. of that:
who can be heir of the goods of God? or: what division can be of equals and
contraryes? of the three virtues, whereof Moses, with others has written.
Moreover: of them whose names are changed, and why they were changed, where
he witnesses him self to have written again, and again of testaments. There
is extant a volume of his: of banishment, and of the life of a perfect wise
man, according unto righteousness, or: of vnvvritte^ laws. Again, of Gyaunts,
or: that the Godhead is not changed* of dreams, which according unto Moses
are given from above, five volumes. And thus much of them which he wrote on
Genesis, that came to our hands. We have also known upon Exodus, five books
of questions, and of the tabernacle, and of the tenn commandments, and four
books of them which by nature of laws may be referred, unto the tenn
commandments. of the sacrifices of beasts, what kinds of sacrifices there
be? of that: what rewards are set forth to the good and godly, in the law?
what punishments, and curses to the wicked. There are found also certain
several books of his, as of Providence, and of the Jews, of Politickes, and
of Alexander, and concerning that: that brute beasts have reason. Again: that
he is a slave which is wicked, and there follows an other book: that he is
free which is godly. After these he wrote of the life contemplative, or
worshippers, whence we borrowed those things, which we alleged concerning
the Apostolic men's lives. the interpretations of the Hebrew names in the law,
and Prophets, are attributed unto his industrye. This Philo coming to Rome in
the time of Caius, wrote a book of the impiety of Caius, wittely cloking it,
with the title of virtues, which book being read before the Romayne Senate, in
the time of Claudius, was so well thought of, that his books were chayned in
the public library, as famous Monuments. At the same time, when Paul had
trauayled in compass, from Jerusalem Act. 18.
to Illyricum, Claudius vexed the Jews, when Aquila, and Priscilla with
certain other Jews were expulsed Rome, and cam^ to Asia, where they had
their conversation together with Paul, who Anno Christi 51.
then confirmed the Churches, whose fundations he had lately laid. Whereof the
holy Scripture, in the Acts of the Apostles, sufficiently enstructeth us.

CAP. XIX.
What calamity happened unto the Jews in Jerusalem upon Easter day.

WHen Claudius as yet raygned, so great a sedition, and stir was raised in
Jerusalem, about the feast of Easter, that of them only, which were pressed
in the porches of the The justice of God for contemning his son. Joseph bell.
Iud. lib. 2. cap 11.
temple, crushed, and trodden to death under foot, there were slain thirty
thousand Jews, and that festival day, was unto the whole nation, a day of
mourning, Lamentation being raised throughout al their dwelling places. And
this, Josephus does write word, by word: Claudius assigned Agrippa (the son
of Agrippa) King of the Jews: When Felix was sent to be Lieuetenante of the
whole province of Samaria, Galilaea, and the region beyond Iordane. Who after
he had raygned thirtenth years, and eight months, dyed, leaving Nero to
succeade him in the Empire.

CAP. XX.
What calamity happened at Jerusalem under Nero: the sedition between priest,
and people. The death of Ionathas the high priest.

Under Nero, Felix being procurator of Iudaea, there was then raised a sedition
between the Priests, which Josephus in the twentyeth book of Antiquities
describes, thus: there Joseph Anti. lib. 20. cap. 13
rose dissension betvveene the high priests, and inferior priests, and chief
of the people at Jerusalem. Every one gathering unto him, a company of
Russians, and cutters, played the captain, they skirmished among them selves,
they vexed one another, they slynged one at another, but there was none to
bridle them. And these things freely were done in the city, as though there had
been no President. So impudent and past all shame were the high priests
become, that they stuck not to send, and take away from the barn floores,
the tithes due unto the inferior priests, so that in the end it fell out,
that the priests were seen to perish for pouertye. The violence of these
seditious persons prenayled beyond all right and reason. Again the same
Historiographer writes that at Ierus(...), about that time, there rose a
certain multitude of thieves, or robbers, which slew them by day that met
them in the streets, and especially on the holy days confounding them selves
with the multitude, and carrying weapons covered under their garments, they
wounded the chief men, and when the wounded fell down, they drew them selves
to them that were incensed against the thieves, and so brought to pass through
the cloking of their prankes, they could not be apprehended. To be brief he
writes that Ionathas the Joseph. Ant^ lib. 20. cap. 1
high priest was slain of them first, and daily after him many, and the fear
to have been greater then the calamity it self, because that every man, every
hour looked for death as in war.

CAP. XXI.
Of the sedition that the Egyptian Sorcerer moved, whereof the Acts make
mention.

COnsequently aft^r these, he annexeth other things, saying: with a greater
plague, did Joseph. bel^ Iud. lib. 2. c^ 12.
the Egyptian, being a false prophet, afflict the Jews. When he came unto
those parts, and challenged unto him self (being a sorcerer) the credit of a
Prophet, he gathered together about a thirty thousand of seduced people,
whom he guyded from the wilderness unto mount Oliuet: whence he might make
an embushment upon Jerusalem, and if he obtained his purpose, to exercise
tyranny, partly upon the Romayne vvatch, and partly upon the people* vsinge to
his wicked enterprise, the company of headye and vvilfull svvashebucklers. But
Felix preventing his violence, met him with armed Romayne soldiers, with
whom all the rest of the people conspired, ready to revenge them selves of
them. After their meeting, and assault given, the Aegiptian with a fevv fled
his way, and many of his adhaerents, were foiled and taken alive. Thus far
Josephus, in the second of his historyes. I think it also very expedient, to
confer with these, that which is read in the Acts of the Apostles,
concerning this Aegiptian, where under Felix it is said of the tribune of the
soldiers, that was at Jerusalem, unto Paul, when the multitude of the Jews
raised a tumulte against him: art thou that Aegiptian, which Act. 21.
a fevv days ago, have raised with thee four thousand common thieves, and
leddest them unto the wilderness? and such are the things that happened
under Felix.

CAP. XXII.
The going of Paul unto Rome, and his pleading there, with his Martyrdom.

FEstus is sent by Nero to succeed Felix, under whom Paul pleading in his
own cause, is brought bound to Rome. There was with him Aristarchus, whom
justly in some place of Coloss. 4.
his Epistles, he calls his fellow captive, and Luke when he had finished the
Acts of the Apostles, concluded his history here, saying: that Paul lived
peaceably at Rome two Act. 28.
whole years, and preached the word of God without impediment. The which
being expired, fame goes that the Apostle (after account made of his doctrine)
returned unto the office of preaching, and afterward when he came the second
time unto the city, under the same Emperor, Whereof read the 25. cap. of this
2. book.
to have been crowned with martyrdom. Where lying in fetters he wrote the
latter Epistle unto Timothe, instructing him both of the account of doctrine
that he made in his former captivity, and also of his death approaching nigh.
Take here of his own testimony, for thus he writes. At my former appearance
none assisted me, for all forsook me. I pray God that it be 2. Timoth. 4.
not laid to their charge. But the Lord assisted me, and strengthened me, that
by me the preaching should be accomplished, and that all nations might hear.
And I was delivered out of the Lions mouth. Plainly he shows by these words
that he was before delivered out of the lions mouth (meaning as it appears
Nero, because of his cruelty) that the preaching might be supplied by him.
Neither afterward has he added the like, for he will deliver me out of the
lions mouth. He saw in the spirit his death to draw nigh. Wherefore immediately
he says: I have been delivered out of the Lions mouth, and the Lord will
deliver me from every evil work, and reserve me unto his heavenly kingdom.
Noting, his martyrdom to draw nigh. The which more evidently he foresheweth in
the same Epistle, saying: For I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my
dissoluing is at hand. In the latter epistle, when he wrote, he declared Luke
alone to be with him, but in his former appearance, and pleading, not one, no
not Luke to be with him. Wherefore it is plain that Luke wrote the Acts of
the Apostles unto that time, knitting up his history, with his absence from
Paul. These things have we spoken to this end, that we may warrant the
martyrdom of Paul, not to have been consummated when Luke finished his
history, that is, when Paul came to Rome. It is very like that the apologye of
Paul for his doctrine, might have been at the beginning sooner accepted, when
Nero was somewhat milder in affection, and dealing. But after that he fell unto
such outrageous wilfulness, he was quick with others for the Apostles sake.

CAP. XXIII.
Of the martyrdom of James, called the brother of Christ.

THe Jews, when their purpose failed them in their pretended malice toward
Paul, after his appellation made unto Caesar, being sent from Festus unto Rome:
they turn themselves against James, the brother of Christ, who was placed of
the Apostles, Bishop of Jerusalem. ^^mesbishop ^f Jerusalem
The like they practice against him, placing him in the midst, and requiring
of him, that in presence of all the people, he would renounce the faith of
Christ. When as he contrary to their expectation, freely, and with greater
audacity then they hoped, in presence of all the multitude, had confessed Jesus
to be the son of God, our Savior, and Lord, they could no longer abide his
testimony, for he was counted of all, most just, for his excellent wisdom,
and piety, which he showed in life. Him they slew, having gotten opportunity
to the accomplishing of this heinous fact, by the vacancy of the Regal seat.
For Festus governor of Iudaea being dead, the province wanted a President, or
Procurator. But how James was slaynt, the testimonye of Clemens (heretofore of
us alleged) has largely declared, that he being thrown down from a pinnacle
of the temple, and brayned with a fullers clubb, gave up the ghost. And
Aegesippus who immediately succeeded the Apostles, repeateth the circumstance
hereof exquistely in his fifth book, after this manner: James the brother of
Christ, took in hand the government of the Church, after Aegesippus lib. 5.
the Apostles, termed a just and perfect man of all men, from the time of our
Savior unto us. For many were called Iameses beside him, but this man was
holy from his mothers womb, He drank nether wine, nor strong drink, nether
^are any living creature. He was neither shaven, neither anointed, neither did
he use bathe. Unto him alone, was it lavvfull to enter into the holy places,
he used no vvollen vesture, but wore a Syndone, and alone frequented he the
temple, so that he was found prostrare on his knees, and praying for the
sins of the people. His knees were after the guise of a camels knee,
benumbed, and bereft of the sense of feeling, by reason of his continual
kneeling in supplication to God, and petitions for the people. For the
excellency of his righteousness he was called Just, and Oblias, which
sounds by interpretation: the bulvvarke, or defense of the people in
righteousness, as prophecies do go of him. When diverse asked him toutching the
heresies among the people vvherof (we mentioned before) which was the gate
or door of Jesus, he answered: the same to be the Savior, by whose means
they had believe Jesus to be Christ. But the aforesaid heresies, acknovvledge
neither the resurrection, nor the coming of any judge, which shall reward
to every one according to his works. For as many as believed, they believed
by means of James. When many of the Princes were persuaded, there rose a
tumult of the Jews, Scribes, and Pharisees, saying: It is very dangerous lest
that the whole people look after Jesus, as though he were Christ, and being
gathered together they said to James: we pray thee refrain this people, for
they err in Jesus, as though he were true Christ. We pray thee persuade this
people, which frequent to this feast of the Passover, concerning Jesus, for
we all obey thee, yea we, and all the people, testify of thee, that thou art
just, and respectest not the person of any man, persuade therefore this
multitude, that they err not in Jesus. For the whole multitude, and we, obey
thee. stand therefore upon the pinnacle of the temple, that thou may be seen
aloft, and that thy word may be perceived plainly of all the people, for
because of this Passover, all the tribes are met here, together with the
Gentiles. The aforesaid Scribes, and Pharisees placed James upon the pinnacle of
the temple, and shouted unto him, and said: Thou just man, at whose
commandment we all are, in so much that this people is seduced after Jesus,
who was crucified, declare unto us, which is the door of Jesus crucified.
And he answered with a lovvde voice: why ask ye me of Jesus, the son of
man, when as he sits at the right hand of the great power in heaven, and
shall come in the clovvdes of the aeer? When as he had persuaded many so that
they glorified God at the testimony of James, and said: Hosanna in the highest
to the son of David: then the Scribes, and Pharisees, said among them selves,
we have done very il, in causing such a testimony of Jesus to be brought forth.
But let us clime up, and take him, to the end the people being stricken with
fear may renounce his faith. And they shouted saying O, O, and the just also
is seduced, and they fulfilled the Scripture which says in Esaias: Let us
remove the just, for he is a stumbling block unto Esaias.
us. Wherefore they shall gnavve the buddes of their own works. They climed
up, and threvv down headlong Iustus, saying: let us stone James Iustus. And
they went about him with stones, for after his fall he was not fully dead,
but remembering him self, fell on his knees saying: I beseech thee Lord, God,
and Father, forgive them, for they vvote not what they do. And as they were
a stoning of him, one of the Priests, the son of Rechab* the son of
Ch^ra^im (whose testimony is in Jeremy the Prophet) cried out: cease, what do
you? This just man prays for you. And one of them that were present, taking
a fullers clubb (with which they pounce, and purge their clothes) stroke
Iustus on the head, and brayned him, and so he suffered martyrdom, whom they
buried in that place* his pillar, or picture as yet remains hard by the
temple engraven thus: This man was a true witness both to the Jews, and
Gentiles, that Jesus was Christ. And Vespasianus immediately having ouerrun
Iudaea, subdued the Jews. These at larg recorded by Aegesippus, are
correspondent with these things which Clemens wrote. This James was so famous
and renowned among all for his righteousness, that the wise among the Jews,
imputed the cause of this sudden besteging of Jerusalem after his martyrdom
(which no doubt therefore happened unto them) to be for the presumptuous
offense, practiced against him. Josephus sticked not to testify the same in
these words. These things happened unto the Jews in way Josephus.
of revenging the death of James the Just, which was the brother of Jesus
whom they call Christ. For the jews slevve him when he was most just. The
same Josephus describes his death in the twentieth book of Antiquities,
saying: Casar hearing the death of Festus, sends Albi^us Antiq. lib. 20.
cap. 16.
President into Iudaea. But Ananus the younger, whom we reported before to
have taken upon him the high priesthood, was a very presumptuous and heady
cockbrayne, he claue unto the sect of the Saduces, which were mercylesse in
judgment, among all the Jews, as we signified before. Ananus then being such
a one, having gotten opportunity to his thinking, in so much that Festus was
dead, and Albinus not yet come: called unto him a counsel, commaundinge the
brother of Jesus, called Christ, whose name was James, with certain others
to be brought forth, accusing them that they had transgressed the law, and
delivered them to be stoned. As many in the city as were just and due
obseruers of the law, took this fact grievously, sending privily unto the
King, and beseeching him to write unto Ananus, that thence forth he attempt
not the like, In so much that his former fact was unadvisedly, and impiously
committed. Certain of them met Albinus coming from Alexandria, and
enstructed him hereof, that it was not lavvefull for Ananus to summone a
counsel contrary to his commandment. Albinus thus persuaded vvrote fumishly
unto Ananus, threatening reuengement upon him, for this fact. And king Agrippa
when he had governed the high priesthood three months, deprived him, placing
in his rovvme Jesus the son of Damaeus, Thus far toutching James, whose
epistle that is reported to be, which is the first among the universal
Epistles. Yet have we to understand that the same is not void of suspicion,
for many of the ancient writers make no mention thereof, like as neither of
that, which is under the name of Judas, being one of the seven called
universal, for all this we know them to be publicly read in most Churches.

The translator for the removing of all suspicion, concerning the canonical
Epistle of James.
TOutching this James whose Epistle has been suspected, take this lesson of
Jerome, against Heluidius: disce Scripturae consuetudinem eundem hominem
diuersis nominibus nuncupari, learn the manner of the Scripture which calls
one and the same man after diverse names, he is called in Math. 10. Mark 3.
Act. 1. Iacobus Alphaei, and numbered among the 12. Apostles. Though Jerome lib.
Jerome. Mat. 10. Mark. 3. Act. 1. Dorotheus in Synopsi. Matthew 13. 27 Mark. 6.
15. Galat. 1. Act. 1. 15. 21. 1. Corinthians. 15. Galat. 1. 2. Eusebius. Eccl. hist
lib. 3. cap 21. lib. 3. cap. 22. ^eron. Cata. Eccle. Script.
5. cap. 17. upon the Prophet Esaias, call him decimum tertium Apostolum, and
Dorotheus Bishop of Tyrus do term him one of the 70. Disciples. He is called
Iacobus frater Domini, James the brother of the Lord, in Math. 13. 27. Mark 6.
15. Galat. 1. and in this present history* but in what sense he might be called
his brother, being his mothers sisters son, read Jerome against Heluidius,
which handles that question purposely. He is called Iacobus Iustus, and
Oblias, in the former chapter of Eusebius. This history reports him to have
been placed by the Apostles, Bishop of Jerusalem, and there to have governed
the Church the space of 30. years, for often in the Scriptures he is found at
Jerusalem, as Act. 1. 15. 21. 1. Corinthians. 15. Galat. 1. 2. Concerning his
epistle, and other parcells of holy Scripture, that they were not generally
received, no marvel at all, considering the malice of the Devil, in obscuring
those things which proceade from the holy Ghost. Eusebius writes, that
besides the Epistle of James, the Epistle of Jude, the latter of Peter, the 2.
and 3. of John, with the revelation, were called into controversy, so that some
rejected them, some cleaued unto them, tanquam certis, and indubitatis
Scripturis, as certain, and undoubted Scriptures. Jerome in Catalog. Eccles.
Scrip, of James writes thus: vnam tantum scripsit epistolam, quae and ipsa, ab
alio quodam sub nomine eius aedita asseritur. he wrote one epistle, which is
thought to have been published by an other, under his name if this be the
whole, no danger Canon Apo. ^anon. 84. Council. Lao^ic. cap. 59. Council. Car^ag.
3. cap. 7. ^nocen. epi. ^ Euxperiu^ p. 7. Gela. 1 Jerome ad Paul. August de
doctrina Christ. lib. 2. cap. 8.
at all. The Canons commonly called the Apostles, Canone 84. have decreed this,
of the Epistle of James, together with the other parcells of holy Scripture,
that it was to be received for Canonical. so has the council of Laodicea,
under Damasus, cap. 59. about the year of our Lord 371. And the third council
of Carthage, under Siricius, about the year 417. cap. 47. Innocentius the
first, about the year of our Lord 408. in his Epistle to Euxperius, cap. 7.
and Gelasius the first, about the year 494. together with seventy Bishops,
have received them for Canonical, of this mind is Jerome ad Paulinum,
Augustine de doctrina Christiana, lib. 2. cap. 8. so that from that time unto
this day, they were generally allowed, and received for Canonical Scripture.
Thus much I thought good here to note, lest that the simple Reader, snared by
the subtlety of Satan, (which in these perilous days throws in bones for
the true Christians to gnawe upon) should doubt of any part, or parcel of
holy Scripture, that might tend to his confusion.

CAP. XXIIII.
How that after Mark, Anianus was appointed Bishop of Alexandria.

WHen Nero had raygned the space of eight years, first after Mark the
Apostle, and Evangelist: Anianus took the government of the church of
Alexandria, a man both virtuous, and renowned, in all respects.

CAP. XXV.
Of the persecution which happened under Nero, when as Peter, and Paul, suffered
martyrdom at Rome.

NEro now settled in his seat, fell into abominable factes, and took armor
against the service due unto the universal, and almighty God. How detestable
he was become, it is not for this present time to declare. for there be many
that have painted out his willful malice, which may easily appear if we
consider the furious madness of that man. through the which, after that beyond
all reason he had destroyed an innumerable company, he fell into such a sucking
vain of slaughter, that he abstayned not from his most dear, and familiar
friends. Yea he tormented with diverse kinds of death, his own mother, his
brethren, his wife, and many of his nearest kinsfolks, as if they had been
enemies, and deadly foes unto him. but it behooved us to note this one thing of
him above the rest, that he was counted the first enemy of all y^ Emperors,
unto Tertul. in Apolog.
the service of God. of him does Tertullian in Romayne letters write thus:
read your authors, there shall you find Nero, chiefly to have first
persecuted this doctrine at Rome. when the whole East was now subdued, he
became cruel unto all men, we boast and brag of such a famous persecutor.
for they which knevve him may easily perceive, that this our doctrine had
never been condemned by Nero, had it not been passing good. This enemy of God
(wherein he was first espied) set up him self to the destruction of the
Apostles, for they write that Paul was beheaded, and Peter crucified of him at
Rome, and that makes for the credit of our history which is commonly reported,
that there be churchyardes unto this day, bearing the name of Peter and Paul.
In like manner Gaius a Romayne, and an Ecclesiastical person, and (after
Zepherinus,) Bishop of Rome, writing unto Proclus, captain of the heresye
which the Cataphrigaeans held, Gaiu^.
speaks thus of the tombs wherein the Apostles were laid. I (says he) am
able to shevve the banners of the Apostles. for if thou vvilt walk unto
Vaticanum, or the way Ostiensis, thou shall find, their victorius banners, of
such as have builded this Church. And that they were both crowned with martyrdom
at y^ same time, Dionysius bishop of Corinthe affirms in his epistle unto
Dionys. Bishop of Corinth.
the Romans. And you obtaining so goodly an admonition, have coupled in one,
the buylding of the Romayne, and Corinthian churches, for they both enstructed
us, when they planted our church of Corinthe.

CAP. XXVI.
How the Jews were wonderfully vexed at Jerusalem under Florus, and of the
stir in Syria raised against them.

LIkewise such as taught together in Italy, suffered martyrdom the same time,
and that this history may bring with it the more creditt, Josephus declares,
that after the manifold miseries which happened unto this nation, many, and
the same innumerable, and of them that were among the Jews in estimation,
were scorged in the city of Jerusalem, by the commandment of Florus, and
nailed to the tree. He writes that Florus was Liuetenant of Iudaea, when as
the wars being begone of old, increased the twelfe year of the raygne of
Nero. Again, because of the rebellion of the Jews throughout all Syria,
there rose such a tumulte, that the Gentiles without all compassion, as deadely
foes destroyed the Jews which inhabited the cities, so that the cities were
seen full of sepulchers, old men, and young men, slain in the streets, women
lying all along, having that uncovered, which nature commanded to be kept in
secret, and the whole province miserably afflicted with unspeakable
calamityes. and greater was the fear (says he) of that which was like to
ensue, then the harm already committed. such was then the state of the Jews.

The end of the second book.
THE THIRD BOOK OF THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORYE OF EVSEBIVS PAMPHILVS BISHOP
OF CAESAREA IN PALAESTINA.
CAP. I.
In what contreyes the Apostles preached Christ.

WHen as the Jewish affairs thus did stand, the holy Apostles and Disciples
of our Savior, were dispersed throughout the world. Thomas (as by tradition
we receive) chose Parthia: Andrew, Scythia: John, Asia: where he made his
abode, and dyed at Ephesus. Peter is reported to have preached to the dispersed
Jews through 1. Pet. 1. Peter the Apostle was martyred at Rome Anno Christi
70. Romans 15. Paul beheaded at Rome under Nero. The first of the 10
persecutions, was under Nero. Linus Anno Christi 70. 2. Timoth. 4.
out Pontus, Gallacia, Bithynia, Cappadocia, and Asia, who about his latter
time, tarying at Rome, was crucified with his head downwards, which kind of
death, he him self desired. What shall I say of Paul, which from Jerusalem to
Illyricum, filled all places with the Gospel of Christ. And at the last
suffered martyrdom at Rome under Nero? These things are manifestly, and word
by word declared by Origin, in the third tome of his Commentaryes upon Genesis.

CAP. II.
Who was the first Bishop of Rome.

LInus first, after the martyrdom of Peter, and Paul, was chosen Bishop of
Rome. Paul about the latter end in the salucation of the epistle which he wrote
unto Timothe, from Rome, makes mention of him, saying: Eubulus saluteth thee,
and Pudens, and Linus, and Claudia.

CAP. III.
Of the Epistles which the Apostles wrote.

THe Epistle of Peter which is in number the first, has been received without
controversy. 2. epistles of Peter.
The elders of old without any doubting, have alleged this in their works,
but the latter Epistle we have learned, not to be allowed. And yet because it
seemed profitable, of many it was read amongst the rest of the Scriptures:
but the Acts, which are called Peter's, and Forged writings published under
the names of the Apostles
the Gospel under his name, and the preaching of his, published under his
name, with the revelation termed his, are no where received, as canonical
scripture: neither has any ancient or new writer alleged testimonies out of
them. but in the process of our history, we thought good to signify, together
with the diligent annotation of successions: what ecclestasticall writers there
flourished in their several times: and what contrary allegations they used: and
what writings they lawfully received: and what they rejected. But of the
writings attributed to Peter, (whereof we acknowledge one Epistle lawfully
received, and never doubted of, among the ancient fathers) 14. epistles of
Paul. The epistle unto the Hebrews. The acts of Paul counter set. Romans 16.
The book of Hermes called Pastor was wont to ^e read in ^he Church.
thus much shall suffice. fourtene Epistles of Paul, are manifest and well
known. but that diverse rejected the Epistle which is unto the Hebrews,
alleging the contradiction of the Church of Rome, that it was not Paul's: I
think it requisite to know, and what our Predecessors hereof have thought: I
will lay down when occasion serves. The Acts which go under the name of
Paul, were never taken as undoubted. And because the same Apostle in his
Epistle unto the Romans, saluteth certain, and amongst others Hermes:
therefore appoint they the book called Pastor to be his, which has been
gaynesayd of many, therefore not to be numbered among those books, which are
for certain. Others thought this book very necessary, especially unto them
that have need of an elementall introduction, but we have known him to have
been publicly read in the Church, and alleged of many ancient writers in
their works. let this much be spoken of the holy Scriptures, as well of the
generally received, as of the doubtfully rejected.

CAP. IIII.
Of the succession of the Apostles.

THat Paul preaching unto the Gentyles, planted the Churches from Jerusalem,
unto Illyricum, Romans 15. Acts from 14 unto 21. cap.. 1. Pet. 1.
it is manifest, both by his own words, and the testimony of Luke in the
Acts. In what provinces Peter preached unto them of the circumcision, and
delivered the doctrine of the new testament, it appears by his words, and
also by the Epistle which of truth is said to be his, written to the
Hebrews, scattered throughout Pontus, Gallacia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bythinia.
But how many, and what sincere followers have fedd the Churches planted by the
Apostles, it can not be affirmed, but as far forth as can be gathered out of
the words of Paul: He had many fellow laborers, and companions as he called
them, whereof diverse Peter and Paul had many fellow laborers.
have purchased immortal memory, for so much as he makes continual mention
of them in his Epistles, and Luke in the Acts repeting the most famous,
remembers them by name. Timothe is reported to be the first Bishop of
Ephesus, and Titus of the Churches in Creta. Timothe the first Bishop of
Ephesus. Titus the first Bishop of Creta. Luke wrote a gospel and the Acts of
the Apostles Luc. 1. 2. Timoth. 2. Eusebius says Crescens was sent into
France. S. Paul 2. Tim. 4. says he se^^ him to Gall^ cia. hereby we may
gather that the epistle to the Galathians was written b^ S. Paul unto the
Fre^chm*
Luke by line of Antioche, by profession a Phisician, having his conversation
of purpose, for the most part with Paul, and the rest of the Apostles:
left us proofs of skyll, comprysed in two volumes, medicinable for our souls
health, sought out among them. One of the Gospel, which he reports to
have published, according as he received of them, which from the beginning
were behoulders, and mynisters of this doctrine, so that he searched all from
the original: the other of the Acts of the Apostles, where he compiled not
only the things heard with his ears, but also the things which he saw
with his eyes. And of Paul they say, that he accustomed to mention the
Gospel of Luke when he spoke, as of his own, saying: according unto my
Gospel. Among the other fellows of Paul, Crescens is witnessed to have been
sent by the Apostle him self into France. Toutchinge Linus we spoke before,
that he was the first Bishop of Rome, after Peter, whom he remembers to have
been with him at Rome, in his latter Epistle unto Timothe. And Clemens the
third Bishop of Rome, is proved by his testimonye, to be Paul's fellow
laborer, and companion. Moreover Dionysius the Areopagite, whom Luke in the
Acts reports to have first believed, at the Sermon of Paul unto the
Athenians, preached in Areopagus: was the first Bishop of Athens. but an other
Dionysius there was, Bishop of the Church of Corinthe. In process of our
history, we will dilate of the successors of the Apostles, in their several
times succeeding. now let us turn unto that, which consequently depends
upon the historye.

CAP V.
Of the utter besieging of the Jews after the passion and resurrection of
Christ.

AFter that Nero had raygned thirtene years: Otho and Galba one year, and six
months: Vespasian i^ proclayme^ Emperor Anno Do. 7*
Vespasianus was counted a potent Prince in Iudaea, among the armies appointed
against the Jews, and being proclaimed Emperor of the host that there was,
forth with he is sent to Rome, committing unto his son Titus the wars, in
hand against the Jews. therefore after the ascension of our Savior,
because the Jews, besides the heinous offense committed against Christ, had
compassed manyfould mischiefs against his Apostles: first stoning Stephen
stoned Act. 7. ^ James beh^^ded. Act. 1^ James the first Bishop of Ierusal^
martyred* The Apo^ persecute^ Matthew. 28*
Stephen to death, next beheading James, the son of Zebede, and the brother
of John with the sword, and above all, James their first Bishop after the
ascension of our Savior, with the manner before mentioned: and drove out of
Iudaea, the rest of the Apostles, pursuing them to the death with innumerable
wyles, when as now they were sent by the power of Christ to preach unto all
nations, saying unto them: go teach all nations in my name: Yea and the
congregation of the faithful in Jerusalem forewarned by an oracle, revealed
unto the best approved among them, that before the wars began, they
should depart the city, and inhabit a village beyond Jordan, called Pella,
into the which when the Christians leaving Jerusalem had entered, and the holy
men had forsaken the princely and principal city of the Jews, together with
all the land of Iudaea: the heavy hand of God apprehended that wicked
generation utterly to root them from among men, which had practysed so
presumptuously against Christ, and his Apostles, how many mischiefs have
happened at that time unto this whole nation: and how they chiefly which
enhabyted Iudaea, were driven to extreme myserye: and how many millions of men
throughout every age, together with women and children, perished with the
sword, with famyne, and with infinite other kinds of death: and how many,
and what cities of the Jews were destroyed: to be short, how many
calamityes, and more then calamityes they saw, which fled unto Jerusalem,
as the Metropolytane and best fortyfied city: Moreover the state of the whole
wars, and the several acts thereof: and how at length the abomination of
desolation foreshewed by the Prophets, standing in Matthew. 24. Daniel. 9.
that famous temple of old, suffered a diuerous destruction, and an utter
overthrow by fire: he that lists to know, let him read the historye of
Josephus, where all these are diligently described. I think it necessary to
note how Josephus writes, that upon the solemn days of Easter, there were
gathered together at Jerusalem, out of all Iudaea, to the number of three
hundred Millions, and there shut up as it were in prison, saying: It was
requisite that destruction A million is ten thousand. Josephus bell Iud. lib.
7. cap 17. says that the just number came to seven and twenty hundred
thousand.
due for their desert, dravvinge nighe, by the just judgment of God, should
apprehende them upon those days (being as it were shut up in prison) in the
which they before, had drawn the Savior and benefactor of al men, the
anointed of God, unto his passion. Omiting those things which particularly
happened unto them, either by sword, or by other kind of misfortune: I think
it expedient to express their only calamityes by famine, so that the reader
may partly hereby conjecture, how that God, not long after was revenged on
them, for their impiety practiced against Christ. go to then, having our
recourse again unto the first book of the historyes of Josephus, let us
peruse their tragical affairs.

CAP. VI.
Of the great famine that fell among the Jews, and their miserable estate.

FOr the rich men to abide in the city (says Josephus) was nothing but
death. and under Josephus bell ^ud. lib. 6. cap 11.
pretense of their traiterous flight unto the enemy, they were slain for
their substance. The vvoodnes of these seditious men increased together with
the famine, and both mischiefs daily as a double fire waxed hott. food there
was no where any found manifest. they rushed into the houses, and made
search, if they found any, they beat them which denied it, if they found
none, they tormented them as though they had with diligence hid it from
them. the carkases of the poor vvretches declared, whether they had food or
no. they which were of strong bodies seemed to have abundance of meat, but
such as pined away, were ouerskipped, for it was judged an absurd thing, to
slay them which were ready to dye for want of vitayles. Many exchaunged
privily their wealth, the richer sort for a measure of wheat, the poorer
sort for a measure of barley, then hiding them selves in the inner and secret
corners of their houses, some for mere pouertye, chevved the unready graynes
of ravve wheat, some other sodde it, as necessitye and fear constrained
them. there was no where any table covered. the meat as yet ravve, was
snatched from the coals. the meat was miserable, the sight was lamentable,
the mightier sort abounded, the weaker sort lamented. famyne exceeds any
doleful passion. for nothing fails here so much as shamefastnes, the thing
otherwise reverenced is here quit contemned, vviues from their husbands,
children from their parents, and that which was most miserable, the mothers
snatched the meat from their infants mouths. and when their dearest friends
pined away in their arms, they pitied them not so much, as to permit them
one drop of drink to save their lives. neither yet escaped they thus
miserably feeding. for on every side they were besett with seditious persons,
greedily ^^e cruelty ^ seditious ^ sons toge ^^r with ^ famine ^^ed them
bent upon their spoil, where they espied any door shutt, they coniectured
straight, that there was meat in preparinge, and forthwith rushinge in,
with the breakinge open of the doors, they violently did vvringe out from
them, yea (and not only) the lumpes of bread out of their jaws. the old
men were buffeted, if that egerly they endeavored to retain their vitayles:
the women were lugged by the hear of the head, if they hid ought of that
they had in their hands. no compassion was had on the hoar headed, or the
tender sucklinges. the infantes together with their nourishment, where at
they honge, and held fast, were lyfted up, and thrown to be crushed
against the pauement. toward them which prevented their assault, and
lauished, (which was prejudicial to their raueninge,) they used more
crueltye, as if they had been injured by them. they invented cruel kinds of
torment, for the searchinge out of vitayles. they stopped unto miserable men,
the passage of their priuye members, with the graynes of the herb Orobus: and
pricked their fundamentes with sharp tvvigges: so that horrible things to be
heard of, were excercysed, and suffered, for the extorting to confession of
one lofe of bread, and knowledge of one handful of meal. but the tormentors
them selves tasted not of hunger. That is ever deamed of less crueltye, which
comes to pass of necessitye. but they thus practicing their rage, provided
costage, or viaticall preparation, against the days following: and meeting
them which in the night season crept out, as far as the Romayne watch, to
gather pott herbs, and green grass, now, being escaped the enemy, they
spoiled. and when as they had often made supplication, and called the
dreadful name of God to help, that at least wise they might have some
portion of that, which they had gotten with danger: nothing was granted,
so that at length it seemed grateful unto them, that were spoiled, that they
perished not with their vitayles. Unto these things Josephus adds, saying:
All hope of safety was denied Joseph. bell. Iud. lib. 6. cap. 14.
the Jews, together with their passage excluded, and the famyne increasing
throughout their houses, and families, devoured the people. the houses were
full of carkases, of women, and children: and the cross vvayes replenished
with the carkases of old men: children, and young men that vvandred, were
brought to the market place, after the likeness of pictures, and every one fell
down, where the fit took him. Every one being brought lovv, was not able
to bury his kinsfolks, and therefore waxed faint by reason of the multitude
of dead men. and because that every one doubted of his own life, many fell
down dead upon the carkases that they buried: many seeing no way but one,
went and laid them down upon the beeres, to vvelcome death. neither was
their lamentation, or vveping in these calamities, for famine suppressed every
ones passion. they which were very loath to dye, beheld with dry cheeks,
the death of those which hastened out of this life unto rest. The city was
in deep silence, the night nothing but death, and thieves more intolerable
then all these myseryes. They dug up houses, and O tragical factes.
tumbes: they spoiled the dead: they took of the vvinding sheets, or
coueringes of the dead carkases: in a mockage, they tried the sharpnes of
their swords, upon the dead bodies. they launced certain of them which
lay along, and yet alive, for the trial of their spears: such as prayed them
to exercise their might, and crueltye upon them, being weary of their lives:
they contemptuously reserved for famine. Every one yelding up the ghost,
beheld the temple with immovable and stedy countenance, sorovving that he
left there behind, seditious persons alive. they which first by
commandment received reward out of the public treasury to burye the dead:
by reason of the intolerable stinche, and greatness of the multitude, threvve
them into a great trenche or pit. When Tytus passing by, savve the trenche
filled, and the noisome Titus soroweth at the miserable sight of the Jews that
were dead. Josephus with grief uttered these words, be^^ Iud. lib. 6. cap.
16. Lib. 7. cap. 7.
putrefaction stilling* and issuing out of the dead carkases, and running
down the sinkes, he sighed, and streatched forth his hands, and called God
to witness, that he was not the cause of this calamitye. Again, after a few
lines he adds, saying: I can not refrain my self, but that I break out,
and signify my grief: If the Romans were slack in ouercomming wicked
persons, I think verily that the city vvoulde either sincke, at the gapinge
of the earth: or be drowned with a deluge: or after the manner of Sodom, be
overthrown with fire. It brought forth abroode far more pernicious, then
they are that suffer this: and for their impietye, all this people vvallovveth
in destruction. And in the seventh book he writes thus, of them which
perished by famine: the multitude was infinite, the afflictions, which did
fall on them can not be uttered. In every house where there appeared but a
shadovve or shevve of meat, there was variance, so that the dearest friends
strove among them selves, one seely soul depriving an other of his daily
sustenance, and provision. And lest the dying should be thought to want, the
thieves searched them that were ready to dye, lest peradventure any had hydd
meat in his bosom, and therefore fained him self to dye. they which greedely
gaped by reason of their want, vvandred and trotted, like madd dogs, falling
upon doors like madd men, rushinge into the same houses, tvvyse and thryse in
an hour, as men berefte of their vvittes. Necessitye made all meat that came
to the teethe, supplying to be eaten those things, which were not
commodious, no not for the fylthyest brute beasts. At length they abstayned
not from gyrdles and shoes, they eat the leathren skynnes that covered their
targetts. Many eat chopped hay, or mynced grass that was withered, other
some gathered svvept and scraped dust, and dounge, selling the least measure
thereof for four pence. But what should I rehearse, how that famyne spares
not things that have no life, unless with all I declare this work of her:
whose like was never reported, to have been done among the Gentyles, nor
Barbarians: horrible to be spoken of, but true to the hearer. I of mine own
part vvoulde gladly pass this calamity, with silence, lest that I seemed
to lay forth monstrous lies unto the world: Unless I had infinite
vvitnesses in this behalf. for otherwise I should recompense my contrye with
cold thank, if I restrained the rehearfall of such Joseph. lib. 7. Cap. 8.
things, as they smarted for. * A certain woman which dvvelled beyond
Iordane, called Maria, the daughter of Eleazar, of the village Bathezor, which
signifies Hyssope: of good kindred An horrible history.
and great wealth: sled with the rest of the multitude unto Jerusalem, and
there was besieged: the rest of her substance, which she had procured unto
her, out of the region beyond lordane, and caused to be carried into the city,
the tyrants of the contrye, took away: the relics that were left, and the
provision for food, the catchpoles rushing in daily, snatched away. A certain
grievous indignation invaded this seely woman, so that often times she
provoked against her self, by railing and scolding, the cruel rauenners.
When as none either moved with pity, or provoked with anger, slevve her: and
she labored about, seeking vittailes, and could no longer find any: and famine
had entered into her bowels, and inner parts: furious motions more then
famine, inflamed her mind so, that she being ledd with the heat of anger, and
pinching or pining necessity, offered violence unto nature. for taking her son
in her arms, which was a suckling, she said: O vvretched infant, for whom
shall I reserve thee in these vvarres, in this famyne, in A mother slays her
own child to eat.
this seditious conspiracy? Among the Romans, if so be that we shall live
under them, there shall be bondage: this bondage has famyne for gone: these
seditious persons do afflict us more grievously then both. Pass on, be thou
meat unto me: a fury unto these seditious men: a fable unto the world:
which yet alone have not felt the Jewish calamities. And immediately with
these words, she slevve her child, and boiled him: being boiled, she eat
half, the rest she saved, and hidd secretly. Anon, these of the conspiracy
come in, stamping and staring, threatening present death unto her, unless with
speade she bring forth what meat she had prepared. she answered that she
reserved the better portion for them, bringing forth and shevving with all the
relics of her little child. A sudden horror, and trance of trembling mind,
took them, that they were astonished at the sight thereof. But she said: this
is my natural son, and this is the work of mine own hands: Eat, for I
have eaten: be not you more tender then a woman, or proner to compassion then
a mother. If you are so godly, and mislike this my sacrifice: I truly have
eaten in your name, and that which remains, I reserve for my self. which
when she had said, they all trembled at this one horrible fact, and scarce
leaving this meat for the mother, they departed with great fear. In a
while after, this heinous offense was bruted over the whole city, so that
every man behoulding before his eyes this affliction, was no less moved, then
if the fact had been committed against him self. But they that were pressed
with famyne, desired death earnestly, and happy were they accounted, whom
death so prevented, that they neither heard nor savve the great misery that
happened. such were the rewards of iniquity, and impiety committed by the
Jews against Christ and God. It shall be thought well, if we add the true
prophecy of our Savior, declaring these things after this manner to have come
to pass.

CAP. VII.
The prophecyes of Christ, toutching the destruction of Jerusalem.

WOE be to them which are with child, and give suck in those days, (says
Christ) ^uth. 24.
but pray that your slight be neither in vvinter, nor on the Saboth day, for
then shall be great tribulation, such as was not from the beginning of the
world, ^osep. (bell. (...). lib. 7. cap (...)) says the ^ber was ^e hundred
^usande.
unto this time, neither shall be. When the Historiographer had collected the
number of them that perished by sword, and famine, he reports that it mounted
to * a hundred and ten myllions. besides the seditious and theeuish reuenners,
betrayed on by an other, and slain after the winning of the city: and young
men of high stature, and comlynes of body, that were reserved for their
exercise in triumph, of the rest of the multitude, as many as passed seuentene
year old, they were sent bound to druggerye in Egypt, many were sent into
the provinces, that being laid on theaters, subject to the sword, and
crueltye of beasts, so they might perish* such as were under seuentene year
old, were brought unto captivity, and soulde, the number of these he
reports to have mounted to nine Myriades, or millions. these things happened
Josephus says the number of the captives was four score and seuentenethou
sand.
after this manner, in the second year of the raygne of Vespasian, Anno
Domini 73. forty years just after the passion of Christ. Luke 19. Luke 21.
truly, according unto the foreshewed prophecye of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, which by his divine power, as if they had been then present, he
foresawe: and with the shedding of tears, as the holy Evangelists testify,
he be wayled: which allege these his words then uttered to Jerusalem. If
thou hadest known (says he) these things which belong unto thy peace,
even at this day, thou would take heed. But now are they hid from
thine eyes, for the days shall come upon thee, that thine enemies also, shall
cast a bank about thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in with
vexation on every side, and make thee even with the ground, and thy children
also. Then says he of the people: there shall be great trouble in the land,
and wrath over all this people, and they shall fall through the edge of the
svvorde, and shall be led away captive unto all nations, and Jerusalem shall
be trodden down of the Gentyles, until the time of the Gentyles be fulfilled.
If any will confer the words of Christ with the rest of those things that
the Historiographer has written concerning the whole wars: how can he but
fall into an admiration, and confess, that the prophecy, and prescience of our
Savior was wonderful, and passing natural reason: of those things which
(after the passion of our Savior, and there crying, when the whole multitude
of the Jews craved a thief Luke 23.
and a murderer to be delivered) happened unto this whole nation, I think it
not necessary to entreat. But this is needful to be noted, which commends
the goodness of the providence of God, in deferring their destruction, for the
space of forty years after their presumptuous rashenes against Christ, in the
which years, many of the Apostles and Disciples, ( James by name, their first
Bishop, called the brother of the Lord) as yet alive, and abiding in the city
of Jerusalem: have endured and continewed as a most sure fortress, for that
place, God winking all that while, if peradventure they would repent, to the
end they might be pardoned, and saved. And besides so notable a patience, how
wonderful signs from above were exhibited, to happen upon the impenitent,
which of the aforesaid Historiographer are set forth to perpetual memory,
and are now to be delivered of us, unto the Readers hands. I will therefore
propose what he has published in his seventh book of historyes.

CAP. VIII.
Of the signs foreshewing the wars.

SEducers (says he) and authors of lies against God, deceived at that time,
that seely and Joseph. bell. Iud lib. 7. cap* 12.
vvretched people, so that they neither marked those evident ougly shapes,
forshevving the desolation to come: nether gave any credit thereunto, but as
astonished, both blind and senseless, contemned the demonstrations of God, so
that a star stood over the city, like unto a A star like a sword. A
commet^
svvorde, and a Commett enduring the space of a whole year. Again, before
their rebellion, and warlike tumulte, when the people frequented the feast
of svveete bread, the viij. day of the month April, in the night, at nine of
the clock: so great a light ouerspred the altar, and A light in the temple in
the night time.
the temple, that it seemed to be clear day, continevving the space of half
an hour, which sight unto the unlearned seemed good, but was numbered of
such as exercised them selves in the holy Scripture, among things which
shortly should happen. At the same feast, a covve led by the high priest to
sacrifice, calued a lamb, in the midst of the temple. A cow calued a lamb^
A great gat^ opening it self.
Moreover the East gate of the inner temple, though of brass, and most
strong, so that in the evening, twenty men could scarce shutt it, being
boulted with iron bars, and strengthened with long posts, and pillars: in
the night time, about the sixth hour, was seen to have opened voluntarily, of
it self. A fevve days after the feast, the xxj. day of May, there A devil
in the form (...) man.
was seen the figure, and shape of the devil, almost incredible. some
vvoulde think that I went about to report, a monstrous lie, unless it had
been reported by them, that savve it: and the afflictions which followed,
were correspondent unto the signs. For before sun set, there were seen
in the aere, throughout the contrye, charettes, and armed soldiers, marching
in the clouds, and compassing the city. In the feast of Pentecost, when the
priests An army of soldiers in the clouds. A co^motion in the aere. A voice
heard in the temple, Let us go hence. One Jesus the son of Ananias, 4. years
before the wars, cried continually woe, woe, all about Jerusalem.
after their manner, went into the temple, in the night season to offer
sacrifice, they reported to have heard a commotion, and a rattling sound,
with this voice following: Let us go hence. And that which was more
terrible on Jesus, the son of Ananias, a rude, and a country fellovv, came
unto the feast, in the which the law given by God, was delivered unto all,
as in the time of their tents, four years before the vvarres, when the city
was in peace, and prosperity, and so dainly about the temple cried out, and
said: A voice from the East: a voice from the West: a voice from the four
vvindes: a voice upon Jerusalem, and the temple: a voice upon the bridegroom,
and nevve married wife: a voice upon all this people. this, day, and night,
cried he out, in the cross vvayes of the streates, Many of the chief of the
people, not pleased with this unfortunate voice, were thoroughly moved, so
that they chastized, and scourged him, with many, and grievous stripes: he of
the contrary, saying not a word for him self, ceased not to cry severally,
unto them that were present, the same song. The magistrates supposing him to
be possessed of a fanaticall spirit, as it was in deed, brought him unto the
Romayne president, where he was scourged, from top to toe, so that the bare
bones might be seen, yet never entreated he for him self, nor shedd a tear,
but as much as in him lay, lifted his voice unto lamentation, sounding at
every stripe, vvoe, vvoe, unto Jerusalem. An other thing yet more strange, the
same Historigrapher writes, that a certain oracle was found in the holy
Scriptures, An oracle to be understood of Christ.
containing in it this sense: y^ there should one rise out of their own
region, which should rule the world, which Josephus understands to have
been meant by Vespasian. yet ruled he not the whole world, but the Romayne
Empire. This oracle may better be referred unto Christ, unto whom it was said
of the Father: Ask of me, and I will give thee the Gentiles, for thine
inheritance, Psalm. 2.
and the ends of the earth, for thy possession, the sound of whose Apostles,
went at the Psalm. 19.
very same time, throughout the earth, and their words to the ends of the
world.

The translator unto the Reader, toutching the infinite number of Jews, which
perished in all the wars, between the Romans, and the Jews, diligently
gathered out of Josephus.
I think it not amiss (gentle Reader) to note here unto thee the infinite
number of Jews which perished, from the beginning of the wars, between the
Romans, and the Jews, that is from the 12. year of Nero, and the 2. of the
Lieuetenantship of Florus, Anno Christi 68. (out of Josephus a Jew, which was
present in the wars) unto the overthrow of Jerusalem, and the burning of the
temple by Titus, the which Eusebius, in these former chapiters, has partly
mentioned, and partly omitted to the end we may behold either the long
suffering, and goodness of God, for the amendment of our lives, by repentance,
which winked so long at the wickedness of these Jews, to provoke us: or else
the ire, wrath, and heavy hand of God, over impenitent persons, to terrify us
to fear his name, and tremble at his plagues. The land of Sodom for their
abominable sin was overthrown, with fire, and brimstone from heaven. The
Lord him self said: (Genes. 18.) that their sin was exceeding grievous.
Abraham pleading with the Angel of God (which came to destroy them) for
pardon, could not find ten just persons, no not Josephus. lib ^. cap. 5.
in five cities. if they could have been found, all the rest had been pardoned
for their sakes. Josephus writes of Sodom thus: (bell. Iud. lib. 5. cap. 5.)
Terra Sodomitica olim tam fructibus, quam substantia ciuitatum fortunata, nunc
autem omnis exusta, atque habitatorum impietate, fulminibus conflagrasse
memoratur. denique adhuc in ea Diuini reliquias ignis, and oppidorum quinque
videre licet imagines, and renascentes in fructibus cineres, qui color quidem
sunt edulibus similes, carpentium vero manibus in fumum dissoluuntur, and
cinerem. The land of Sodom is known of old to have been fortunate, both for
fruit and wealth of cities, but now to lie all parched, and to have been burnt
with lightnings, for the sin of the inhabitants* to be short, as yet a man
may there see relics of the fire, which God sent, and tokens of the five
cities, and ashes to spring again, and grovve in the fruit, which in color
are like unto the eateable fruit, but being plucked down in the hand of the
gatherer, they are dissolved into smoke, and ashes. The ten plagues of Egypt
were very grievous, yet was the heart of Pharao, and of the Egyptians, so
hardened, that they could not repent. so that in steed of the salt tears of
repentance, which should have trickled down their cheeks, to the washing away
of their sins: the redd sea was feign to open, and to wipe away such
monsters, from of the face of the earth. God ouerthrewe infinite nations,
before the face of his own people (I mean the Jews) to make away, for them
into the land of promise. Yet forgot they all his goodness, and benefits
bestowed upon them. how shameful a thing is it for the son to disobey his
father, for the servant to dishonor his Lord and master, for the pacient to
cast of the physician, for the chosen people to forsake their proper, and
peculiar God? this have the Jews done, wherefore behold what happened unto
them. Josephus writes (bell. Iud. lib. 2. cap. 13.) that in the 12. year of
the raygne of Nero, the 17. year of the raygne of King Agrippa, in the month
of May, and the 2. year of the Lieuetenantship of Florus, the Jews began to
rebel, and to take armor against the Romans, rejecting the solemnity done
in the temple, to the honor of Caesar. The chief cause that moved them
thereunto, was the cruelty of Florus. Wherefore this Florus, to give the Jews
a taste of his authority, for displeasure conceived against some which reviled
him, caused such a slaughter at Jerusalem, that the number of the slain,
mounted to six hundred and thirty persons. Josephus bello Iudaico, lib. 2. cap.
14. Again through wiles, and deceate, this Florus raised a great commotion at
Jerusalem, to the slaughter of many. cap. 14. The inhabitors of Caesarea, slew
in one day all the Jews which dwelled there, above twenty thousand in
number, all that fled, Florus took, and imprisoned. the Jews seeing this,
thought to revenge them selves, upon the Syrians, in which skirmishe there were
slain thirtene thousand Jews, and all their substance taken for spoil.
bell. Iud. li. 2. cap. 19. Other contreyes in like sort, set upon the Jews:
the Ascalonites slew two thousand* the inhabitants also of Ptolemais
destroyed two thousand. The Tyrians imprisoned a great many, and slew very
many. The Hippinaei and Gadarits set packing the stoutest of them, and watched
the rest very narowely. Varus the procurator of King Agrippa, slew seventy of
the noblelest, and sagest Jews, being sent as Legates unto him. lib. 2. cap.
20. The people of Alexandria, slew fifty thousand Ieeves, cap. 21. Cestius
gathered an host, went into Iudaea, he burned Zabulon, he took Ioppe, he
destroyed eight thousand, and forty persons. cap. 22. Caesennius Gallus,
ouerrunneth Galilee, he destroyed in Asamon, two thovvsande. cap. 23. The
inhabitants of Damascus, destroyed tenn thovvsande Jews, which dwelt among
them. lib. 2. cap. 25. The Romayne soldiers under Antonius their captain,
took Ascalon, and destroyed tenn thovvsande Jews, immediately at an other
skirmishe, in the same place above eight thousand. bell. Iud. lib. 3. cap. 1.
Vespasian is sent from Nero into Iudaea, he inuadeth Galilee, he takes Gadara,
he burns the city, and the villages round about. lib. 3. cap. 5. 6. The
city Aphaca was taken by Titus, the 25. day of June, there were slain fiftene
thousand Jews, and two thousand, a hundred, and thirty persons taken
captives. lib. 3. cap. 11. Vespasian took Samaria, the 27. day of June, and
slew eleven thousand, and six hundred. lib. 3. cap, 12. Vespasian took
Iotapata, set all the castles afire, the 13. year of Nero, the first of the
Calendes of July, he slew forty thousand, he took a thousand, and two
hundred captive. lib. 3. cap. 13. Vespasian took Ioppe, the second time, the
Jews seeing no way but one, slew them selves, and fell hedlong into the sea,
so that the sea was imbrued with blood, the number of dead bodies which the sea
threw up, was four thousand and two hundred. the rest otherwise slain,
there remained not one to bring tydinges thereof into Jerusalem. lib. 3. cap.
15. Vespasian besieged the Taricheans, he slew in their city six thousand,
and five hundred, he took many alive, whereof he commanded a thousand, and
two hundred of the noblelest, and elder sort of them to be slain, he sent
six thousand of the lustier to Nero, unto Istmon. he sold thirty thousand
and four hundred persons, besides those which he gave to King Agrippa, this
was done, the sixth of the Ides of September. Iosep. bell. Iud. lib. 3. cap. 19.
The city of Gamala, began to rebel, the 21. of September, the city was
taken, the 23. of October, there were slain therein, four thousand, besides
these, there were found other five thousand, which had cast them selves
headlonge, and broke their necks, not one of the whole city left alive, but
only 2. women. lib. 4. cap. 3. Titus took the city Gascala, the inhabitants
fledd to Jerusalem, they were overtaken, two thousand slain, and three
thousand taken captive. and thus was all Galilee ouerrunne, and now to Judea.
lib. 4. cap. 4. In Jerusalem there was such a sedition, and conspiracy among
themselves, which opened a gappe for the enemy to come upon them, that even in
the first bickering. there were found dead eight thousand, and five hundred
Jews. lib. 4. cap. 7. again the seditions persons among them, called
Zelotae, by the help of the Idumaeans, sl^we twelve thousand of the chief
of the Jews. lib. 5. cap. 1. Vespasian took Gadara, and slew thirty
thousand, besides these, the number was infinite that drowned them selves, the
number of the captives came to two thousand, and two hundred. lib. 5. cap. 3.
Vespasian took Gerasion, and slew a thousand young men, which had not fledd.
lib. 5. cap. 6. Vespasian now at length, after the death of Nero, Galba, Otho,
and Vitellius the Emperors: is chosen Emperor, and goes to Rome, he
commits the wars in Iudaea to his son Titus. li. 5. cap. vlt. The misery
of the Jews in Jerusalem waxed so great, that the sedition before time but one,
was now become three fold, every one having their captain. Titus lays siege
to the city. Iosep. bell. Iud. lib. 6. cap. 1. 2. Their estate was miserable,
the famyne lamentable, the slaughter out of all measure, such as came out of
the city, were hanged on gibbetts: such as fled away, were taken: of the
fugitives two thousand had their bowels ripped, to see whether they had swalowed
up any gold. lib. 6. cap. 15. report came unto Titus, that from the 14. of
April, until the 14. of June, there were brought out at one gate of the city,
fiftene thousand, one hundred and four score Jews, which dyed of famine.
bell. Iud. lib. 6. cap. vlt. The temple is set on fire, the priests, the
women, and children, with other people which hid them selves in vautts, in
walls, and in corners of the temple, which also were burnt to ashes: came to
six thousand. lib, 7. cap. 11. Titus took the city, the soldiers killed,
until they were weary. Titus commanded all that wore armor to be slain:
such as were old, weak, and feeeble, the soldiers dispatched. the young, the
lusty, and profitable, they shutt up in a certain place of the temple, for
further consideration. Many were sold for a small price, there were many to be
sold, but few to bye. all the thieves, robbers, and seditious persons within
the city, he commanded forth with to be dispatched. the chosen young men of
goodly bodies, and tall stature, he reserved for triumph: seuentene thousand
of elderly years, he sent bound to Egypt, for slavery, and druggery* many
others through out the provinces, he allotted for spectacles, and teeth of wild
beasts* as many as were under sixtene years* of age, were sold* of such as
were shutt up in the temple, for further consideration, during the time of this
deliberation, and disposed order: there dyed twelve thousand of famine.
Iosep. bell. Iud. lib. 7. cap. 15. 16. The number of the captives, during the
time of the wars, mounted to four score and seuentene thousand. The number
of all that dyed, during the siedge within Jerusalem, came to ten hundred
thousand. no marvel at all, that the city could comprise so many. for at the
feast of the Passover, Cestius being Lieuetenant of Iudaea, sent Neroworde,
that the high priests had numbered, at his request, all that came to offer,
which came to seven and twenty hundred thousand. lib. 7. cap. 17. and such
was the woeful, and miserable end of the Jews. Josephus moreover (lib. 7.
bell. Iud. cap. 18.) writes of Jerusalem, that it was taken at sundry times
before, his words be these: Jerusalem was taken the 2. Josephus. lib 7. bell.
Iud. cap. 18.
year of the reign of Vespasian, the 8. day of September, it was taken five
times before, and then again destroyed. Asochaeus King of the Egyptians:
after him Antiochus: then Pompeius: and after these, Herod and Sosius took
the city, and kept it* and before that time the King of Babylon, by conquest
destroyed it, a thousand three hundred three score years, eight months, and
six days after the building thereof. The first founder of this city, was the
most potent Prince of the Chananits, called after his country language The just
king* for such a one he was in deed* therefore he first ordained a priesthood
unto God, and having first builded the temple: he termed the city Jerusalem,
which before was called Solyma, Leobius King of the Jews, having vanquished
the Chananits, delivered the city to be inhabited of his own people, the
which was overthrown by the Babylonians, four hundred, three score, four
years, and three months after. From Leobius the King, which was the first
Jew that raygned in it, unto the overthrow under Titus, there were one
thousand, one hundred, seventy, and seven years. Yet for all that, neither
did antiquity prevail, neither great riches profit, neither the fame dispersed
throughout the whole world, favor them, neither the great glory they put in
their religion, help them at all, that the city should not perish.

Discite iustitiam moniti non temnere Christum. CAP. IX.
Of Josephus, and his commentaries, in the ninth and tenth chapiters following.

BEsides all this, I think it good, not to be ignorant of Josephus him self,
that has stood us in so great stead, for the furnishing of this our present
historye, whence, and of what kindred he came, which circumstance he him self
shows, saying thus: Josephus the son of sephus of ^ self An ^. lib. 16.
cap ^el. lud. lib cap. 25. lib. contra Anem.
Mattathias, a priest, of Jerusalem, which him self also at the first
impugned the Romans, and was necessarily present, at the final end of
their woeful miseryes, because of the Jews of that time. This man was
famous, not only among his own nation, but also among the Romans, so that
at Rome, he was thought worthy the honor of a graven picture, and the books
which diligently he wrote, were thought worthy of the public librarye. He
wrote twenty books of Judicial Antiquities. he testifies him self,
therefore worthy of creditt, that he gathered in seven books the Romayne
vvarres of his time, and published it both in the Greek, and Hebrewe tongues.
Certain others worthy the reading, pass under his name, for example: Two
volumes of the Antiquity of the Jewish nation, where he answers Apion
Grammaticus, and certain others: which at that time impugned the Jews, and
endeavored to disgrace the native law, of the Iewishe nation. In the first he
lays down the number of the books of the old testament, delivered by
tradition, and received without gainfaying, of the Jews, saying as follows:

CAP. X.
How Josephus mentioned the books of the old testament, and diverse of his own.

THe books of the holy Scripture (says he) are not innumerable amongst us,
disagreeing, Iosep. lib. 1. contra Apio^. The Jews acknowledge 22. books. 5.
Books of Moses. 13. Books of the Prophets 4. Books of psalms and admonitions
and dissenting one from an other, but only xxij. containing the circumstances
of all times, and worthy of creditt. five of these are Moses works,
containing the laws, and the state of man, continevved unto his death. the
time of them contains little less, then three thousand years. The Prophets
which lived after Moses, comprised in thirtene books, the famous acts of
their times, from the death of Moses, to Artaxerxes, who after the death of
Xerxes, was king of Persia. The other four, contain Hymns unto God, and
admonitions for the amendment of man's life. From Artaxerxes unto our times,
there are continual books, yet not of such creditt as the former, in so much
there is not diligently laid down a continual succession of the Prophets. It
is very apparent, what affection we bear unto our Scriptures, because there
is now so much time past, and yet none of us dare presume, either to add any
thing thereto: or to diminish anything therefro: or to alter any thing
thereof. this is engrassed in the sevves, from their youth up, that they
persuade them selves, this doctrine to be the writings of God, and to
persevere in the same, and willingly, if necessity so constrayne, to dye in
the quarrel. these words I have thought commodiously to have been by us
alleged out of his commentaryes. this writer has published one other, and no
simple volume of the rule of reason, which some have fathered upon the
Machabees, because it contains the combats of the Hebrews, so termed in the
books of the Machabees, manfully fighting in the defense of their pietye
toward God. And about the end of the twentieth book of Judicial
Antiquities, Josephus him self signifies, that he wrote four books, of the
proper opinions of the Jews. of God. of his essence. of the laws. and why
according unto them, certain things are lavvfull, and certain forbidden. He
mentions in his works other treatyes of his. it shall seem agreeable with
order, if we recite those things, which he wrote about the end of his
Judicial Antiquities: that our allegations may the better be confirmed, for he
endeavoring to confute Iustus Tyberianus, (who writing the historye of that
This is found in losephus first book against Apio^*
time, reported many untruths,) among others, of his confutations, thus he
says: I feared not thy censure so much of my vvritings, but that I exhibited
my books unto the Emperors themselves, when the deeds done, were now fresh
in memory, my conscience bare me witness, that Ierred not, but delivered the
truth, having obtained their testimonies which I hoped for. And to diverse
others, I offered my historye, where of some were encombred with the vvartes,
as king Agrippa, and diverse of his kinsfolks. And the Emperor Tytus him self
vvoulde have the certain knowledge of these vvarres, delivered unto the
world, by my books only, commanding them to be published, with the
privilege of his own hand. King Agrippa vvrote threescore, and two
epistles, vvherin he testifies of the true history delivered by me. Two of
these epistles he alleges. but so far concerning Josephus, now we will
proceed to that which follows.

CAP. XI.
How after James the Just, Simeon was Bishop of Ierusalom.

AFter the martyrdom of James, and the captivity of Jerusalem now ended, the
report ^^^eth, that the Apostles and Disciples of our Lord, which then were
alive (whereof many yet remained) gathered them selves from every where, unto
one place, together with the kinsmen of the Lord, according to the flesh,
there to have consulted, who was thought best worthy to succeed James: so that
all, with one voice, judged worthy of the seae of Jerusalem, Simeon the son
of Cleopas, mentioned in the Gospel, and called the cousin of Christ, for
Aegesippi^^ writes that Cleopas was the brother of Joseph.

CAP. XII.
How Vespasian commanded the posterity of David diligently to be sought out,
in the Church of Jerusalem.

Moreover, he declares that Vespasian after the siege of Jerusalem, caused
inquiry to be made, of such as were of the line of David: lest that any
remained yet among the Jews, of the royal blood, so that thereby again,
there was raised a great persecution among the Jews.

CAP. XIII.
After Vespasian, and Titus: Domitian reigned. under Titus: Linus, and
Anacletus were Bishops of Rome. under Domitianus: Anianus, and Abilius, were
Bishops of Alexandria.

WHen Vespasian had reigned ten years, Titus his son, succeeded him in the
empire, Titus created Emperor Anno Domini 81. Linus. Anacletus. Domitia^
created Emperor Anno Domini 83. Anianus. Abilius. The 2. of the ten
persecutions was raised by this Emperor Domitian. Clemens.
in the second year of whose raygne, Linus after he had been Bishop of Rome,
the space of xii. years, deseased, and him succeeded Anacletus. When Titus had
raygned two years and two months, his brother Domitian took the imperial
crown. In the fourth year of the reign of Domitian: Anianus the first Bishop
of Alexandria, (having continued there xxii. years) dyed. the second after
him that succeeded, was Abilius.

CAP. XIIII.
Of Clemens, his Bishoprike, his testimony, his epistle.

IN the twelfe year of the raygne of Domitian, when as Anacletus had been
Bishop of Rome twelve years: Clemens succeeded, whom S. Paul writing to the
Philippians, calls his fellow laboter, when he says: Cap. 15. after the
greek Philip. 4.
with Glemens, and the rest of my fellow laborers, whose names are written
in the book of life. Cap. 16. after the greek The epistle of Clemens unto the
Cointhians eade in the Church. ^ Cap. 17. after the greek ^omitian die ^d Anno
Do ^ini 98. cap. 18. after (...) greek.
one undoubted epistle there is of his, extant, both worthy and notable, y^
which he wrote from Rome, unto Corinthe, when sedition was raised among the
Corinthians: the same Epistle we have known to have been read openly, and
publicly, in many churches, both of old, and amongst us also* that at that
time there was raised a sedition amongst the Corinthians, Aegesippus is a
witness of creditt.

CAP. XV.
Of the persecution, and end of Domitian, warring against God.

DOmitian, when he had executed much cruelty against many, and put to death no
small multitude of the Nobles of Rome, and notable men, beyond all rightful
judgment: and punished an infinite company of famous men, with the hurtful
exile and loss of their substance, dies: and appoynteth him self successor
of the hatred owed to Nero, and of the war against God. this man secondarily
raised persecution against us, although his father Vespasian practysed no
presumptuous Lordlynes toward us.

CAP. XVI.
When John the Evangelist was banished into Patmos.

ABout this time, John y^ Apostle, and Evangelist, is said to have been
banished into y^ I Will Patmos, ^hn being ^iled into ^tmos An. ^omini 97. ^ote the
relation. ^naeus lib. 5
for the testimony of the word of God. Irenaeus in his fifth book against the
heresies, writing of the epitheton of Antichrist, laid down in the revelation
of S. John, says thus, word by word of John: If his name ought publicly to
have been preached, at that present time: by him verily it was preached which
vvrote the revelation. for it was not seen a long time after, but vvelnigh in
this our age, about the end of the raygne of Domitian. Our religion so
flourished in the foresaid times, that the heathen writers, noting exactly the
times: voutchsafed to publish in their historyes, this persecution, and the
martyrdomes suffered in the same.

CAP. XVII.
Of Flania Domicilla, a noble gentlewoman, banished into the I Will Pontia: and
the edict ^p. 19. after 5 greek.
of Domitian, for the destroying of the posterity of David.

THey have written that in the fiftenth year of Domitian, one Flauia,
descending of the sister of Flauius Clemens, which then was of the Romayne
Consuls, was exiled with many others unto the I Will Pontia, for the testimony of
Christ. When Domitian commanded such as lynealy descended out of David to be
slain, the old report goes, that certain of this opinion, were accused to
have come out of the auncetors of Judas, who was the brother of Christ,
according unto the flesh, as if by this means they were of the stock of
David, and the kinsmen of Christ. this Aegesippus declares, saying: Cap. 20.
after the greek Aegesippus.
there suruiued as yet certain of the kindred of the Lord, nephevves of
Judas, called his brother, according unto the flesh, whom they brought forth,
as being of the line of David. these Iocatus does bring before the Emperor
Domitian, for he feared the coming of Christ, even as Herod did, and
demanded of them, whether they were of the stock of David. which when
they had acknowledged, he demanded again, what possessions they enjoyed,
and what money they had. They answered: both we have only ix. thousand
pence, so that half that sum suffices either of us, yet this sum have we
not in money, but in vallovved land, containing not above xxxix. acres, out of
the which we pay tribute, and relieve our selves through our labor, and
industry. Then shevved they him their hands, for testimony that they labored
them selves, and the hardness of their bodies, and the hard bravvne of their
hands grown by continual labor. and when as they were asked of Christ,
and his The kinsme^ of Christ according unto the flesh, make an account of
their faith, before Domitian the Emperor.
kingdom, what manner, when, and where, it should appear, they answered:
that his kingedome, was neither vvorldly, nor earthly, but caelestiall and
Angelical, and that it should be at the consummation of the world, when
that he coming in glory, shall judge the quick and the dead, and reward
every man according unto his works. After they had thus answered, the
report goes, that Domitian condemned them not, but despised them, as vile, and
base creatures, and let them go free, and stayed by his edict, the persecution
then raised against the church. When they were gone, it is said, that they
were rulers over Churches, in so much that in the end they were martyrs,
and of the line of our Lord, and afterward peace ensuing, the report goes,
that they lived until the reign of Traian. So far Aegesippus. Tertullian
also reports Tertullian.
the like of Domitian. Domitian (says he) some time assayed the like practice,
being a portion of Neroes cruelty. but he having some humane sense, (as I
suppose) forthwith relented, calling home again such as he had exiled.

CAP. XVIII. Cap. 21. after the greek.

Nerua succeeds Domitian, and Traian succeeds Nerua in the empire. Cerdo
succeeds Abilius, in the Church of Alexandria.

AFter that Domitianus had raygned fiftene years, and Nerua had succeeded him:
the Historiographers Nerua created Emperor Anno Domini 99. Traian created
Emperor Anno Domini 100. The 3. persecution of the 10. famous persecutions was
under this Traian. Cerdo. Cap. 22. after the greek. Peter. Linus. Anacletus.
Clemens. Euodius. Ignatius. Simeon. Cap. 23. after the Greek*
of that time do write, that the Romayne Senate decreed, that the honors
exhibited unto Domitian should cease, and such as were injuriously exiled,
should return unto their native soil, and receive their substance again. it
is also among the ancient traditions, that then John the Apostle returned
from banishment, and dwelt again at Ephesus. When Nerua had reigned a little
above a year: Traian succeeded him. In the first year of whose reign, Cerdo
succeeded Abilius, which was Bishop of Alexandria, the space of thirtene
years. This is the third after Anianus of that Church.

CAP. XIX.
The succession of the first Bishops in three Churches, Rome, Antioch,
Alexandria.

AT that time Clemens ruled the Church of Rome, being the third Bishop after
Paul, and Peter. the first was Linus. the second Anacletus. And of them which
governed the church of Antioche, the first was known to be Euodius. the second
Ignatius. likewise Simeon at the same time, the second after the brother of
our Savior, governed the church of Jerusalem.

CAP. XX.
An history of John the Apostle, and a young thief converted by him.

AS yet the Apostle and Evangelist, whom the Lord loved, remained alive in
Asia, who after the death of Domitian, being returned from the I Will Patmos,
governed the Churches there in Asia. And that he lived at that time, the
confirmation of two witnesses shall suffice. They are worthy of creditt, such
as have governed the Church with sound doctrine. These are Irenaeus and
Clemens Alexandrinus. the former in his second book against the heresies,
writes thus: All the Elders bear witness, which lived together with John,
the Disciple of our Savior Irenaeus lib. 2 cap. 39. Irenaeus lib. 3 cap. 3.
in Asia: that he delivered these things. he endured with them unto the time
of Traian* also in the third of his said argument, he declares the same in
these words: The church of the Ephesians planted by Paul, confirmed by John,
which remained there until the time of Traian, is a true testimony of this
Apostolic tradition. Clemens with all, signifies the time, and also a very
necessary historye is by him adjoined, for such as are recreated with honest
and profitable Sozomenus an Historiographer is crept into this greek copy, I
wot not how, he lived an hundred and odd years after Eusebius, and dedicated
his history* unto Theodosius junior, the author therefore of this history
toutching John, was Clemens as Eusebius writes before and after.
things, whereof also one Sozomenus in his history has made mention, at large
in his commentaryes, if thou read it, thou shall find thus written. Hear a
fable, and yet no fable, but a true tale reported of John the Apostle:
delivered unto us and committed to memory after the desease of the tyrant.
When he had returned to Ephesus, out of the I Will Patmos, being requested, went
unto the contreyes adjoining, partly to consecrate Bishops, partly to set in
order whole Churches, and partly to choose by lot, unto the Ecclesiastical
function, of them whom the holy Ghost had assigned. When he was come unto a
certain city not far distant (the name vvherof diverse do express) and among
other things had recreated the brethren: beholding a young man of a goodly
body, a gracious face, and seruente mind, he turned his face unto him, that
was appointed chief over all the Bishops, and said: I commend this young man
unto thy custody, with an earnest desire, as Christ, and the Church, bear me
witness. When he had received his charge, and promised diligence therein: he
spoke and protested unto him, the self same, the second time. Afterward he
returned to Ephesus. but the elder taking the young man, that was delivered
unto him, brought him up at home, ceased not, cherished him still, and in
process of time baptized him. he came at length to be so diligent and
serviceable, that he made him a livery garment or scrole, signed with his
masters seal of Arms. but this young man became dissolute out of season,
perniciously accompanied him self with them, of his own years, idle,
dissolute, and acquainted with ill behavior. first they bring him to
sumptuous banquetts: next they guide him in the night to steal, and to rob:
after this they require that he consent unto the committing of a greater
offense. but he acquainting him self by a little, and a little, through the
greatness of his capacitye, much like a horse of a hardened mouth, fierce,
strong, and hardy, forsaking the right way, with the biting of the bridle,
brings him self unto a bottomless pit, of all misorder and outrage. At
length despayring of the salvation that comes of God, being past all hope of
grace* he practiced no toye nor trifle, once being over the shoes, he proceeded
forvvardes, and took the like lot with the rest of his companions. taking
unto him companions, and a rout of thieves being gathered together, he became a
most violent captain of thieves, wholy bent to slaughter, and murder, and
extreme cruelty. In the mean while, necessitye so constrayning, the Bishops
sent for John: he when he had ended, and finished the cause of his coming,
go to (says he) O Bishop: restore unto us thy charge, which I, and Christ
have committed unto thy custody, the church whereof thou art head, bearing
witness. the Bishop at the first was amazed, supposing some deceit to be
wrought toutching money, which he had not received, yet was he not able to
aunsvvere them, for that he had it not, neither to mistrust John. but when
John had said: I require the young man, and the soul of our brother, then the
elder looking down, with a heavy countenance, sobbing and sighing, said: he
is dead: to whom John spoke, how? and what kind of death? which
answered: he is dead to God. for he is become wicked, and pernicious, and to
be short, a thief. for he keeps this mountain over against the church,
together with his associates. the Apostle then renting his garment, and
beating his head with great sorrovv, said: I have left a wise keeper of
our brothers soul: prepare me a horse, and let me have a guide. he hastened
out of the church, and rode in post, being come unto the place appointed, he
is straight vvayes taken of the theeuishe vvatch, he neither flies, neither
resists, but exclam^th: for this purpose came I hither, bring me unto your
captain, who in the mean space as he was armed, beheld him coming. but
eftsoon when he savve his pace, and knevve that it was John, he was stricken
with shame, and fledd away. the old man forgetful of his years, with
might pursues him flying, and cries: My son, why flyest thou from me thy
father, unarmed and old? O son tender my case, be ^he words ^f John the
^uangelist un (...) the thief
not afraid, as yet there remains hope of salvation, I will undertake for
thee with Christ. I will dye for thee, if need be, as Christ did for us. I
will hazard my soul for thine, trust to me, Christ sent me* but he hearing
this, first stood still, turning his countenance to the ground, next Tokens of
true repentance.
shoke of his armor, anon trembled for fear, and wept bitterly. He embraced
the old man, coming unto him, aunsvvering as well as he could for weeping,
so that again he seemed to be baptized with tears, the shaking of the hand
only omitted. The Apostle when he had promised and protested to procure for
him pardon of our Savior, and prayed, and fallen upon his knees, and also
kissed his right hand, now cleansed through repentance, brought him unto the
Church again. When that also he had povvred forth often times prayers for
him, and stro^gled with him in continual fastinges, and mollified his mind
with diverse and sundry sermons, and confirmed him: departed not (as the
report goes) before he had fully restored him unto the Church* and exhibited
a great example of true repentance a great trial of nevve birth, and a
singular token of the visible resurrection. this have I taken out of Clemens,
partly for the history, and partly also for the profit^ of the Reader.

CAP. XXI. Cap. 24. after the Greek.

Of the order of the Gospells.

NOw we will forwards, and entreat of the undoubted wrytinges of this
Apostle. And The Gospel of John.
first let there be no staggering at his Gospel, which is well known of all
the Churches under heaven. Why it was of old placed the fourth, after the
other three, it shall thus appear. The divine and holy men, namely the
Apostles of Christ, leading a passing pure life, having their minds be decked
with every kind of virtue, used, rude and simple speech, yet of a divine and
forcible power, which they had received of Christ, neither knew they, nether
endeavored they to publish the doctrine of their ^^ister, with curious paynting
of words: but using The Apostle in their preaching used no curious eloquence*
the demonstration of the holy spirit which wrought with them, and the only
power of Christ, which brought miracles to perfection, they showed the
knowledge of the kingdom of heaven to the whole world, being nothing careful
at all for the writing of books. And this they brought to pass being
occupied with a greater work, and in manner exceeding the strength of man. Paul
the mightiest of all the rest, in the settling of words, and best armed with
the power of perfect senses, wrote but very short epistles, whereas he might
have laid down infinite things, yea and secrets, 2. Corinthians. 12.
being rapt unto the third heaven, and behoulding celestial things, yea
brought into paradyse it self, and there thought worthy to hear secret
mysteries. neither were the rest of the Disciples of our Savior, namely the
twelve Apostles, and the seventy, with other innumerable, ignorant and
unskillful herein. And yet of al these the Disciples of our Savior, Matthew,
and John, wrote gospels. Who (as report goes) were constrained thereunto. for
Matthew, when he had first The Gospel after Matthewe written in Hebrewe. Why
John the Apostle wrote a Gospel.
preached unto the Hebrews, and now passing unto other people, wrote his
Gospel in his country language, supplying by writing in his absence, y^ which
was desired in his presence. When Mark and Luke had published their gospels*
John (say they) in all y^ space preached without writing, but at length was
moved to write for this cause. It is reported that when the books of the three
Evangelists were through out the world, and come into his hands, he allowed
them, and yielded of them a true testimonye, wishing that the declaration of
such things had been printed in their books, which were done at the first
preaching of Christ. the Reader may perceive these three Evangelists to have
only set forth the doings of our Savior, one year, after the imprysonment,
and captiuitye of John the Baptist, which may be gathered by the beginning of
their histories. for after the xl. days fasting, and the annexed temptation,
Matthewe shows the time of Matthew. 4.
the beginning of his historye, saying: When he had heard that John was
taken, he returned from Iudaea into Galilee And Mark likewise: after that
(says ^e) John was taken, Jesus came Marck. 1.
into Galilee. And Luke also before he had mentioned the doings of Jesus,
observing the same manner: Luke 3.
Herod (says he) proceeding in his heinous offenses, shutt up John in
prison. John the Apostle being for these causes entreated, wrote the time
passed over of the former Evangelists with silence, and therein the Acts of
our Savior, namely which went before the imprisonment of John, which he partly
signified, writing thus: this was the first of the miracles which John. 2.
Jesus did: partly with all mentioning the doings of John the Baptist, who as
then baptized in ^non, by Salem. which is evident, when he says: for as yet
John was not cast into prison. John John. 3.
then in his Gospel, delivers such things as were done of Christ, before
the co^^i^^ing of John. the other three, begin with the mention of John's
imprysonment, unto him that reco^^yleth the Evangelists thus they shall not
seem discrepant, in so much that the Gospel of John contains the former
doings of Christ, the other, the latter, lasting unto the end. therefore
not without cause John passes over with silence, the genealogye of our Savior
according unto the flesh, being before amply laid down by Matthewe, and
Luke, and begins with his divinity, reserved of the holy Ghost for him, as
the mightier, thus much shall suffice concerning the Gospel written by Saint
John. The cause why Mark wrote his Gospel we have Why Luke wrote a Gospel.
declared before. Luke in the beginning of his historye, shows the occasion
of his writing, signifying that diverse now already had employed their diligent
care, to the setting forth of such things, as he was fully persuaded of,
delivering us very necessarily from their doubtful opinion, why left that he by
his Gospel, declares unto us the sure, and certain narration, of such
things whereof he had received the truth sufficiently, partly by the
company, and conversation of Paul, partly also through the familiarity had
with the rest of the Apostles. but of these things thus far. for hereafter
more properly in place convenient, we will mention what the fathers of old
hereof have written. Among the rest of John's writings, his first epistle has
been generally of old, and late writers received, without any staggering. the
two latter, have been gainesayed. toutching his Revelation as yet among many,
there is a variable opinion, some allowing, and some disalowing of it. likewise
of this hereafter, what the Elders have thought shall be entreated.

CAP. XXII. Cap. 25. after the Greek.

The books of the new Testament, canonical, and Apocrypha.

IT shall seem convenient if in this place we collect briefly, the books of
the new Testament. 4. Evangelists The Acts of the Apostles. The epistles of
Paul. The 1. epistle of John. The 1. epistle of Peter. The revelation of S.
John The epistle of James. The epistle of Jude. The 2. of Peter. The 2. and 3.
of John. Acts of Paul. Pastor. Revelation of Peter. epistle of Barnabas.
Doctrine of the Apostles The Gospel unto the Hebrews. Also of Peter, Thomas,
Mathias, Andrewe, etc. Cap. 26. after the greek. Mena^der the Sorcerer caleth
him self ^ Savior.
In the first place we must set the fourefolde writings of the Evangelists:
next the Acts of the Apostles: then the Epistles of Paul are to be added:
after these the first of John: and that of Peter which is autenticke: lastly,
if ye please the Revelation of John. of the which what is to be thought shall
follow hereafter, all these are received for undoubted. the books which are
gaynesayde, though well known unto many, are these: the Epistle of James: the
Epistle of Jude: the latter of Peter: the second and third of John, whether
they were John the Evangelists, or some others of the same name. take these
which follow for forged works: the Acts of Paul. the book called Pastor.
the Revelation of Peter. moreover the Epistle fathered upon Barnabas, and the
Doctrine called the Apostles, and the Revelation of John (if it so please you)
which (as I have said before) some disalowe, some other receive as an
undoubted true doctrine. diverse do number among these the Gospel unto the
Hebrews, used specially of them, which received Christ of the Hebrews.
these writings are they which commonly of all others are impugned. I suppose
that necessaryly we made rehearsal hereof, to the end we may discern and
sever the unfeigned, the undoubted, the true writings, according unto the
Ecclesiastical tradition: from the unlawful wrytinges of the new Testament,
from such as are impugned, and yet daily read of diverse Ecclesiastical
persons, that we may know them and such as under the name of the Apostles, as
of Peter, of Thomas, or Matthias, and besides, the Gospells of others, as of
Andrewe, of John, containing the Acts of the other Apostles: are published by
Heretics, whereof not one Ecclesiastical writer has with reverence
alleged in his Commentaries. moreover the form of the phrase, varieth from
the manner of the Apostles: their sentence: their drifte in discourse
disagreeth very much with the truth of the tried doctrine. for now being
convinced, they plainly express the fond sigments of heretical persons. In
fine they are not to be placed as forged, but altogether to be rejected as
absurd and impious. but let us proceed unto that which follows.

CAP. XXIII.
Of Menander the Sorcerer.

MEnander succeeding Simon the Sorcerer, is found nothing inferior unto him for
deuelish operation, for invention, and behavior. he was also a Samaritane, and
prevailed no less in the blind misteryes of magical arts, then his master.
yea rather added unto these monstrous sayned illusions, somewhat of his own,
terming him self now a Sa^iour, sent down from above of the invisible worlds
for the salvation of mankind, teachinge with all, that none was otherwise able
to subdue the Angels, workers of this world, then first of all by his magical
experience, delivered for the purpose, and by the Baptism received of him, the
which as many as do accept of it, they purchase into them selves, sempiternall
immortality, yea in this present life, so that they dye no more, but
continually remain among them selves, without wrinckled old age, and become
immortal* these things out of Irenaeus may easily appear. and Justinius
likewise making mention of Simon, remembers also this Menander* saying: vvo
have known one Menander, and the some a Samarytane, of the village
Caparattaea, Justinius Martyr Apolog. 2 pro Christ.
the Disciple of Simon, thoroughly moved of devils, and abiding at Antioche, to
have bewitched many with magical arts, persuading his followers, that
they should not dye. And as yet there be diverse which can testify the same of
him. it was the drifte of the devil by the means of such Sorcerers, cloked
under the name of Christians, to defame by magic the great mystery of
godliness, and by them to choke the Ecclesiastical doctrine, which concerned
the immortality of the soul, and the resurrection of the dead. but such as
embraced these The craft of the devil.
Saviors, have lost the saving health of their souls. When the spyte of
Satan could not sever unto him self such as syncerely bare affection toward
Christ, he linked unto him self the wavering and wandering turnecoates.

CAP. XXIIII. Cap. 27. after the greek.

The heresy of the Ebionites.

THese the Elders properly called Ebionites, that is poor men. for they were
poor and Ebionites.
abiectes in delivering the doctrine which concerned Christ, they judged him a
simple and a common man, and for his perfection of manners found justified as
man only, borne by reason of the company of man, and his mother Marie* again
they thought the observation of The heresy of the Ebionites, which thought
that faith alone did not justify.
the law to be necessary, as though salvation were not by faith alone in
Christ Christ^ ^^^uersation of life correspondent unto the same. Other some of
the same name have au^yded the foul absurdity of the words, nor denying the
Lord to have ^e^e borne of the virgin, and the holy Ghost: yet when they
confess him to be God, the word and wisdom to have been before the
nativity of the flesh they sincke in the same sin, with their former
fellows, especially when as they busily go about to set up the corporal
observation of the law. these Heretics all do reiecte the epistles of the
Apostle Paul, accusinge him that he fell from the law. they use only the
Gospel which is after the Hebrews, other they pass not for. the Iewishe
Sabothe, and other their ceremonies, they observe a like, with the Jews. they
celebrate the Sonnedayes, as we do, in remembrance of the resurrection of our
Savior. for hence it came to pass by reason of these their fancies, that they
allotted unto them selves the name of Ebionites, signifyinge their poverty.
for by this name or title poor men Ebionites what it signifies.
are called of the Hebrews. About the same time, we learn there was one
Cerinthus, an author of an other heresy. Gaius whose words we have before
alleged, in the controversy carried about under his name, writes thus of him.

CAP. XXV. Cap. 28. after the greek.

Of Cerinthus the Heretic.

CErinthus also by revelations written, as of a great Apostle, brought unto
us certain Gaius writes thus of Cerinthus the Heretic.
monstrous things, fayning them to have been revealed unto him by Angels. that
the kingdom of Christ after the resurrection should become earthly: that in
Jerusalem our flesh again should serve the concupiscence and lust of the
flesh: and being set wholy to seduce, as enemy unto the word of God, he said
there should be the term of a Millenarie feast allotted for marriage.
Dionysius also Bishop of Alexandria, in his second book, after Dionysius
bishop of Alexandria lib. 2.
he had remembered the revelation of Saint John, received by tradition of old,
he reports of this man, thus: Cerinthus which found the Cerinthian
heresy* gave his figment a name for the further creditt thereof. his kind of
doctrine was this ^he dreamed the kingdom of Christ should become earthly,
and set upon those things which he lusted after, now being covered with
his flesh, and compassed in his skin, that is: the satisfying of the belly,
and the things under the belly: with meat, with drink, with marriage, and
that he might the more colerably bring his deuelish devices to pass, he
dedicated thereunto holy days, oblations, and slaughter for sacrifices. so
far Dionysius. but Irenaus in his first book against the heresies, lays
down certain more detestable opinions of his. And in his third book he
reports a historye worthy the memory, as received by tradition of
Polycarpus, saying: that John the Apostle on a Irenaeus lib. 3. cap. 3.
certain time to bayne him self, entered into a bathe, and understanding that
Cerinthus there within bayned him self also, started a side, and departed
forth, not abiding any tariance with him under the same ^ouffe, signifying
the same to his company, and saying: let us speedely go hence, lest that the
bathe come to ruin, wherein Cerinthus the enemy of the truth baineth him
self.

CAP. XXVI. Cap. 29. after the Greek.

Of Nicolas, and such as of him are called Nicolaites.

AT the same time the heresy of the Nicolaites spronge, which lasted not
long after, whereof Apocalypse. 2. Nicolas the 7. Deacon. Act. 6. Clemens Bishop
of Alex andria.
the revelation of S. John made mention. they boast, that he was one of the
Deacons, ordained together with Stephen, of the Apostles, to minister unto the
poor. Clemens Alexandrinus in his third book of stromaton reports thus of
him. This Nicolas (says he) having a beautiful woman to his wife, after the
ascension of our Savior, was accused of jealousy, and to clear him self of
that crime, brought forth his wife, and permitted him that lysted to marye
her. but his followers say, that their doing is agreeable with that saying,
that is: the flesh is to be brydled: and so follovving that doing and saying
without all discretion, they sin without all shame, in silthy fornication.
but I hear that Nicolas accompanied with none other, then Eusebius excuses
this Nicolas whose folowers the holy Ghost in the revelation abhors. Mathias.
his proper wife, allotted unto him by wedlock: and of his children, his
Daughters to have endured virginity: his son to have remained vncorrupt. the
case being thus, in y^ he brought forth his wife (for jealousy over the which
he was accused) into the midst of the Apostles, it was to clear him o^ the
^^^me laid to his charge, and to teach the brydling of the flesh, by
containing and refrayning voluptuous lust and pleasure. He would not (as I
suppose) according unto the precept: serve two masters, lust, and the Lord.
they say that Mathias after this manner, commanded by instruction, the flesh
to be overcome, and tamed, yelding unto it not one jot which might tend unto
pleasure, and that the soul hereby should take increase by faith, and
knowledge. Thus much shall seem sufficiently spoken, toutching them which then
depraved the truth, and suddenly came to naught.

CAP. XXVII. Cap. 30. after the greek.

Of the Apostles which lived in wedlock.

CLemens whose words lately we alleged, after the premises, against them
which relece and rebuke marriage, recites the Apostles which lived in wedlock,
saying: What do Clemens Alexandrinus. Peter. Philip. Paul was married. Philip.
4.
they condemn the Apostles? for Peter, and Philip, employed their industry, to
the bringing up of their children. Philip also gave his Daughters to marriage.
And Paul in a certain epistle sticked not to salute his wife, which
therefore he ledd not about, that he might be the redier unto the ministation.
In so much then that we have made mention hereof, it will not seem tedious if
we allege an other historye worthy the notinge, which he wrote in his seventh
book after this manner: they say that Saint Peter going to his house, and
seeing his wife ledd to be Clemens Alexandrinus.
executed, rejoiced greatly because of the calling, and cried out unto her
vehemently, exhorting and comforting her, calling her by her name, and saying:
O woman remember the Lord. such The words of Peter unto his wife when she
went to martyrdom
was the marriage of the godly, and the entire affection of faithful friends.
And thus much as pertinent to my purpose hereof, I thought good here to
allege.

CAP. XXVIII.
Of the death of John, and Philip the Apostles. Cap. 31. after the Greek.


OF the death of Paul, and Peter, the time eke, and the manner, their resting
place also after their departure hence, we have spoken of before, and of John
toutchinge his appointed time, we have told before. but of his resting place,
or tomb, we are enstructed by Polycrates his epistle, (this Polycrates was
Bishop of Ephesus) which he wrote unto Victor Bishop of Rome, where he
remembers also Philip the Apostle, and his Daughters after Policrates Bishop
of Ephesus, unto Victor Bishop of Rome.
this manner: for in Asi^ (says he) great pleadges of Christian religion
rested them selves* which shall rise the last day at the coming of the
Lord, when he shall come from heaven with glory, to seek out all the
Saints* Philip one of the twelve Apostles* rests in the dust of the earth
at Hierapolis, and two of his Daughters which ledd their whole life in
virginitye. the third whose conversation was directed by the holy Ghost,
rests at Ephesus. And John (which leaned on the breaste of our Savior,
who being also a John the Apostle called a Priest, he wore a Bishops atyre
called Petal^ ergo ministers had the^ pecullar apparel. Act. 21.
Priest, wore the garment petalum, A martyr and a doctor,) rested at Ephesus.
thus much of their ends. In the Dialogue of Gaius mentioned before, Proclus,
(against whom be proposed the question) testifies agreeable unto that before,
of the death of Philip, and his Daughters, saying: After this the four
Prophetisses, the Daughters of Philip were at Hierapolis in Asia, their
sepulcher is there to be seen, and their fathers also* so far he* Luke in
the Acts of the Apostles, makes mention of the Daughters of Philip, dwelling
at Caesarea, in Iudaea, with their father, which were endued with the gift of
prophecye, saying: We came to Caesarea, and entered into the house of Philip
the Evangelist, which was one of the seven, and there made our abode. this
Philip had iiij. Daughters which were virgins, and Prophetisses* thus much
of the Apostles, and apostolic times: and the things delivered unto us by
holy Scriptures: of the canonical, and disalowed Scriptures, though read of
many in many Churches: of the forged, and far from the Apostolical rule, as
far forth as we could learn. Now to that whi^^ follows*

CAP. XXIX. Cap. 32. after the Greek.

The martyrdom of Symeon Bishop of Jerusalem.

AFter Nero, and Domitian, under that Emperor, whereof we mind now to
entreat, the rumor went every where throughout the cities, that persecution
was raised against us Christians, through populare seditions, in the which we
learned that Symeon the son of Cleopas, the second Bishop of Jerusalem,
ended his life with martyrdom. hereof is Aegesippus a witness, whose words
we have often alleged. for he writing of certain Heretics gives us to
understand, how that the before said Symeon was then diversely by them accused to
be a Christian, for the space of many days he was scourged, so that the Judge,
and his company, was maruelously amazed, and in the end he dyed a death
agreeable with the passion of Christ. but let us hear the Historiographers
own words. Certain (says he) of the Heretics accused Aegesippus writes
thus of Symeons martyrdom Symeon the 2. Bishop of Jerusalem was crucified Anno
Dom. 110. being a hundred and twenty year old. Aegesippus writes of the
kinsmen of Christ.
Symeon the son of Cleopas, that he linealy descended of the stock of David,
and that he was a Christian. he suffered martyrdom being a hundredth, and
twenty year old, under Traian the Emperor, and Atticus the Consul. The same
Aegesippus reports, how that his accusers (enquiry being then made of such as
came of the royal blood among the Jews) were found to have their
original, of the Regal Jewish trybe. whosoever wayeth this, with him self,
he will confess, that this Symeon was of them, which both heard, and saw
the Lord, in that he lived so long a time, and in that the Gospel makes
mention of Marie Cleopas, whose son we have said this Symeon to have been
before. Again the same Historiographer writes, how that certain others of
the posterity, of some one of them, called the brethren of our Lord, namely
Jude, were alive, until the same time, yea after the testimony of them which
under Domitian were tried, for the true faith of Christ. for thus he writes*
they come and govern whole Churches, as martyrs, being also of the kindred of
Christ. When peace now had possessed the Churches, they remain alive unto
the time of Traian the Emperor, until the before said Symeon the Lords
consingermaine, the son of Cleopas, was il entreated of Heretics, accused
under Atticus the Consul, often scourged, tolerated such martyrdom, that all
vvondred, and the Consul him self marueiled, how that he, being a hundred, and
xx. years old, was able to endure that bitter torment. to be short, in the
end he was by commandment crucified. Unto the before said the same
Historiographer annecteth this* unto those times the Church of God remained a
pure The Church of God was a pure (...) 110 years (...) (...) Christ.
and an uncorrupted virgin. for such as endeavored to corrupt the sound rule and
the right preaching of the word (if then there were any such) hidd them
selves unto that time in some thick miste* or dongeon of darkness, but after
that the sacred company of the Apostles, was worn, and come to an end, and
that, that generation was wholy spent, which by special favor had heard
with their ears, the heavenly wisdom of the son of God* then the
detestable error of conspiracy, through deceate of such as delivered straung
doctrine, took rooting, and because that not one of the Apostles suruiued,
they publish boldly, with all might possible, the doctrine of falsehoode, and
impugn the open, manifest, and known truth. Thus of these things, has
this Historiographer written. Now to that which by order of history we are
bound unto.

CAP XXX. Cap. 33. after the greek.

How Traian caused to cease the inquisition for Christians.

SO great a persecution was raised against us in sundry places, that Plinius
secundus a notable Plinius secundus wrote unto the Emperor Traian in the
behalf of the Christians.
President, made relation thereof unto the Emperor, being very much moved with
the number of martyrs, which suffered death for the testimony of their faith,
signifying withal, that they committed no heinous offense, that they
transgressed no law, saving that they rose before day, and celebrated Christ
with hymns, as God. forbidding adulteryes, and slaughter, with such other like
abominable factes, conforming all things agreeable unto the laws. After which
report, it is written that Traian commanded by edicte, that the Christian
nation should not be enquired for, but if happily they were found, they ought
to be punished. by which edicte, the vehement heat of that grievous persecution
was somewhat delayed, yet nevertheless, there was scope enough left for such
as were willing to afflicte us. so that in one place the people, in an other
place the Princes, and rulers of the regions, laid wait for our men, whereby
several persons, suffered martyrdom in their provinces, and sundry of the
faithful, sundry kinds of death, without open, or manifest persecution. which
history we have selected out of the latin Apollogye of Tertullian, whereof we
have alleged before, by interpretation thus: Although we have known
Tertullian.
the inquisition directed for us to be inhibited, it was by reason of Plinius
secundus President of the province, which having condemned some of the
Christians, and deprived some others of their dignities, was moved with the
greatness of the multitude, and doubted what was best to be done. he made the
Emperor Traian privy thereof, saying: that he found nothing in them that
was impious, but that they refused the vvorshippinge of Idols. signifyinge
this vvithall, that the manner of the Christians was to rise before day, to
celebrate Christ in Psalms as God: and to the end their discipline might
straightly be observed, to forbid shedding of blood, adultery, fraud,
traiterous dealing, and such like. for aunsvvere hereunto, Traian vvrote
again: that there should be no inquisition for the Christians, but if they
were met with, to be punished. And thus went the affairs of the Christians
then.

CAP. XXXI.
Of Euarestus the fourth Bishop of Rome. Cap. 34. after the greek.


Among the Bishops of Rome, when as the before said Emperor had reigned three
years, Euarestus.
Clemens committed the ministry unto Euarestus, and finished his mortal race,
when he had governed the Church, and preached the word of God, the space of
ix. years.

CAP. XXXII. Cap. 35. after the greek.

How after Symeon, Iustus succeeded, the third Bishop of Jerusalem. and of the
famous Bishops then living* Polycarpus, Papias, Ignatius, and his Epistles.

AFter Symeon had such an end, as before we have reported, a certain Jew,
called Iustus, Iustus Bishop of Jerusalem
one of that infinite number, which of the circumcision believed in Christ, was
placed in the Bishops seae of Jerusalem. And unto that time Polycarpus a
Disciple of the Apostles, lived Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna. Papias Bishop of
Hierapolis. Ignatius Bishop of Antioche.
in Asia, being placed Bishop of the Church of Smyrna, by such as saw the
Lord, and ministered unto him. the same time flourished Papias, Bishop of
Hierapolis, a man passing eloquent, and expert in the Scriptures. And Ignatius
likewise unto this day, amongst most men famous, the second Bishop by
succession after Peter, of the Church of Antioch. the report goes, that this
Ignatius was sent from Syria to Rome, for the confession of his faith, to be
food for wild beasts, who passing through Asia, and curiously guarded with a
great troop of keepers, confirmed the congregations throughout every city
where he came, with preaching of the word of God, and wholesome exhortations,
and specially giving charge to avoid the heresies lately sprung, and at that
time ouerflowing, and to cleave steadfastly unto the traditions of the Apostles,
which for the avoiding of error, and corruption, he thought very necessary to
be diligently written. And being at Smyrna where Polycarpus was Bishop, he
wrote an epistle unto the Church of Ephesus, making mention of Onesimus their
Pastor. An other unto the Church of Magnesia, lying on the river Meander*
making mention of Dama their Bishop. An other unto the Church of Trallis, whose
ouerseer then was Polybius, and besides these epistles, he wrote unto the
Church of Rome, prefixing an exhortation, lest that they refusing martyrdom,
should be deprived of the hope laid up for them. but it may seem needful,
that we alleadg thence some part of the words for proof hereof, for thus he
writes: Cap. 36. after the greek Ignatius epist. ad Romans
from Syria (says he) unto Rome, I strive with beasts, by sea, by land,
nights, and nights, fettered among ten Leopardes, that is a band of
soldiers, and the more benefit they receive, the worse they become. I thus
exercised with their injuries, am the more instructed, yet hereby am not I
justified. I desire to enjoy the beasts prepared for me, which I vvishe to
fall upon me with fierce violence, yea I will allure them forthwith to
devour me, that they abstain not from me, as they have left some for fear
vntoutched. If they as unwilling will not. I will compel them to fall upon
me. pardon me. I vvott well what this shall avail me. Now do I begin to
be a Disciple, I way neither visible, nor invisible things, so that I gain
Christ* let fire, gallovves, violence of beasts, bruysing of the bones,
racking of the members, stamping of the whole body, and all the plagues
invented by the mischief of Satan light upon me, so that I win Christ Jesus.
this he wrote from the aforesaid city, unto the Churches before named. And
being beyond Smyrna, he wrote unto the Churches of Philadelphia, and Smyrna,
and severally to Polycarpus their Bishop, whom he knew for a right Apostolic
man, commending as a sincere and right Pastor ought to do, the congregation of
Antioche, praying him to be careful of the business there, namely about the
election of a Bishop in his rowme. this Ignatius writing unto the Church of
Smyrna, reports certain words Ignatius epist. ad Smyrnenses.
uttered by Christ, which he found I wott not where: I know and believe that
he was in the flesh, after the resurrection, for coming unto them which
were with Peter, he said unto them. Come, feel me, and know that I am not
a spirit without body, and anon they felt him, and believed. Irenaeus also
knew his martyrdom, and remembered his epistles, writing thus: Irenaeus lib. 5
Even as one of our men condemned unto the beasts, for the confession of his
faith said: In so much that I am the wheat of God, I am to be grinded with
the teeth of beasts, that I may be found pure bread, or fine manchet. And
Polycarpus makes mention hereof in the epistle under Polycarpus epist. ad
Philip.
his name unto the Philippians, writing thus: I beseech you all, that you be
obedient, and exercise patience, which you have thoroughly seen, not only in
blessed Ignatius, Rufus, and Zosimus, but in diverse of your selves, and in
Paul, with the rest of the Apostles, being persuaded for certain, that all
these ran not in vain, but in faith, and righteousness, now resting them
with the Lord, in the place appointed, due for their deserts, with whom
they suffered together. they loved not this present world, but him that dyed
for our sins, and rose again for our sakes. again he adds: both you, and
Ignatius, vvrote unto me, that if any did travel unto Syria, he might convey
thither your letters, of which I will be careful, if fit opportunity be
offered, whether I my self go, or send, that your business there, may be
dispatched. according unto your request, I have sent you the epistles of
Ignatius, both unto us written, and the others in my custody, annexed unto
this epistle, where you may gain much profitt, they contain faith, and
patience, Heroes.
and all manner of edifying in the Lord. thus much concerning Ignatius, whom
Heroes succeeded in the Bishopric of Antioche.

CAP. XXXIII. Cap. 37. after the greek*

Of the Evangelists then flourishing.

AMong them which were then famous, was Quadratus, whom they say together with
the Quadratus*
Daughters of Philip, to have been endued with the gift of prophesying, and
many others also at the same time flourished, which obtaining the first stepp of
Apostolical succession, and being as divine Disciples of the chief and
principal men, builded the Churches every where, planted by the Apostles:
preaching, and sowing the celestial seed of the king^ of heaven, throughout
the world, filled the barnes of God with increase. for the greater ^^^^e of
the disciples then living, affected with great zeal toward the word of God,
first fullfilling the heavenly commandment, distributed their substance unto
the poor: next taking their journey, fullfilled the work, and office of
Evangelists, that is they preached Christ, unto them which as yet heard not of
the doctrine of faith, and published earnestly the doctrine of the holy
Gospel. These men having planted the faith in sundry new, and strange
places, ordained there other pastors, committing unto them the tillage of the
new ground, and they lately converted unto the faith, pas sing them selves
unto other people, and contries, helped there unto by the grace of God which
wrought with them, for as yet by the power of the holy Ghost they wrought
miraculously so that an innumerable multitude of men, embraced, yea at the
first hearing, with prompte and willing minds, the Religion of the Almighty
God. In so much that it is impossible to rehearse all, by name, when, and who
were pastors, and Evangelists, in the first succession after the Apostles, in
the Churches scatered throughout the world: it shall seem sufficient only
to commit in writing to memory, the names of such as are recorded unto us by
tradition, from the Apostles them selves, as of Ignatius in the epistles before
alleged, and of Clemens mentioned in the epistle which for undoubted he wrote
unto the Corinthians, in the person of the Romayne church, where he imitating
very much the epistle written unto the The epistle unto the Hebrews undoubted
is Paul's, written by him in Hebrewe, but traslated into greek, by Clemens
bishop of Rome, or by the report of Clemens bishop of Alexandria, (as Eusebius.
lib. 6. cap. 13. writes) translated by Luke the Evangelist.
Hebrews, and alleging thereof whole sentences word by word, manifestly
proves, that this epistle unto the Hebrews, was nether new, nether of late
found: wherefore it seemed good to number it among the rest of the Apostles
writings. when as Paul wrote unto the Hebrews in his mothers tongue, some
affirm that Luke the Evangelist: some other (which seems more aggreable)
that Clemens traslated it, for both the Epistle of Clemens, and that unto the
Hebrews, use the like manner of speech, and differ not much in sense.

CAP. XXXIIII. cap. 38. after the greek

Of the Epistle of Clemens, and other wrytinges forged under his name, and
fathered upon him.

WE have to learn that there is a second epistle of Clemens, yet not so
notable, and famous as the former, and we know that the elders did nether use,
nether allege it. Now diverse have thrust out in his name, certain vabling,
and tedious comentaries, containing the dialogues of Peter, and Apion, which
none at all of the elders have mentioned, nether do they observe the sincere
form, and rule of the Apostolic doctrine.

CAP. XXXV. Cap. 39. after ^he greek.

Of the writings and works of Papias.

THe undoubted wrytinges of Clemens are apparent, we have spoken likewise of
the wrytinges The works ^f Papias.
of Ignatius, and Polycarpus. The wrytinges of Papias, are said to be five
books entitled the exposition of the Lords sermons. Of these Irenaeus
reports, as written alone by this man, saying thus: This truly Papias, the
auditor of John, the companion of Polycarpus, testifies in the fourth book of
his vvrytinges, for he vvrote five. Thus far Irenaeus. Papias ^^enaeus.
him self in the preface to his books signifies that he nether heard, nether
saw the Apostles, but received the undoubted doctrine of faith, of their
familiars, and disciples, When he says: It shall not seem grievous unto me if
that I compile in vvriting, and commit to memory, the ^^pias in the ^^oe^m to
his ^^okes.
things which I learned of the elders, and remember as yet very well, with
there expositions having fully tried already the truth thereof. Nether am I
pleased with such as say many things (as many are accustomed to do) but
with such as teach true things: nether with such as repeat strange
precepts, but with such as allege, the things delivered of the Lord, for
the instruction of our faith, proceeding from the truth it self. if any came
in place which was a follovver of the Apostles, forthwith I demanded the
words of the elders. What Andrewe, what Peter, what Philip, vvvhat Thomas,
or James, or John, or Matthewe, or any other of the Lords disciples: what
Aristion, and the elder John, disciples of the Lord had said. I believed verily
not to profit my self so much by their vvrytinges, or books, as by the
authority of the persons, and the lively voice of the reporters, making
relation thereof. It may ^n the E^^^elist.
seem worth the notinge, that by these words we mark the name of John, to
be twice repeated. The first numbered with Peter, James, Matthewe, and the rest
of the Apostles, signifying John* the Evangelist; the second with a different
term, without the cataloge of the Apostles, joining him with Aristion, and
plainly calling him the Elder: that hereby the truth of the history may John
the Elder.
appear, which declares two of the same name, to have been in Asia, and two
several monuments of them both, to be at Ephesus, whereof ^oth as yet bear the
name of John, which may not lightly be passed over of us for it is very like,
that the second (unless ye are pleased with the first) saw that revelation,
which bears the name of John. Papias then (of whom we spoke before)
confesses him self to have heard the words of the Apostles, of them which
were their followers, namely of Aristion, and John the elder. for often times
by mentioning them, he alleges their traditions in his books. I suppose
these things to have been spoken to good purpose. again, to that which has
been already spoken, I think it not amiss to add out of the books of
Papias, things very straung, which he reports to have received by tradition.
before we have written how that Philip the Apostle, together with his
Daughters, had his abode at Hierapolis, now we have to signify how that
Papias remaining amongst them, reports a certain history told him by the
Daughters of Philip he writes that a dead man rose to life again, and
moreover an other miraculous thing to have happened to Iustus, whose syrname
was Barsabas, that he drunk deadly poison, and took thereby no harm, the
godnes of God preserving him. The history of the Acts declares of this
Iustus, how that after the ascension of our Savior, the holy Apostles severed
him together with Mathias, praying over them, that ereother of them might be
allotted in the place of Judas the traitor, to the complete number of the
Apostles: They appointed two, Joseph Act. 1.
called Barsabas, by syrname Iustus, and Mathias. Certain other things the
same writer reports, of the which some he received for tradition, by word of
mouth: also certain strange parables of our Savior, mixed with fabulous
doctrine, where he dreameth that the kingdom of Papias was of the here sy of
the Chiliasts. tradition and not the truth led him thereun to. Irenae^ a
Chiliast.
Christ shall corporally here upon earth, last, the space of one thousand
years, after the resurrection from the dead. which error (as I suppose) grew
hereof, in that he received not rightly the true, and mystical meaning of the
Apostles, neither deeply wayed the things delivered of them, by familiar
examples. for he was a man of small judgment, as by his books plainly
appears. yet hereby he gave unto diverse Ecclesiastical persons, occasion of
error, which respected his Antiquity. namely unto Irenaeus, and others, if
there be any found like minded. other traditions he alleges of Aristion,
and the Elder John, unto the which we refer the studious reader, yet one
thing toutching Mark the Evangelist, the which he reports, we may not
omit, for thus he writes: The Elder (meaning John) said: Mark the
interpreter of Peter, look what Papias reports of Mark the Evangelist.
he remembered, that diligently he vvrote, not in that order, in the which the
Lord spoke, and did them. neither was he the hearer, or follovver of the
Lord, but of Peter, who delivered his doctrine not by way of exposition, but
as necessity constrained, so that Mark offended nothing, in that he vvrote as
he had before committed to memory. of this one thing was he careful, in
omitting nothing of that he had heard, and in delivering nothing which was
false. so far of Mark. concerning Matthewe he writes thus: Matthewe vvrote
his book in the hebrew Matthevve.
tongue, which every one after his skill interpreted by allegations. Papias
alleged testimonies out of the first epistle of John, and of Peter. he
expounded a certain historye of a woman accused before Christ of many crimes,
written in the Gospel after the Hebrews, of these things thus much we
suppose to have been necessarily spoken, and added unto that which went before.

The end of the third book.
THE FOVRTH BOOK OF THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORYE OF EVSEBIVS PAMPHILVS BISHOP
OF CAESAREA IN PALAESTINA.
CAP. I.
What bishops were of Rome, and Alexandria, in the time of Traian the Emperor.

ABout the twelfe year of the Raygne of Traian after the death of the Bishop of
Alexandria Anno Christi. 111. Primus. Alexander.
before mentioned: Primus was placed the fourth bishop, after the Apostles. The
same time Alexander (when Euarestus had governed full eight years) was the
eight bishop of the Church of Rome, after Peter and Paul.

CAP. II.
What calamities the Jews suffered in the time of Traian.

THe doctrine of our Savior, and the Church of Christ, so flourished, that
daily it increased, and was more and more furthered. But the calamities of the
Jews, grew so great that one mischief ensued upon an other. When the
Emperor was now come to the eightenth year of his raygne, the rage of the
Jews was so stirred that a great multitude of their nation The rebellion and
tumultes of the Jews in Egypt Anno Christi. 117.
was destroyed. for at Alexandria, and throughout the rest of Egypt, and
Cyren, the Jews (as if they were possessed of a raging, seditious, and
fanaticall spirit) so bestirred them selves, that they made an uproar among
the Gentiles where they abode, and kindled such a firye sedition, that the year
following, they waged no small battle. Lupus then being president throughout
Egypt, In the first battle the Jews had the victory. Then the Gentiles
fled to Alexandria, and as many Jews, as they found there they took and
executed. The Jews which wandered throughout Cyren, a region of Egypt being
destitute of aid, spoiled the country of corn and cattle, having one Lucas
to their captain, against whom the Emperor sent Marcus Turbo, with a great
power of footmen and horsemen by land, and a nauye by sea, who nether in
short space, nether without long and cruel wars slew many millions of the
Jews, not only of them of Cyrene, but also of the Egyptians, which aided
their King, and captain Lucas. The Emperor also suspecting the Jews, which
inhabited Mesopotamia lest that they traitorously should join with the other,
The calamities of the Jews in Mesopotamia.
commanded Lucius Quintius, to banish them the province, who having gathered
an hoaste, marched toward them, and joining with them, slew a great
multitude of the Jews there abiding, for the which fact he was appointed by
the Emperor, president of Iudaea These things have the Heathen
historiographers then living painted for the knowledge of the posterity
folowinge.

CAP. III.
Of them which in the reign of Adrian, published Apologies, in the defense of
the faith.

WHen Traian had reigned twenty years, six months excepted, Aelius Adrianus
succeeded Traian reigned 19. years and six months. him succeeded Adrian Anno
Domini. 119. Quadratus. Apolog.
him in the Empire. Unto whom Quadratus dedicated a book, entitled an
Apology of the Christian faith. for certain spiteful, and malicious me^, went
about to molest the Christians. This book is as yet extant among diverse of
the brethren, and a coppye thereof remains with us. By the which we may
perceive, and understand, the marks of this man, to be according unto the
true understanding, and the right rule of the Apostolic doctrine. That he was
of the ancient elders it may be gathered by his own testimony, where he
writes thus: The works of our Savior were manifest, and open, for they
were true. such as were healed, and raised from the dead, were not only
healed, and raised in sight, and outvvarde shevve, but they continually, and
constantly remained such in deed. Nether lived they only the time our Savior
had his abode here on earth, but a long time after his ascension, yea and a
number Aristides an Athenian philosopher, wrote an Apology of the christian
faith.
of them, unto our time. Such a man was Quadratus. Aristides likewise, a
faithful man, one that labored for the furtherance of godliness, published an
Apology (as Quadratus did before) of the Christian faith, with a dedicatorie
epistle unto Adrian the Emperor, which book of his, is read in many hands at
this day.

CAP. IIII.
Of the Bishops of Rome, and Alexandria, under Adrian.

THe third year of this Emperors raygne, Alexander bishop of Rome, after that
he had governed Anno domini. 122. Xystus. b. of Rome. Iustus. b. of Alexandria.
ten years, departed this life, whom Xystus succeeded. And about that time
Primus bishop of Alexandria, when he had preached there, twelve years, dyed:
after whom Iustus succeeded.

CAP. V.
The number, and the names of the Bishops of Jerusalem, from our Savior unto
the 18. year of Adrian.

THe years of the bishopes of Jerusalem, I find written no where. It is said
they lived a short time. Only out of certain books, I have learned that
until the destruction of the Jews under Adrian, there were fifteen bishops
of Jerusalem, successively, all which they say by ancient line, to have been
Hebrews, and sincerely to have embraced the word of God and there to have
been thought worthy to rule, by such as then could well discern such things.
The church then stood, and flourished through the faithful Hebrews, which
continued from the Apostles unto y^ Calamity, in the which the Jews rebelling
again under the Romans with no small wars were overthrown. because that
then the bishops of y^ circumcision failed: I think it necessary to name them
from the original. The first was James, called the brother of the Lord: 15.
Bishopes of Jerusalem from the Apostles unto the 18. year of Adrian all
Hebrews. Telesphorus b. of Rome. Eumenes b. of Alexandria.
the second, Sym^on. the third, Iustus: the fourth, Zach^us: the fifth, Tobias:
y^ sixth, Benjamin: the seventh John: the eight, Matthias: y^ ninth, Philip: the
tenth, S^nnecas: the eleventh, Iustus: the twelfe, Leui: the thirteneth,
Ephrem: the fourteneth, Joseph: the fifteneth, and last of all, Judas. So many
bishops were there of Jerusalem, from the Apostles times, unto the said Judas,
and all of the circumcision. In the twelf year of the reign of Adrian, after
that Xystus had been bishop of Rome ten years Telesphorus succeeded him, being
the seventh from the Apostles. After a year, and few months Eumenes was
chosen bishop of Alexandria, the sixth by succession, when as his predecessor
had governed that church, eleven years.

CAP. VI.
The last besieging of the Jews in the time of Adrian.

WHen as the Jewish rebellion waxed vehement, and grievous, Ruffus Liuetenant of
Iudaea, Ruffus procurator of Iudaea. Barchochebasthe Jews captain.
being sent with a great power from the Emperor, fiercely withstood their
fury. And forthwith, slew an innumerable multitude, of men, women, and
children, destroying (as by law of arms it was lawful) their regi^s, and
contries. The Jews the^ had to their capitain one called Barchochebas which
be interpretation is a star, a man otherwise given to murder and theft.
Which alluding to his name, lied shamefully saying y^ he was come from heaven,
as a light, to shine comfortably, in the face of the Jews, now oppressed with
slavery, and bondage, and afflicted to death. When the wars, in the
eighteneth year of the emperor Adrian, waxed hott about the town Beththera
(well fortifyed, neither far distant, and belonging to Jerusalem) and the
slege lasting longer then was looked for, and the rash raysers of sedition, by
reason of famine, were ready to yield up the last gasp, and the guide of this
ungodly dealing had received due unto his desert (as Aristion P^ll^us writteth)
this whole nation was vanished that town, and generally, the whole country of
Jerusalem, by the laws, decrees, and specially, the constitutions of The Jews
being foiled, Ierusal^ was overthrown and called after the emperors name
Aelia. Mark of the Gentiles the first bishop of Jerusalem. when persecution
failed then heresies sprang.
Adrian, so that by his commandment it was not lawful for these seely
souls, to behold their native soil, no not through the least chinke of the
door. This city then at the utter ruin of the Jewish nation, and the manifold
overthrow of ancient inhabitours, being brought to confusion began to be
inhabited of strange nations, and after that it was subdued to the Roman
empire, the name was quite changed, for unto y^ honor of the conqueror Aelius
Adrianus, it was called Aelia. And the church being gathered there of the
Gentiles, Mark was first bishop there, after them, of the circumcision. When
as the churches of God now shined as stars throughout the world, and the
faith of our Lord, and Savior Christ Jesus, flourished: Satan enemy to all
honesty as a sworn adversary to the truth, and man's health and salvation,
impugneth the church with all means possible, arming himself against her with
outward persecution, then deprived of that used the aid of subtle sorcerers,
and sleyghty inglers, as fit instruments, and authors of perdition, to the
destruction of seely souls. Which sorcerers, and iuglers bearing the same
name, and title, and in show professinge the same doctrine with us (by his
subtle invention) might the sooner snare the faithful, in the slipery way of
perdition, and under pretense of reducing them to the faith, to ouerwhelme
them, in the whirpoole, and deep dungeon of damnation. Out of Menander
therefore Menander
(whom before we termed the successor of Simon) there budded out, a doubtful,
a viperous, and a twofolde heresy, by the means of Satan, having two heads
or captains, varying among themselves: Saturninus of Antioch, and Basilides of
Alexandria, whereof the one throughout Syria, Saturninus of Antioch. Basilides
of Alexandria Irenaeus lib. 1. cap. 22. 23.
the other throughout Egypt, published heretical, and detestable doctrine.
Irenaeus says that Saturninus for the most part, dreamed the same with
Menander: and that Basilides under pretense of more mystical matters, enlarged
his devise into infinity, inuenting monstrous fables to the furtherance of his
Heresy.

CAP VII.
What heretics, and ecclesiastical writers lived then.

WHen as many ecclesiastical persons in those days, striued in the behalf of
the truth, and contended with sure, and certain reasons, for the Apostolic,
and Ecclesiastical doctrine: some also as forefencers, have exhibited
instruction to the posterity, by their commentaries, leuealing at the aforesaid
heresies, of which number one Agrippa Castor, a stout champion, and a famous
writer of those times, published a confutation of Basilides, disclosing all
Agryppa Castor confuted Basilides. Barcabus. Barcoph.
his Satanicall iugling. having displaied his secrety, he reports that
Basilides wrote four and twenty books upon the gospel, fayning unto him self
prophets, whom he calls Barcabus, and Barcoph, and certain others never
heard of before: Inuenting those barbarous names, to amaze the hearers withal:
teaching that indifferently things offered to Idols may be eaten: that in time
of persecution, the faith with perjury may be renounced: commanding silence
after the manner of Pythagoras, for the space of five years. And such like
heresies of Basilides, the said writer has plainly confuted. Irenaeus
writes, that in the time of these two: Carpocrates lived, ye father of that
Irenaeus lib. 1. cap. 24. The opinions of Gnostici whose father was Carpocrates.
heresy, which the Gnostici hold, who thought good, not to publish the
sorcery of Simon privily, after his manner, but openly. Glorying of charmed
love drinks: of devilish, and dronken dreams: of assistent, and associate
spirits: with other like illusions. They teach farther, that who so will
attain unto the perfection of their mysteries, or rather abominable devises,
must work such factes, by they never so filthy, otherwise can they not
overcome (as they term them, the secular potentates, unless every one play
his part, after the same secret operation. So it came to pass that Satan
rejoicing in his deuelish subtlety, seduced many of the^ thus already snared,
whom he led to perdition, by the means of such wicked ministers, and gave
hereby great occasion to ye infidels, of blasphemy against the divine doctrine,
and spread a great slander in that the fame of The heretics were a sclau^der
unto christian religion.
them was bruted abroad throughout christendom. By this means it fell out
often that the infidels of those times conceived a wicked, absurd, and
shameful opinion of us, that that we used the unlawful company, of Mothers,
and sisters: that we fed upon the tender infantes and sucklinges. But these
reports prevailed not long for the truth tried it self, and in time following
shined as the son beams. for the sleyghts, and subtleties of the adversaries
turned to their own confusion, whilst that new heresies daily sprung,
creeping one upon an other, the latter taking place, the former vanished away,
and increasing into diuerouse, and manifold sects changing now this way,
Falsehood vanishes away the truth remains still.
anon that way, they were destroyed. The brightness of the catholic, and
only true church, continuing always the same, increased, and enlarged daily
the bounds thereof, that the gravity sincerity, liberty, and temperancy of
Godly conversation, and christian philosophy, shined and flourished among all
the nations, both of the Grecians, and Barbarians. Thus the slander slyded
away with the time, and the doctrine famous among as, and forthered of all men,
specially for the piety, and modesty, for the divine, and mystical doctrine
thereof, took place: so that from that time unto this day, none durst note y^
same of any heinous crime, or ^^famy, as they durst before, which conspired
against us, and the Christian faith. But the truth brought forth, many in
those days which contended and dealt with these Heretics, some with
invincible arguments, without the Scriptures: some with manifest proofs, and
authorities of Scripture, confuting their heretical opinions.

CAP. VIII.
What notable writers lived the^.

OF the number was Aegesippus, whom we have before ofte^^ymes (...), one ofth^
Apostles time, who in five books wrote the sincere tradition of the Apostles
preaching* signifying his own time, and making mention of such as in former
times, erected Idols, where he writes thus: To whom they erected Idols, and
monuments, and ^alo^^^d temples, Aegesippus.
it is well known. Antinous the servant of Adrianus Caesar, had a festiual
triumph decreed unto him, called after his name Antinous vvrastling,
celebrated in our days. They builded him a city after his name Antinoia; they
consecrated Priests, they appointed Prophets. At the same time Justinius
Martyr, an embracer of the true philosophy, well studied, and exercised in the
doctrine of the Gentiles, makes mention of the same man, in his Apology unto
Antoninus, writing thus: It Justinius Apolog. pro Christianis.
shall not seem impertinent; if that we propose unto you, the remembrance of
Antinous, and of that which they celebrate in his name. Whom all do
worship as it vvote for fear, when as they know well enough who, and
whence he was. The same Justinius makes mention of the wars, held against
the Jews, saying thus: In the Iudaical vvarres fresh before your eyes,
Barchochebas a captain of the Jewish rebellion, commanded the Christians
only to be grievously punished, unless they renou^ced Christ, and blasphemed
God In the same place he declares, how that not rashly, but after good
aduisement taken, he left p^gauisme, and embraced the true, and only piety.
For I my self (says he) delighted with the doctrine of Plato, hearing the
Christians led captives, nether fearing death, nether all the torments most
terrible* thought it could not be, that this kind of men, was subject unto
malice, and set on pleasure. For what voluptuous person, or intemperate, or
delighted with deuo^^ing of man's (...): can so embrace death, that he be
deprived of his desire, and not rather endeavor* that this life may alvvayes
^^ste, that he be able to deceive Princes, and not betray him self to the
death* Moreover this Justinius writes, how that Adrianus, receiving letters of
Serenius Granianus, a noble President, signifying in the behalf of the
Christians, that it was very injurious for no ^e, but only at the out^ry of
the people, they should be brought forth, and executed: wrote again unto M^ius
Fundanus, Proconsul of Asia, and commanded that none, without grievous crime,
and just accusation, should dye the death. The copy whereof, observing the
Latins phrase, as much as in him lay, he added, prefiring these few words:
And when as we might justly require, by virtue of the epistle, of the most
victorious, and noble Caesar Adrian, your father, that as he graciously
commanded, so sentence should be given: yet we require not this as commanded
by Adrian, but in as much as you know, that at the request of the people,
justice is to be craved. we have annexed the copy of Adrianus his epistle, to
the end you may understand, we tell nothing but that which is true. for
thus he vvrote.

CAP. IX.
The epistle of Adrian the Emperor, that no Christian be accused, neither
suffer, without just cause.

Unto Minutius Fundanus, Proconsul of Asia, Adrian fendeth greeting: I received
an Epistle Adrian the Emperor writes in the behalf of the Christians.
from Serenius Granianus that right worthy man, and ^hy predecessor, the
occasion vvherof I can not with silence leave vntoutched, lest that thereby,
men be troubled, and a gappe left open, to the malice of Sycophants. Wherefore
if your prouincialls can prove ought against the Christians, whereof they
charge them, and justify it before the bar, let them proceed on, and not
appeach them only for the name, nether crau^ with outcries against the^* for
it is very expedient, that if any be disposed to accuse, the accusation be
thoroughly known of you, and sifted. Therefore if any accuse the Christians,
that they transgressed the ^^vves, see that you judge and punish according to
the quality of the offense, but in plain words, if any upon spyte, or
malice, comense or cavil against them, see you chastise him for his malice,
and punish him with reuengement. This was the epistle of Adrian.

CAP. X.
What Bishops there were of Rome, and Alexandria, in the time of Autoninus.

AFter that Adrian, ruling in the regal scepter, the space of one and twenty
years, had Adrian the Emperor died Anno Domini 140. him succeeded Antoninus
Pius. Hyginus b. of Rome. Irenaeus lib. 3 cap. 3.
run the race of his natural life: Antoninus called Pius, succeeded him in
the empire. In the first year of whose raygne, Telesphorus having governed the
Ecclesiastical seae, eleven years, depar^ed this life, whom* Hyginus
succeeded. Irenaeus writes that this Telesphorus was crowned at his death,
with martyrdom, and signifies withal, that in the time of the said Hyginus*
Valentinus; the inuentor of his own heresy, and Cerdon, author of that error
which Marcion afterward sucked, were manifestly known at Rome. For thus he
writes.

CAP. XI.
The report of Irenaeus, toutching the graund heretics of that time, with the
succession of the Bishops of Rome, and Alexandria.

VAlentinus came to Rome, in the time of Hyginus, ^e flourished under Pius, and
continued Irenaeus lib. 3. cap. 4. Valentinus. Cerdon.
unto Anicetus. Cerdon likewise (whom Marcion succeeded) came under Hyginus
the nynth Bishop from the Apostles. who having protested his faith, one while
perseuered: an other while taught privily: afterward confessed his error:
Again being reprehended for the doctrine, which he had corruptly taught,
refrayned the company of the brethren. This he wrote in his third book,
against the heresies* Cerdon also sucking error of such as were Simons
Irenaeus lib. 1 cap. 28. 29.
adhaerents, abiding at Rome under Hyginus, (the nynth by succession from the
Apostles) taught This heresy is confuted by Origin, (...) lib 2. cap. 4. 5.
Marcion of Pontus.
that God, preached of the law, and Prophets, was not the father of our Lord
Jesus Christ. He said moreover that Christ was known, the father of Christ,
unknown: Christ was just, the father good. After him succeeded one Marcion
of Pontus, a shamles blasphemer, which increased this doctrine. Irenaeus
dilating that infinite profundity of matter, invented by Valentinus, subject to
many errors, discloseth openly the malice of the Heretic, being cloked and
concealed, as it were a serpent, hid in his den. After this he remembers one
Mark by name, most expert in inagical arts, to have been in that time. for he
revealing their profane ceremonies, and detestable mysteries, writes thus:
Some prepare their wedding chamber, and accomplish the service Irenaeus lib.
1. cap. 18.
to be said over them that are to be consecrated, with charmed words, and
having thus done, they call it a spiritual marriage* conformable to the
celestial copulation. Some bring them to the water, and in baptizing say thus:
In the name of the unknown father of all things, in the truth mother of all
things, and in him which descended upon Jesus. Some other pronounce hebrew
words, to the end the young conuerts, might therewith be the more amazed. But
omitting these things, after that the fourth year of Hyginus was expired: Pius
took the public ministry of y^ Pius bish. of Rome. Marcus b. of Alexandria.
Celadion b. of Alexandria. Anicetus b. of Rome. Aegesippus.
church of Rome. At Alexandria Mark is chosen their shepherde, when Eumenes
had continued there Bishop, thirteen years. After Mark had been Bishop ten
years: Celadion succeeded him in ye church of Alexandria. And at Rome, after
ye death of Pius, which departed the fiftenth year: Anicetus was placed
minister, under whom Egesippus says of him self y^ he came to Rome, where he
remained unto the time of Eleutherius. But specially Justinius at that time,
disposing the heavenly doctrine, in a Philosophers atyre, contending by his
commentaryes for the faith which he embraced: Wrote a book against Marcion,
who at y^ present time lived, and was well known, for these are his words.
Marcion of Pontus at this present, teaches such as harken unto him, to believe
in a Justinius Martyr.
certain God, greater then the maker of all things, who among all sorts of
men, (aided by the subtlety of Satan) has seduced many, to blaspheme, and to
deny the maker of all things to be the father of Christ, and to confess some
other that should be greater then he* as many as come of him are called
Christians, even as it fares with Philosophers, though they be not addicted
to the same precepts in philosophy: yet the name of a Philosopher is common to
all. To these he adds: We have written a book against the heresies now
reigning if you please you may read it. The same Justinius has valiantly
encountered with the Gentiles, and dedicated Apologies in the defense of our
faith unto Antoninus, by syrname Pius, and to the Senate of Rome, for he
dwelled at Rome, and declares who, and whence he was, in his Apology writing
thus.

CAP XII.
The beginning of Justinius Martyrs Apology, for the Christian faith.

Unto the Emperor Titus Aelius. Adrianus unto Antoninus Pius, most noble
Caesar, Justinius Martyrs Apolog. Antoninus was called T. Aelius Adrianus
because he was adopted of T. Aelius Adrianus the Emperor.
and unto Verissimus his adopted son and true Philosopher, unto Lucius son
of the Philosopher Caesar, and adopted of Pius, favorer of learning, and unto
the sacred Senate, with all the people of Rome, in their behalf, which among
all sorts of men, are unjustly hated, and reprochfully dealt vvithall:
Justinius the son of Priscus Bacchius, borne in Flauia, a nevve city of Syria
in Palaestina, one of them, and one for them all, do make this request, etc.
The same Emperor receiving a supplication of others, in the behalf of the
brethren in Asia, which were grieved with all kind of contumelyes practiced
upon them by their prouincialls: graciously sent unto the commonaltye of Asia,
this constitution.

CAP. XIII.
The epistle of Antoninus Pius, unto the commons of Asia, in the behalf of the
Christians, not to be persecuted.

THe Emperor Caesar, Marcus, Aurelius, Antoninus, Augustus, Armenicus,
Pontifex maximus Antoninus the Emperor, unto the commo^s of Asia.
fiftene times tribune, thryse Consul, unto the communalty of Asia, sends
greeting. I am sure the Gods are not so secure, but that they disclose hurtful
persons. For these men punish such as vvil not worship the Gods, more
grievously then you do, which thus vex them, and confirm the opinion which
they conceive of you, to be Atheists, or godless men. It is their desire in
Gods quarrel, rather to dye, then to live. so that they become conquerers,
yeldinge their lives unto the death, rather then they obey your edictes. It
shall seem very necessary to admonish you of the earthquakes, which have
and do happen among us, that being therewith moved, ye may compare our estate,
with theirs. They have more confidence godvvardes, then you have. you during
the time of your ignorance, despise other Gods: contemn the religion of the
immortal God: banish the Christians which worship him, and persecute them
unto the death. In the behalf of these men, many of the provincial
Presidentes have written heretofore unto our father, of famous memory, whom
he answered in vvriting again, that they were not to be longer molested,
unless they had practiced treason, against the Romayne empire. and many have
given notice unto us of the same matter, whom we answered as our father did
before us. If any therefore hereafter be found thus busied in other men's
affairs: we command that the accused be absolute, and free, though he be
found such a one, I mean faulty, and that the accuser be grievously punished.
This edict was proclaimed at Ephesus, in the hearing of the great assembly of
Asia, witness hereof is Meliton, Bishop of Sardis, (which flourished Melito^
wrote an Apology.
at ye time) in his profitable Apology for our doctrine, delivered unto the
Emperor Verus.

CAP. XIIII.
Of Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna.

IRenaeus reports that while Anicetus was Bishop of Rome, Polycarpus as yet
lived, and came to Rome, and questioned with Anicetus* concerning the day of
Easter. An other thing yet, he reports of Polycarpus, in his third book
against heresies, which needefully must here be annexed, Polycarpus (says he)
was not only instructed by the Apostles, and conversant with many Irenaeus
lib. 3 cap. 3. Polycarpus the Disciple of S. John being old was seen of
Irenaeus being young.
which savve Christ but also of the Apostles ordained Bishop of Smy^na in
Asia* whom we in our youth have also seen, for he lived long, and was
very old, and at length finished this life with most glorious* and
renowned Martyrdom* when he had continually taught that he learned of the
Apostles which the Church at this day delivers for undoubted truth. All
the Churches of Asia, and as many unto this day as succeeded him in that seae
bear witness that Polycarpus was vvorthier of credit, th^n Valentinus, and
Marcion, and then the whole rabble of perverse people. For he being (...)
Rome, in conference with Anicetus, converted many of the foresaid Heretics,
unto the Church of God, preaching the one, and only truth, received of the
Apostles, and delivered by the Church. There be yet alive which heard him
reporting, how that John the Disciple of Christ, entering into a bath at
Ephesus, to bayne him self, and spying within the Heretic Cerinthus,
departed the bath vnbayned, and said: Let us depart hence, lest the bath fall,
wherein Cerinthus, the sworn enemy of the truth bayneth him self. And
Polycarpus on a time meeting Marcion face to face, which said unto him, know
us, answered: I know thee for the first begotten son of Satan. So zealous
were the Apostles, and their Disciples, that they communicated not in word,
with the corrupters of the truth, according unto that of Paul: eschew him
that is an Heretic, after the Tit. 3. Antoninus Pi us died Ann. Domi. 163.
and him succe ded Marcus Aurelius Verus, under this Verus the 4. of the te^ne
persecutions was raised. Lucius being the son of Verus was called the brother
of Antoninus because he was adopted together with him.
first and second admonition, knovving that such a one is perverse, and
condemned a sinner by the testimony of his own conscience. There is extant an
epistle of Polycarpus unto the Philippians, very profitable for such as are
careful of their salvation, where they may know the true character of
faith, and the right rule of doctrine. So far Irenaeus. Polycarpus in the
foresaid Epistle unto the Philippians (at this day extant) alleges
testimonies out of the former Epistle of Peter. When that Antoninus syrnamed
Pius, had ended twenty and two years, in the Romayne Empire: Marcus Aurelius
Verus, and Antoninus his son, together with Lucius his brother, succeeded him.

CAP. XV.
The martyrdom of Polycarpus, and diverse other Saints in Smyrna, under Verus
the Emperor.

WHen Asia was visited with great persecution, Polycarpus was crowned with
martyrdom. I suppose it necessary, to pen in this our historye, his end,
which at this day is published in writing. The Epistle is in the person of the
Church where he was President, unto the Parishes throughout Pontus, signifying
the circumstance about Polycarpus, in this sort: The Church of God which is at
Smyrna, unto the Church at Philomilium, and unto The epistle of the church of
Smyrna whereof Polycarpus was Bishop.
all the congregations of the holy Catholic Church throughout Pontus, mercy
to you, peace, and the love of God the Father, and of our Lord Jesus Christ be
multiplied.
We have written unto you brethren, of such as suffered martyrdom, and of
blessed Polycarpus, who signed, and sealed this persecution with his own
blood. And before they make relation of Polycarpus, they rehearse the
constancy, and patience of other Martyrs, saying: The behoulders were amazed,
seeing the flesh of the Martyrs rent with scurges, even into the inner veins
and sinovves, so that the most secret entrayles of their bodies, their bowels,
and inward priuityes were piteously to be seen. Behoulding again the sharp
shells of sea fish, and pimple stones stravved under the Martyrs backs, and
bruised bodies, with every kind of torment, that could be devised. Last of all
thrown to be torn in pieces, and devoured of vvilde beasts.


Specially they wrote of Germanicus, that he valiantly endured and overcame
through the grace of God Germanicus torn in pieces of wild beasts.
that corporal fear of death, graffed in the frail nature of man. For when
as the Proconsull exhorted him to relent, admonished him of his tender years,
prayed him to pitye his own case, being now in the flower of his youth* He
without intermission, enty^ed the beast to devour him, yea constrained, and
compelled, that with speed, he might be dispatches of this wrongful, and
wicked life. Which patience and constancye of the blessed Mar^^^* and of the
whole Christian nation, the multitude of In^^dels behoulding, suddenly began to
sho^^^: ^^^oue the wicked, seek out Polycarpus. And when there was a great
tumu^^e raised, by reason of this clamor, a certain Phrygian, by name Quintus,
lately come out of Phrygia, trembled at the fler^e Qulntus unconstant in
persecution.
rage of the terrible beasts, and shrinked at the sight of their grimme visage,
and betrayed his own safety, with his slacknes of courage. For the same epistle
testifies of him, that he personally appeared together with the rest before
the bar, more of rashues, then of any religion, and being taken, be publicly
protested: that none ought to intru^e him self, among such men, without good
devotion, neither intermedle in m^^^^^s wherewith he has not to do. But of
these men thus much. Toutching the renowned Polycarpus, they write, that he
hearing the report of this cruel persecution, was nothing therewith moved, but
retained the immovable tranquilitye of his mind, continued still in the city,
until at length he was persuaded through the petitions of such a^: prayed him,
to go aside for a season, and to get him to a certain farm place, not far
from the city, where he abode with a few, occupied day and night only in
prayer, making humble supplications after his usual manner: for the
tranquillitye, and peace of all congregations throughout the world. Being in
prayer, three days before he was taken, and now fallen a sleep, Polycarpus is
forewarned by a vision of his mar tyrdome.
he sa^e in a vision by night, the pillowe under his head set a fire, and
suddenly consumed to ashes, when he waked, forthwith he enterpreted this vision
unto them that were then present, plainly progn osticating, that it should
come to pass, that his life should be ended, that his body should be burned
for the testimonye of Christ. They write further, that when the searchers were
now at hand, at the instant, and earnest entreaty of his friends, be fleeted
thence unto an other village, where incontinently the pursuers came, which
took two boys of that place, and scourged them until that one of them
confessed the circumstance, and led them unto the lodginge of Polycarpus.
When they had entered in, they found him lying in an upper chamber, where he
might have escaped, if that it had pleased him. But he said* The will of the
Lord be fulfilled. for he understanding of their pretense, as the report
goes, came down, commoned with them pleasantly, and chearefully, so that they
which knew him not before, steadfastly eyed his comely age, his grave, and
constant countenance, marueyling that such a do was made, so much labor
spent, and that a man of such years should be taken. He commanded the table
forthwith to be covered, meat to be laid on, requested them to make meary,
craved of them the space of one hour for prayer, that being granted, he rose
up, went to prayer, so replenished with the grace of God, that such as were
present, and prayed, hearing his devotion, were ravished, and many sorowed,
that so honest, and godly a father, should dye. After these things the
Epistle contains in manner these words following: When that he The epistle
of the Church of Smyrna.
had now ended his prayer, with the remembrance of all such things, as ever
befell him, whether they were small, or great, famous, or infamous, and also
of the universal, and Catholic Church, and the hour now fully ended: they
set him upon an ass, and brought him to the city, being on the great
Sabbath day. There met him Herod the justice of peace, and his father
Nicetes, who receiving him into their chariott, persuaded him, saying: What
harm is it to say: Lord Caesar, to sacrifice and so be saved? at the first
he answered nothing, but when they urged him, he said: I will not
condescende unto your counsel, they perceauing he vvoulde not be persuaded,
gave him very roughe language, and tumbled him down out of the vvaggon, to
the brusing of his shinnes. But he as though he had been nothing hurt,
neither iniuried at all, went bolte vprighte, cheerful, and apace toward
the Theater. When he was come upon the Theater or stage, a voice came down
from heaven (which by reason of the great tumulte was heard of fevve) Be
of good cheer o Polycarpus, and play the man. The speaker no man savve, but
the voice was heard of many of us. In the mean time the multitude was in a
rage, seeing Polycarpus brought forth. The Proconsul demands of him,
whether he were that Polycarpus, beckning that he should deny it, and
saying: tender thine years, with such like persuasions, swear by the
fortune of Caesar, repent thee of that is past, say, remove the wicked. But
Polycarpus behoulding with immovable countenance, the multitude round about
the stage, poynting with the hand, and sighing, and looking up unto heaven,
said: remove o Lord the wicked. When the Proconsul urged, and said:
swear, and I will let thee go: Blaspheme, and defy Christ, Polycarpus
answered: four score, and six years, have I served him, neither has he
ever offended me in any thing, and how can I revile my King, which has
thus kept me? The Proconsul still urged, and said: swear by the fortune of
Caesar. To whom Polycarpus: If thou requirest this vain glory, that I
protest the fortune of Caesar, as thou say, fayning thou know me not,
Here freely I am a Christian. If thou desire to know the doctrine of
Christianity, apoynte the day, and thou shall hear. When the Proconsul
said, persuade this people, Polycarpus answered: I have voutchsafed to
confer with thee. For we are commanded to give to Princes, and Potentates
their due honor, ordained of God, nether prejudicial to our religion, but as
for this furious multitude, I will not deal with them. I judge them
unworthy hearers of my purgation. To this the Proconsul said: I have vvilde
beasts to devour thee, unless thou take a better way. Polycarpus
answered: bring them forth, for it is determined amongst us, not to pass
from the better unto the worse by repentance: But we recount it a thing
commendable, to turn from the thing that is evil, to that which is good and
just. Again the Proconsul said: I will still thee with fire, if thou way
not the beasts, neither repent. Whom Polycarpus answered: Thou threatnest
fire for an hour, which lasts a while, and quickly is quenched, but thou
art ignorant of the everlasting fire, at the day of judgment, and endless
torments reserved for the wicked. But what lingerest thou, dispatche as it
pleases thee. Uttering these, and the like words, he was constant, and
cheerful, his countenance so gracious, that he notvvithstanding was nothing
moved therewith, but of the contrary the Proconsul being amazed, commanded the
bedle, in the midst of the theater, thryse to cry: Polycarpus confesses him
self a Christian. At which saying, the multitude both of Jews, and Gentiles,
inhabiting Smyrna, shouted with a great rage: this is that Doctor of Asia, the
father of the Christians, the ouerthrovver of our Gods, who instructed many,
that our Gods are not to be adored. To this they added an other clamor, craving
of Philip President of Asia, that he vvoulde let loose a lion to devour him,
who answered: That this was not lavvefull, in so much that the game or
stage stryuing of beasts was then finished. Then they cried with one voice
that Polycarpus should be burned quick. It behooved that the vision should be
fulfilled which he savve on his pillovve, and prophesied of, to such as
prayed with him at that present, saying: I must be burned quick, which
was as soon done as spoken. For the multitude forthwith carried logges of
wood, and sticks out of their shoppes, and bathes. but specially the Jews,
served promptly (after their wonted manner) for that purpose. The fyery pyle
being prepared, he vnapparelled him self, loosed his girdle, endeavored to pull
of his shoes, which before he did not, for that the faithful contended among
them selves who could soonest touch his body, at their farevvell. for his
good, and godly conversation, yea, before his graye hear grevve, he was
honored of all men. In a short while all things necessarily required for
the execution, were applied. And when as they vvoulde have nailed him to the
stake, he said: nay suffer me even as I am. For he that gave me patience to
abide this fire, will give me also an immovable mind, to persevere within
this fyery pyle, without your provision, in pryntinge my body with nails.
When they had heard that, they cease from naylinge, and fall a byndinge of
him. His hands then being bound to his back, he like a notable ram, picked
out of a great flock, fit for an acceptable burnte sacrifice unto Almightye
God, is offered, saying: O Father of thy well-beloved, and blessed son Jesus
Christ, through whom we have known The prayer of Polycarpus at his Martyr
dome.
thee: O God of the Angels, and powers, and of every living creature, and of
all sorts of just men, which live in thy presence: I thank thee that thou
have graciouslye voutchsafed this day, and this hour, to allotte me a
portion, among the number of Martyrs, among the people of Christ, unto the
resurrection of the everlasting life, both of body, and soul, in the
incorruption of the holy Ghost, among whom I shall be received in thy sight
this day, as a fruitful, and acceptable sacrifice, as thou have heretofore
prepared, often revealed, and now fulfilled, most faithful God which can
not lie. Wherefore for all things I praise thee, I bless thee, I glorifye
thee, through the everlasting high Priest Jesus Christ, thy well-beloved
son, to whom with thee, and the holy Ghost, be all glory world without
end, Amen. When that he had pronounced this Amen, and finished Polycarpus
burned.
his prayer, the executioners set the pyle a fire. The flame vehemently
flashed about, terrible to the sight, shevved no doubt of purpose to such as
were preserved to publishe the same to the posterity. For the flamye fire,
framing it self after the form of a vault, or the sail of a ship, with
the blustering blastes of vvinde, compassed the filling body of the Martyr
within placed, as with a wal, and that which was in the mids of the
same, was not as firye, skorched, or burned flesh, but as gold or silver
tried in the furnace. For it seemed to our senses, a fragrant, and svveete
smell, as of frankensense, or some such like precious perfume. At length when
the cruel persecutors perceived the fire not to consume his body, they called
for a torme^tor, and gave him charge, to lance him in the side with a spear,
which when he had done, such a stream of blood issued out of his body, that
the fire was therevvith quenched, so that the whole multitude maruailed, such
a pre-eminence to be granted (in respect of the Infidels) among the faithful
and elect people of God, of which number this Polycarpus was one, a right
Apostolic, and prophetical doctor of our time bishop, of the Catholic
church of Smyrna, for all that he spoke, either is already, or shall be
hereafter fullfilled. But the enuiouse, subtle and maliciouse aduersarye of
just men, seeinge the glory of this Martyr so great, and his unblameable
conversation from the beginning to be crowned with incorruption, and to
receive an incomparable reward: procured that his body should perish from
among us, for there were many that endeavored and fullye purposed to have
been partakers of his blessed body by burial, many pricked forvvardes
Nicetes, the father of Herod, and his brother Dalces, to move the proconsull,
not to deliver unto the Christians his body least that (says he) they leauinge
Christ, fall a vvorshippinge of him. This they said, when the Jews egged,
and urged them forevvardes, which continually vvatched us least that we
snatched him out of the fire, being ignorant of this, that we can never
forsake Christ, which dyed for the salvation of the whole world: that we
can vvorshippe none other. for we vvorshippe Christ The Christians worship God
and reuere^ ce his Martyrs.
as the son of God, the Martyrs we love, as disciples, and followers of the
Lord, and that vvorthely for the invincible good love they bear, to their
King, and master, whose companions and disciples we desire to be. when the
Centurion perceived the sedition of the jews he caused the body to be laid in
the mids after their accustomed manner, to be burned. So we gathered his
bones, more precious then pearls, and better tryde then gold, and buried them
in the place that was fit for the purpose, where god vvilling, we being
gathered together, the Lord will grant that with joy and gladness, we
may celebrate the birth day Why the passions of martyrs are celebrated.
of his martyr, both for the remembrance of such as have been crowned before,
and also to the preparation, and stirringe up of such as hereafter shall
strive. Thus it happened unto Polycarpus that was martyred at Smyrna, together
with twelve others out of Philadelphia, who only among all the rest is so
remembered, that the Gentiles every where spredd his fame far and nighe.


Such was the end of the blessed Apostolic Polycarpus, published in wrytinge
by the brethren of the Church of Smyrna in the aforesaid Epistle, where is
also contained the martyrdom of sundry others, that suffered then with
Polycarpus, whereof one Metrodorus Metrodorus burned. Pionius burned.
suspected of the heresy of Marcion was burned with fire, and consumed to
ashes. And among the Martyrs of that time, there was one Pionius, very famous,
who for his protestations and liberty of speech and Apologies for the faith
both in the presence of the people and Magistrates: for his godly sermons, and
comfortinge persuasions of such as faynted in persecution: for his consolation
unto such as were imprisoned: for his exhortations unto the brethren resorting
unto him: for his constancye in his manyfolde, and grievous torments and
afflictions: for his patience in the firye pyle flashing about: and last of all
for his quiet death: is highly commended, Eusebius wrote a book of Martyrs which
is not extant. Carpus, Papylus, Agathonica, martyrs.
and published to the praise of God, in that book of ours which contains his
Martyrdom, Whereunto I refer the reader. Also there are extant other
monuments of certain Martyrs that suffered at Pergamus, a City of Asia. As of
Carpus, Papylus, and Agathonica a woman, who after their notable confessions,
suffered gloriouse Martyrdom.

CAP. XVI.
Of the martyrdom of Justinius a Christian philosopher,

AT that time Justinius of whom we made mention before, when he had dedicated a
book in the defense of our doctrine, to the foresaid Emperors was crowned
with martyrdom by the maliciouse means of Crescens the philospher, professing
in life and learning the sect of Cynickes, for Justinius in open disputations,
and public conference had with this philosopher, bare away the bell which
tended to the shortning of his life, and the hasteninge of his end. This
thing did this famous philosopher in his foresaid Apology foresee and
signify in these words. I look for no other thing then this, but that I be
betrayed of some one of the^ called philosophers Justinius martyr Apolog. 2.
, or knocked in the head with a clubbe by Crescens, no philosopher in deed, but
a stately iangler. It is not requisite that we call him a philosopher, which
of ignorance reports that the Christians are impious and irreligious, to the
end he may please and flatter such as are ouershadovved with the miste of
error and darkness. For either he impugneth the doctrine of the Christians
which he has neither readd nor known, then is he full of malice and far
worse then Idiotes that alvvayes bevvare they reason not of unknown matters,
least they bear false witness: or else he reads them, but understands not
the mystery and maiesticall meaning thereof, or if he understand, he does it
that he be not taken for such a one, then is he again far more wicked, and
spiteful, the bondslaue of vayneglo^ye, and bruti^he sear: for I vvoulde have
you well to understand, and to recount my tale for truth, that I have
proposed certain questions, and demanded certain interrogatoryes of him,
wherein I have found and know rightvvell that he knovveth nothing. If that
these conferences have been neither bruted, neither blased in your hearing: I
am ready again to rehearse the same unto you. This will be a Princely part
and a worthy work, for your honor to hear. If you knevve both what I
demanded, and what he answered: you vvoulde soon give sentence, that he is
altogether ignorant in our doctrine. Or if he knovveth it, he dares not utter
it for fear of his auditors, and hereby to be proved (as I said before) no
philosopher, but a flatterer, contemninge that which Socrates highly esteemed.
No man's fond, vain, or foolish humor with flatterye to be fed. Thus far
Justinius. And that he perished through the practice of Crescens, Tatianus a man
instructed from his youth up in profane literature, and praised very much for
the profit he took therein, testifleth in his book against the Gentiles
writing thus: The famous philosopher Justinius said very well, that the
Tatianus lib. contra gentes.
philosophers then were to be likened to thieves. A little after he says:
Crescens being newly come unto that great City passed all men, in that
unnatural, and shameful sin of Sodom, de filing himself with mankind,
inferior to no man in covetousness, taught, that death was not to be feared,
yet he was so fearful of it that he procured Justinius death for a great
mischief, pouring out the poison of his malice, because that he preachinge the
truth reprehended the philosophers, for gluttonous and deceitful persons.
such was the cause of Justinius martyrdom.

CAP. XVII.
Of the Martyrs mentioned in the Apology of Justinius.

THe same Justinius before he suffered, remembered in his Apology, such as were
martyred before him, very pertinent for this our purpose, writing thus: A
certain woman there Justinius in his Apology reports a certain history of a
man and his wife.
was married unto an husband wholy given unto lascivious life and leudnes,
whereunto she her self was in times past addicted, who when she had learned
the doctrine of Christ repented her of her former life, and embraced chastity,
and exhorted her husband likvvise to repent, expounding unto him the doctrine
which threatened unto intemperate, and beastly livers everlasting punishment,
of endless fire. But he nevertheless altogether set upon the same lewd
nesse, separateth by his unlawful means his wife from him. for she said
that it was thenceforth unlawful for her, to use company at bed, and at
board, with that man, who contrary unto the law of nature, beyond all
right and reason, sought means to satisfy his filthy lust and therefore
would be divorced from him. But through the persuasions of her friends, she
revoked her sentence, and changed her mind, who counsayled her, a little while
quietly to live together that there was great hope at length of his
repentance: refrained her self and continevved with him in vvedlocke. When
her husband was gonne to Alexandria, and there known to have practiced
far more lewd factes, least that she should be made partaker of his wicked
factes and heinous offenses by continevving in his company at bed and board,
in the bond of matrimony: she made a bill of divorce (as we term it) she
was separated and went away from him. Then this good man (when he should
have rejoiced that his wife which Ironia.
of old was slaundered of her servants and accused of her levvdnesse: which
of old was given to drunkenness, and all kind of spite: now had renounced
her former life, and exhorted him to the same repentance with her, whom she
divorced because he kept other company) accused her that she was a Christian.
And she gave up a supplication unto thee (o Emperor) humbly requesting, that
she might first dispose her househould affairs, and after the disposition and
ordering thereof, to aunsvvere unto that which she was accused for, the
which thing thou did graciously grant, but he (her husband sometimes)
having no color, nor cloak, to accuse his wife: bent his bow and leueled
thus at Ptolomaeus, who instructed her in the Christian faith, and endured
torments under Vrbicius the Judge. He had to his friend the Centurion, whom he
persuaded to impryson Ptolomaeus: to entreat him roughly vvithall: and to
demand of him if he were a Christian. which when Ptolomaeus, one that was
zealous for the truth, no flatterer, no dissembler, Ptolomaeus martyred.
had confessed himself to be: the Centurion cast him into prison where he
was long punished. Afterward being brought before Vrbicius, of this only
he was examined: if he were a Christian, whose conscience bearing him
witness of no crime, but in a just cause: confessed that he had preached the
true, and heavenly doctrine of Christ. For he which denies himself to be
that man he is, either condemns that which is in him by denial: or knovving
him unworthy and estranged from the matter, refuses to confess: where of
neither is found in a true Christian. And when Vrbicius commanded that he
should be brought forth: one Lucius (that was also a Christian) seeing the
sentence given contrary to all reason, said to Vrbicius What reason is it (O
Vrbicius) that thou should condemn this man for confessing the name of
Christ: which has committed neither adultery: neither fornication: neither
manslaughter, neither theft: neither robbery: neither any wicked offense, that
he may justly be charged vvithall. Thy Judicial sentences do become neither
Pius the Emperor: neither the philosopher the son of Caesar: neither the
sacred Senate. Vrbicius aunsvvering nothing to these things said to Lucius:
and thou seem to me, to be such a one. Lucius answered: I am so, and he
commanded him forthwith to be brought forth to the place of execution. For
this, Lucius thanked Lucius martyred.
him, and said that by this means he should be delivered, from such wicked
masters, and go unto a gracious God, his father, and King. After this a third
stepped forth which suffered the like. In the end Justinius concludes with y^
rehersall of that which we remembered before, saying: And I look for no other,
then that I be betrayed by some one of them, that are called philosophers.

CAP. XVIII.
Of the works and writings of Justinius

IVstinus has leaft unto the posterity many monuments, of his instructed
mind, and right understanding: full of all kind of profitt, unto the which we
refer the studious readers, and withal we will note such as came to our
knowledge. first: a supplication unto Antoninus Pius: and his sons: and to
the Romayne Senate: in the defense of our doctrine. Again: an Apology unto y^
said Emperors successor, by sirnam^ Antoninus Verus, whose time we presently
do prosecute. He wrote also against the Gentiles: where at large he disputes
many questions, both of ours, and the heathenish philosophers doetrinet of the
nature of spirits, altogether impertinent for this our present purpose. He
wrote an other book also against the Gentiles, entitled a confutation or
reprehension. After that of the monarchy of God, collected not only out of
the sacred Scriptures, but also out of profane writers. Next one entitled:
Psaltes. An other: of the soul, as by way of annotation, alleging diuers^
questions, and many opinions of the heathen philosophers, differring the
consutation and his definitive sentence, until an other place. Lastly of all
he wrote a dialogue against the Jews disputing at Ephesus with Tryphon, then
a famous Doctor among the Jews, where he beela^eth how the mercifulnes of God
brought him to the knowledge of the true faith: how he diligently studied
philosophy: and earnestly sought after the truth. In that dialogue of the
Jews, declaring their spite against the doctrine of Christ he inueieth
against Tryphon thus: You have not only hardened your selves from repentance,
but have sent chosen men from Jerusalem, which should pass through out the
world, and pronounce: that there was a certain Christian Heresy spronge,
slaunderinge us as the rest do, which know us not, so that thereby you
proved your selves authors of falsehood, not only to The gift of prophecye
was in Justinius, and Irenaeus time^ Irenaeus li. 5. Irenaeus li. 4. cap. 14.
Erasmus no^ without caus^ suspecteth this opinion of Irenaeus in his prologue
to the fif^ book of Irenaeus. Anno Domini. 171. Soter b. of Rome. Agryppas
byshope of Alexandria. Cap. 20. after the Greek. Teophilus b. of Antioch Cap.
21. after the Greek. Egesippus. Dionysius. Pinytus. Philippus. Apolinarius
Meliton. etc. Cap. 22. after the greek.
your own people but to all other nations. He writes also, how that unto his
time the gift of prophecy flourished in the Church. He remembered the
revelation of John, plainly affirming: that it was the Apostles, he alleges
many places of the prophets, charging Tryphon: that the Jews rased them out
of the Bible. It is reported he wrote many other things, well known unto
diverse of the brethr^. His works of old, were in great reverence, Ir^^^^^ in
his fourth book remembers him, saying: Justinius writing against Marcion
says very well. Nether vvoulde I have believed in the Lord, if he had shevved
any other God, besides the ma^^^ of all things. And in his first book*
Justinius said well that before the coming of our Savior, S^tha^ durst not
blaspheme God, in so much he knevve not certainly of his condemnation before
that time. These things were needful to be noted: that the ^^^sous
might^^^^nestly embrar^ his works. so far concerning Justinius.

CAP. XIX.
The succession of Bishops in Rome, Alexandria, and Antioche.

IN y^ eight year of the said Emperors raygne, when as Anicetus had been
byshope of Rome eleven years: Soter succeeded. And in Alexandria after that
Celadion had governed fourteen years: Agryppas came in place* In the Church
of Antioche Theophilus was the sixth from the Apostles: Heroes the fifth:
Cornelius the fourth.

CAP. XX.
What ecclesiastical persons flourished at that time

IN those days Egesippus flourished in the Church, one of the most ancient:
and Dionysius byshope of Corinthe: and Pinytus byshope of Creta: Philippus:
Apollinarius: Meliton: Musanus: Modestus: but specially Irenaeus. of all which
number, there are monuments leaft in writing unto the posterity of their
Apostolic traditions and sound faith.

CAP. XXI.
By the report of Egesippus he declares what uniform consent in relligion,
there was in that age, and who of old were authors of sects and heresies.

EGesippus in his five books, left unto the posterity a full remembrance of
him, where he declares that coming to Rome, and conferringe with many
byshopes: he found them all of one mind, and the same doctrine: we have also
to understand of the worthy report alleged by him toutching the Epistle of
Clemens, written unto the Corinthia^s saying: The church Egesippus.
of Corinthe remained in the pure and right rule of doctrine, unto the time of
Primus bishop there, with whom (meaning the Corinthians) sailing to Rome, I
conferred: and abode many days: and was conforted very much by reason of them
and their doctrine. Being come Thebulis through ambition became an heretic.
Simon. Cleobius. Dositheus. Gorthaeus. Masbothaei. Menandrianists. Marcionists.
Carpocratians. Valentinians Basilidians. Saturnilians. Essaeans. Galilaeans.
Hemerobaptists. Masbothaea^s Samaritans. Saduces. Pharisees. The Gospel after
the Hebrews, and Syrians. Proverbs of Solomon. Apocrypha published by
heretics. Cap. 23. after the greek.
to Rome, I stayed there until that Anicetus was stalled bishop, whose Deacon
was Eleutherius whom Sother succeeded, and after him Eleutherius. In all
their successions, and in every one of their Cities: it is no otherwise then
the law, and prophets, and the Lord himself preached. The same author
recites y^ originalles of y^ heresies in his time writing thus: After that
Iacobus Iustus, had been martyred, in such sort as Christ himself was put to
death this uncle Simo^ Cleopas was chosen byshope, whom all preferred,
because that he was the Lords second kinsman, wherefore they called that
church a pure virgin, for as yet the deuell had not sovvne there any corrupt
seed of false doctrine. But Thebulis because he was not chosen bishop, went
about to corrupt the same, being partaker of the seven heresies where of one
is Simon, of whom the Simoniani: and Cleobius, of whom Cleobiani: and
Dositheus, of whom Dositheani: and Gorthaeus, of whom Gorthaeani: and
Masbothaei, of whom spronge the Menandrianists: Marcionists: Carpocratians:
Valentinians: Basilidians: and Saturnilians, whereof every one has set a
broche, a proper and several opinion. Of these sprang the false christ's: the
false prophets: the falseapostles: renting a sunder the Church with their
false doctrine directed against God, and Christ our Savior. The same author
describes likewise yt old heresies of the Jews, saying: There were in the
time of the circumcision sundry sects among the children of Israel, varying
in opinions, and set opposite against the tribe of Judah, and Christ, namely
these: the Essaeans* the Galilaea^s: the Hemerobaptistes: the Masbothaeans:
the Samaritans: the Sadduces, the Pharisees. diverse other things he writes
of, the which have been partly remembered of us before, and applies to their
proper and peculier places. Afterward he makes relation of the Gospel after
the Hebrews, and Syrians, and severally of certain Hebrew dialectes: and
that (...) mean^s of the Hebrews, he attained unto the Christian faith: with
a recital of other unwritten traditions of the Jews* Moreover Egesippus, and
yet not only he but also Irenaeus, with the whole assembly and company of the
elders ^ have termed the proverbs of Solomon, wisdom it self, replenished
with all kind of virtue and godliness, and by occasion, reasoninge of the
Scriptures called Apocrypha he said that in his time, diverse of them were
published by Heretics. hereof thus much, now to that which by order of
history we are bound unto.

CAP. XXII.
Of Dionysius Bishop of Corinthe* and his Epistles.

FIrst we have to speak of Dionysius* who being bishop of Corinthe freely
communicated his divine and godly labor and industry not only to such as were
his charge, but also to strangers, showing himself most profitable unto all
people, by those, Catholic epistles which he directed unto the Churches. of
which number is that epistle written by him unto the Lacedaemonians* containing
ye right institution of christian peace, and unity, Moreover his epistle wrytt
unto the Athenians stirs the minds of faithful men unto the embracing of
the truth, and evangelical conversation of life: rep^en^endeth the
gainesayers and despisers thereof: charge diverse of them, that they were now
in manner fallen from the faith: although Publius there bishop Publius a
Martyr. Quadratus Dionysius Areopagita 1. b. of Athens.
in their time had there been martyred. He remembers Quadratus the successor
of Publius (after his martyrdom in the byshoprick) and testifies of him, that
by his means they were united, and stirred to the faith. He shows moreover
how that Dionysius Areopagita converted unto the faith, according unto that
which is written in the Acts of the Apostles* was by Paul placed the first
bishop of Athens. There is extant also an other epistle of his unto the
Nicomedians, where repugninge the heresy of Marcion: he fortifieth the right
rule of faith. And unto the Church of the Gortynenses, together with other
congregations throughout Creta he writes: commending Philip there byshope, for
that the Church committed unto his charge was beautified and bedecked Philip.
by the proof of many virtuous properties: warninge withal that they should
avoid the wilfulnes of perverse heretics. And writing to the Church of
Amastris together with the rest throughout Pontus: he mentions Bachilides,
and Elpistus, at whose instant motion he wrote: Bachilides. Elpistus. Galma.
and Galma there bishop: interlacing expositions of sundry places of Scripture.
He admonishes them at large toutching marriage and virginitie^ commaundinge
also to receive after repentance such as fell, how soever it happened, either
of purpose, or by heretical persuasion. Unto this there is annexed an epistle
unto the Gnosij, where their byshope Pinytus is admonished not to charge
Pinytus. Vowed chastity forbidden.
necessarily the brethren, with the grievous burden of vowed chastity: but to
have consideration of the frail imbecility of many natures. unto the which
epistle Pinytus making answer extolleth and commends Dionysius, yet again
by way of admonition requires, that stronger meat being delivered, he fead
the flock committed unto his charge, with more absolute and profound doctrine,
least that they lingering in their milkesoppes, and smothe exhortacions, wax
old through negligence, in childish nurture. In the which epistle of Pinytus
the right rule of faith: diligent care for the salvation of his flock:
discretion also and understanding of holy scripture, is lively set forth. last
of all there remains an epistle of Dionysius unto the Romans, namely unto
Soter their bishop Dionysius writes of the Romans then: if he were now to
write he could tell an other tale.
whereof if we allege some part it shall not seem impertinent, where he
commends the Roman manner observed unto the persecution of our time,
writing thus: It has been your accustomed manner, even from the beginning:
diuersely to benefitt all the brethren, and to send relief throughout the
city, supplying the want of the poor by refreshing them in this sort, and
specially the want of the brethren appointed for slauishe drudgerie, and
digging of mettalls, you Romans, of old do retain the fatherly affection of
Rome, which holy Soter your bishop not only observed, but also augmented,
ministringe large and liberal relief to the use of the saints: embracing
lovingly the converted brethren, as a father does his sons, with exhortation
of wholsome doctrine. Here also he remembers y^ epistle of Clemens written to
the Corinthians, showing the same of ancient custom, to have been read in the
Church, for thus be writes Dionysius reads in the Church of Corinthe the
epistle of the Church of Rome, and of Clemens. Dionysius complains that
heretics corrupted his epistles. Cap. 24. after the greek.
We have this day solemnized the holy sunday, in the which we have read your
epistle and alvvaies will for instructions sake, even as we do the former of
Clemens written unto us. The same author reports of his own epistles that
they were patched, and corrupted in these words: When I was entreated of the
brethren to write, I vvrote certain Epistles, but the messengers of Satan
have sown them with tares, pulling away some, putting to other some, whose
condemnation is laid up for certain. no marvel then though some endeavored to
corrupt the sacred Scriptures of God, when as they went about to counterfett
such vvrytinges of so small authority. Yet be sides all these, there is found
an other epistle of Dionysius to Chrysophora a faithful sister, where, as it
was most mete, he ministers unto her spiritual food convenient for her
calling. thus much toutching Dionysius.

CAP. XXIII.
Of Theophilus bishop of Antioche, and his works

OF Theophilus bishop of Antioch before mentioned: there are found three books
of Eleme^tall Theophilus.
Institutions, dedicated unto Antolicus. again an other entitled: Against the
heresy of Hermogenes, where he alleges many testimonies out of the
revelation of Saint John. there are also certain other books of his,
entitled: of Institutions, but there was never no greater plague or pestilence,
then the poison of heretics: which then infected after the manner of tares,
the true seed of Apostolic doctrine. whom the pastors of the Churches
repelled from the flock of Christ, as if they had been certain sauadge beasts,
partly by adinomtions and exhortations unto the brethren: partly also by
encountering with the heretics them selves: sometimes disputing and
questioning with them face to face, to the utter overthrow of their trifling
fantasies and sometimes by their written commentaries, diligently confuting by
way of reprehension their fond opinions. Among whom Theophilus together with
others which then labored against the^, was counted famous, who also wrote a
book leaueling at Marcion, the which we know together with the rest, at this
day to be exta^t. after the desease of this Theophilus, Maximinus being the
Maximinus b. of Antioche Anno Domini 179. cap. 25. after the greek
7. from the Apostles, succeeded him in the Church of Antioche.

CAP. XXIIII.
Of Philip bishop of Gortyna, Irenaeus, and Modestus.

PHilip whom by the report of Dionysius we have learned to have been bishop
of the Church Philip. Irenaeus. Modestus.
of Gortyna: wrote a most exquisite tract against Marcion. so did Irenaeus, and
Modestus which of all others chiefly detected his error unto the world. so did
sundry other learned men, whose books are yet to be seen with diverse of the
brethren.

CAP. XXV. Cap. 26. after the greek.

Of Melito bishop of Sardis in Asia, and his works.

About this time Melito bishop of Sardis, and Apollinarius bishop of
Hierapolis flourished, Melito and the cataloge of his books
who both wrote unto the Emperor of Rome then raygning, several books, and
Apologies, in the behalf of our faith: whereof these of Melito his doings,
came to our hands 2. books of Easter. of Politic conversation, and the
Prophets. of the church. of the sundaye. of the nature of man. of the molde of
man. of the obedience of faith of the senses. Moreover: of the body, and soul.
also of our regeneration, or nevvbirth. of the truth* of the faith, and the
nativity of Christ. likewise a book of his: of prophecy. of the soul, and
body* of hospitality. And a book entitled: a key an other: of the deuell. an
other: of the revelation of Saint John, and of God incarnate. last of all a
book dedicated unto Antoninus. In his book of Easter he declares the time
when he wrote it, beginning thus: In the time of Seruilius Paulus proconsul of
Asia, what time Sagaris suffered martyrdom, and the great stir was moved at
Laodicea, tourchinge the Melito in his book of Easter. Sagaris martyred. Apece
of the Apology of Melito unto the Emperor.
Sabbath, which then by reason of the time fell out, these things were
vvrytten of this book Clemens Alexandrinus made mention, in a several tracte
which he wrote of Easter, and purposely (as he testifies himself) by occasion
of Melito his book. In his Apology unto the Emperor he reports the things
practiced against the Christians, writing thus: The godly people grened, by
reason of nevve edictes, published throughout Asia and before never practiced:
now suffer persecution. for impudent Sycophantes, and greedy gapers after
other men's goods, having gotten occasion through those proclamations: openly
robb and spoil, day and night, such as committee no trespass at all. And
after a few lines he says: If this be done through your procureme^t, let it
stand for good. for the Emperor that is just, never puts in practice any
unjust thing, and we willingly will bear away the honor of this death, yet
this only we humbly crave of your highness, that you (after notice and trial
had of the authors of this contention) do justly give sentence, whether they
are worthy of death and punishment, or of lif and quietness. but if this be
not your majesty's pleasure, and the nevve edicte proceed not from your power
and authority, (which were not seemly to be set forth against barbarian
enemies) the rather we pray you, that you despise us not, which are grieved
and oppressed, with this common and shameful spoil. Again to these he
adds: The philosophy now in aestimation amongst Christian religion began
to be made manifest in the time of Augustus, for then Christ was borne.
us, first flourished among the Barbarians. for when as it flourished under the
great dominion of Augustus, your forefather of famous memory, it fell out to
be a most fortunate success unto your empire. For thence forvvardes unto this
day, the Roman empire increased and enlarged it self with great glory,
whose successor now you are, greatly beloved: and have been long wished
for: and will be together with your son continually prayed for. retain
therefore this religion, which increased with the empire, which began with
Augustus, which was reverenced of your auncetors, before all other religions.
This was a great argument of a good beginning, for since that our doctrine
flourished together with the happy beginning empire: no misfortune befell unto
it from the raygne of Augustus unto this day: but of the contrary all
prosperous, and gloriouse, and gladsome, as every man wished him self. Only
of all others Nero, and Domitian, through the persvvasion of certain envious,
and dispitefull persons: were disposed to bring our doctrine into hatred. From
whom this sclaunder of flattering persons, raised against the Christians
sprung up, after a brutishe manner or custom. but your godly auncetors
corrected their blind ignorance, and rebuked oftentimes by their epistles,
their sundry rash enterprises. Of which number Adrianus your graundefather,
is known to have written both unto Fundanus Proconsul, and President of
Asia, and to many others. And your father (yours, I say, in that you governed
all things together with him) vvrote unto the cities in our behalf, and unto
the Larissaeans, Thessalonians, Athenians, and to all the Grecians: that they
should innouate nothing, nether practice any thing prejudicial unto the
Christians. but of you we are fully persuaded to obtain our humble
petitions, in that your opinion, and sentence is correspondent unto that of
your predecessors, yea and that more gracious, and far more religious. Thus
as ye read, he wrote in the aforesaid book. And in his Proeme to his
annotations of the old Testamente, he recites the cataloge of the books of
the old Testament, then certain and canonical (the which necessarily we
have annexed) writing thus: Meliton unto the brother Onesimus sends
greeting: Melito writes unto Onesimus of the canonical Scripture of the old
testament.
Whereas oftentimes (you being inflamed with earnest zeal toward our
doctrine) have requested of me, to select certain annotations out of the law
and prophets, concerning our Savior, and our whole religion: and again to
certify you of the sum of the books, contained in the old testament,
according unto their number, and order of placinge: now at length I (being
mindful heretofore also of your petitions) have been careful to perform
that you look for, knovving your endeuer, your care and industry in setting
forth the doctrine of faith, marching forwards with love toward God, and
care of everlasting salvation, which you prefer before all other things.
When that I traueled into the east and was there, where these things were
both preached and put in practice: I compiled into order the books of the old
testament, such as were well known, and sent them unto you, whose names
are these: The five books of Moses: Genesis, Exodus, Leuiticus, Numeri,
Deuteronomium. Then Jesus Naue, the Judges, the book of Ruth, four books of
kings, two of Cronicles, the Psalms of David, the Proverbs of Solomon, the
book of VVisdome, Ecclesiastes, the Canticles, Job, Esaias, and Jeremy the
Prophets. on book of the twelve prophets, Daniel, Ezechiel, Esdras. upon the
which we have written six books of commentaries. Thus far Meliton.

CAP. XXVI. These. 2. chapters in the Greek were one.

Of the writings of Apollinarius, and Musanus.

Although there were many volumes written by Apollinarius, yet these only
came to our Apollinarius
hands. A book unto the foresaid Emperor. five books against the gentiles,
2. books of the truth. 2 books against the Jews. and such books as
afterward he wrote against the Phrygian heresy, which not long after waxed
stale, then first buddinge out, when as Montanus together with his false
prophetisses ministered principles of Apostasy. so far of him. Montanus the
heretic. Musanus. Encratitis. Tatianus.
Musanus also spoken of before, wrote a certain excellent book entitled:
Unto the brethren, lately fallen into the heresy of the Encratits, which then
newely had sprung, and molested mankind, with a strange and perniciouse kind
of false doctrine, the author whereof is said to be Tatianus.

CAP. XXVII.
Of Tatianus and his heresy.

WE mean that Tatianus, whose testimony a little before, we have alleged
toutchinge the renoumed Justinius, whom also we have reported to have been the
Martyrs disciple. The same does Irenaeus declare in his first book against
heresies, writing of him and his heresy thus: Out of the schole of Saturninus
and Marcion sprange the Heretics Irenaeus li. 1. cap. 30. 31. Saturniani.
Marcionitae.
whom they call Encratits (that is to say continent persons) who taught that
mariadg was to be abhorred, contemning the ancient shape and molde of man,
framed of God and so by sequel, reprehending him that made the generation of
man and woman. Again they have commanded abstinence from living creatures,
for so they call them, shevving themselves ungrateful toward God, which
made all things for the use of man. They deny that the first man was saved
and this blasphemy lately spronge up, Tatianus being original thereof. who
Tatianus.
vvhilest that he was the auditor of Justinius, revealed no such thing, but
after his Martyrdom, falling from the Church, and being puffed up with
presumptuous estimation and self opinion of Doctorship, as though he passed
all others: invented a self and a several character or manner of Doctrine. he
dreamed of certain invisible worlds, with the Valentinians, preachinge of
Valentiniani.
mariadge and corruption, and fornication as Marcion, and Saturninus had done
before, calling into controversy of himself the salvation of Adam. This does
Irenaeus write in the place before cyted, and a little after thus: One Seuerus
revived the foresaid heresi, and became an author Seuerus. Seueriani.
unto his followers that of him they were called Seueriani. These receive y^
Law, the Prophets and the Gospells: they expound names of holy Scripture, as
pleases them best: they revile the Apostle Paul: they reject his Epistles:
they deny the Acts of the Apostles. there first author was Tatianus, who
patched together, I wot not what kind of mingle mangled consonancy of the
Gospells and termed it Diatessaron, which as yet is to be seen of many. some
report that he presumed Diatessaron.
metaphrastically to alter the words of the Apostle, correcting as it were the
order of the phrase. He left in writing unto the posterity a great number of
commentaries, but of all the rest that book of his, against the Gentiles is
recounted famous, and taken for the best, and most profitable: Tatianus though
an heretic yet wrote ^e a learned book against the Gentiles.
where mention is made of the former times, with a bold protestation, that
Moses and the Prophets among the Hebrews, were far more ancient, the^ the
famous men among the Gentiles, and thus stood these things then.

CAP. XXVIII.
Of Bardesanes a syrian, and his books.

Under the raygne of the same Emperor, when heresies increased, a certain man
in Mesapotamia by name Bardesanes, being very eloquent and skillful in logic:
published in Bardesanes a Syrian.
writing in the Syrian tongue, Dialogues together with other books, against
Marcion, and other graundeheretickes. the which certain learned men (whereof
he had then a great number to his disciples, his gift of utterance did so
pass) translated from the Syrian into the Greek tongue, of which books, that
dialogue entitled of Desteny, and dedicated unto Antoninus the Emperor, is of
great force. The report goes that he wrote many other books, by occasion of
the persecution raised in those times. This man was first schooled by
Valentinus, but afterward reprehendinge and condemning his fabulous dreams:
transformed and altered himself of his own accord embracing the sounder
sentence, and yet scarcely so, washed he altogether away the spotts of the
former heresy. About this time Soter bishop of Rome departed this life. Anno.
179.


The end of the fourth book.
THE FIFTE BOOK OF THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORYE OF EVSEBIVS PAMPHILVS BISHOP
OF CAESAREA IN PALAESTINA.
The proeme.
How that Eleutherius succeeded Soter in the seae of Rome. the difference
between the ecclesiastical and profane history. he purposes to write of
martyrs.

SOter when he had been bishop of Rome eight years finished his mortal race,
whom Eleutherius the twelfth from the Apostles succeeded. And then was it the
seuenteneth year of the raygne of Antoninus Verus the Emperor. In which
Eleutherius* b. of Rome. Anno Domini. 179.
time sedition being raised throughout the Cities, and vehement persecution in
all parts of the world increased against us: we may easily conjecture, how
many milllions of martyrs suffered throughout the world, by such as happened
unto one nation, which for most true and, everlasting memory, has been
thought worthy the wrytinge, and is printed for the posterity. And although we
have hereheretofore compiled a book of martyrs in most ample wise, reciting
the catalogue of them, and yet not only the hystoricall narration, but also
enterlacing matters of doctrine: nevertheless we mind not presently to omit
any thing that may seem pertinent unto this our history which we have now in
hand. Other historiographers have carefully considered, only to commit to
letters warlicke victories and noble triumphs against the enemies, valiant
enterprises of captains, notable courage of armed soldiers, bespotted with
blood and innumerable slaughters of tender sucklings, committed for country
and substance sake: But this our history contains a policy grateful unto
God, most peaceable wars for the quietness of the soul, for the truth of
conscience rather the^ trial for our country, for godly favor, rather the^
worldly frendshipp. It contains the valiant constancy of champions, buckling
and wrestling for the truth, the most victorious fortitude and triumphs
against fiery fiendes of hell, the upper hand of our unvisible adversaries, to
be short it pronounces for all these, crowns of everlasting memory.

CAP. I.
Of the martyrdom of Saints, and cruel persecution in France, under
Antoninus Verus the Emperor.

IT was the country of France, wherein the theater of this wrastlinge (before
mentioned) lay. whose chief cities and most frequented in respect of the rest
in the same region are Lions and Vienna. Through both which Cities the river
Rhodanus does run compassinge that whole country. The holy Churches there,
sent this letter toutching their martyrs, unto the Churches throughout Asia and
Phrygia, making relation of their affairs after this manner.

The servant of Christ inhabiting Vienna and Lions Cities of France, unto
The epistle of the french me^ unto the Churches of Asia, and Phrygia.
the brethren throughout Asia, and Phrygia, obtaining with us the same faith
and hope of redemption: peace and grace and glory from God the father, and
Christ Jesus our Lord be multiplied.
When they had premised certain things by way of preamble, they follow
after in these words: The greatness of this our tribulation, the furious rage
of the Gentiles against the Saints, and what things the blessed martyrs have
suffered: we are able exactly, neither to express by word, nor comprehend
in writing. The adversary with all might possible, applied himself shevving
tokens of his preparatiues and disposed entrance to persecution, and passing
throughout all places acquainted and instructed, his lymmes, to strive against
the servants of God: so that only we were not banished our houses, bathes,
and common market places: but altogether, every one of us straightly charged
not to shevve his face* yet the grace of God vvithstoode him, delivering the
vveakelinges, vphoulding certain others of the contrary, as sure and
immovable pillars which through their sufferance were able not only to
repel the violence of the despitefull adversary, but also to provoke him,
patiently abiding all kind of sclaunder, and punishment. To be short vveyinge
great torments for small trifles: they hastened unto Christ, declaring as
truth is: that the passions of these present times, are not vvorthie of the
Romans ^.
glory, which shall be revealed unto us. And first of all, they bare manfully
all such vexations as the clustered multitude laid upon them: exclamations,
scurginges, draggings, spoiling, stoninge, fettring, and the like whatsoever
the heady and sauadge multitude accustometh to practice against their professed
enemies. next being ledd unto the open market place, and examination had: they
were comdempned in presence of the people by the Tribune, and the other chief
potentates of the city, and cast into prison, until the presidentes coming.
After that, when they were brought before the president which had exercised
all kind of extreme cruelty against us: Vegetius Epagathus one of the
brethren having fulness of love toward Vegetius Epagathus martyred. Luke.
1.
God, and man, whose conversation was so perfect, Although a yongeman, yet
thought comparable with Zachary the Priest, for he vvalked unblameable in
all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord, and very serviceable
toward his neighbors, having great zeal and feruencie of the spirit of
God: allowed not of the sentence unjustly pronounced against us, but with
vehement motion required, that audience might be given him to plead for the
brethren, that we had committed no impiety. which being denied him (for he
was a noble man) of such as compassed the tribunal seat, and of the
president rejecting this just petition, and only demaundinge whether he was
a Christian: confessed it with a lovvde voice, and so he was received into
the fellovvshipe of the Martyrs and called the advocate of the Christians. for
he having the spirit which is the comforter, in greater abundance then
Zachary, declared the fulness of love that was in him, in that he spared
not his life, in the defense of the brethren. he was and is the true disciple
of Christ, follovvinge the lamb vvhither soever he goes. the other
foremartyres stirred up by this example hasten them selves unto Martyrdom, and
are become liuelyer, and readyer, accomplishinge Ten fell in persecution.
the confession of Martyrdom with all cherefullnesse of mind. there were
certain others found unready, less exercised, and as yet vveake, not of
abylitie to bear the burden of so weighty a combat* (in number ten):
which fell through the frailtye of the flesh, to our great heuinesse and
sorovvefull lamentation, quaylinge the cherefullnes of others, which were not
as yet apprehended, but accompanied the Martyrs, what torments soever befell
them, and severed not them selves from them. Then trembled we all for fear,
and that greatly because of the uncertainty of confessions: not terrified
with any torments, but careful for the end, least that any shrinked and
fell from the faith. daily there were apprehended such as were worthy to
fulfill the number of the fallen vveakelinges: so that out of both these
Churches as many as ruled and bare the greatest svvaye were taken, and
executed, and vvithall certain of the Ethnickes being our servants were
taken, (for the president had commanded publicly, a general inquisition to
be made for us) who being overcome by the subtle sleyghtes of Satan, and
terrified with the sight of the torments which the saints suffered,
through the persvvasion of the soldiers egginge Sclaunders raised against the
Christians.
them forevvardes: feigned against us and reported: that we used the
feastinges of Thiestes and the incest of Oedipus, with diverse other crimes
which may neither godly bethoughte upon, neither with modesty be uttered,
neither without impiety be believed. These things now being bruted abroad,
every body was moved and incensed against us, in so much that they which for
familiarity sake used moderation before, now were exceadingly moved and
madd with us. then was that saying of our Savior fulfilled, to vvete: the
time will come, when as every one that sleyeth you, shall think that
therein he does John. 16.
God good service. then suffered the holy Martyrs such torments as tongue
can not express. Sanctus a Deacon. Maturus a late convert.
And Satan provoked them with all might possible, to utter some blasphemy,
greatly was the whole rage both of people, and presidente, and soldiers set
against Sanctus, Deacon of the Church of Vienna: and against Maturus, lately
baptized, yet a noble vvarrier: and against Attalus a Pergamenian, who was
alvvayes a pillar and fortress of our faith: Blandina a woman. 1. Corinthians. 1.
and against Blandina a woman, by whom Christ shevved that those things
which in the sight of men appear vile, base, and contemptible, deserve
great glory with God, for the true love they bare toward him in deed,
without boasting in shevve. when as we all quaked for fear, yea and her
carnal mystres (which also was one of the persecuted Martyrs) very careful
least that peradventure at the time of her aunsvvere, by reason of the
frailetye of the flesh, she should not persevere constant: Blandina was so
replenished with grace Blandina shows great patience in her torments.
Blandina confesses her self to be a Christian. Sanctus shows great
patience.
from above, that the executioners which tormented her by turns, from morning
to night, faynted for vverynesse, and ceased confessing them selves overcome:
and that they were no longer able to plague her, with any more punishments:
marueling, that as yet she drew breath having her whole body rent in pieces,
and the wounds open: they confessing vvithall, that one of these torments
was of force sufficient, to costher her life, much the more, so many, and so
great. but this blessed woman, like a noble vvrastler, was renewed at her
confession, for as often as she pronounced: I am a Christian, nether have we
committed any evil: she was recreated, refreshed, and felt no pain of her
punishment. Sanctus also bare noblye, and valiantly, yea above the strength of
man all such vexations, as man could devise. when as the wicked in
compass, by reason of his great passion, and torments, hade well hoped to
have hard some indecent, and uncomely speech, out of his mouth: his
constancy was so great, that he uttered neither his own name, neither his
kyndred, neither the country whence he was, nor whether he were bond or
free, but unto every question he ansvvered in the Romayne tongue: I am a
Christian. thus confessed he often instead of all Sanctus confesses him self
a Christian.
other things: of his name, and City, and kindred, neither could the
Gentyles get any other language of him. Wherefore the president and the
tormentors were fearcely set against him. And when as now there remained
no punishment unpracticed, at length they applied unto the tenderest parts of
his body, plates of brass glovving hott, which fried, seared, and scorched
his body, yet he Remained immovable, nothing amazed, and constante in his
confession, being strengthened and moystened with the dew which fell from
the celestial fountain of the water of life, gushinge out of the womb of
Christ. his body A notable saying of Sanctus.
bare vvittnesse of the burning* for over all his body his flesh was
vvounded, his members bescarred, his sinevves shrinked, so that the natural
shape and outvvarde hevve was quite changed, in whom Christ suffering,
obtained inspeakeable glory, conqueringe Satan and leauinge an example for the
instruction of others: that no tormente is terrible where the father is
beloved, no lamentation loathsome where Christ is gloryfied. when as the
wicked tormentors a fevve days after, had brought him to the place of
tormente, and well hoped, that if they punished him now (having his whole
body pufte up with swelling and festred wounds, so sore, that it might not
be toutched, no not with the least finger) they should overcome him, and
prevail: or if that he died in tormente, they should terrify the reast, and
so vvarne them to take heed: none of all these hapened unto him, but beyond
all man's expectation, in the later torments his body was released of the
pain, recovered the formershape, and the members were restored to their
former use, so that the second plague through the grace of Christ, was no
grievous malady, but a present medicine. Again Satan goinge about blasphemously
to sclaunder us, procured Biblis a woman (one of Biblis a woman pitiously
tormented.
them which had faynted before) to be brought forth, supposing her frail and
fearful mind, now to be quite altered from the Christian oppinion, and
consequently through her blasphemous denial, to be in danger of dampnation:
she then at the very hour of torment, returned unto her self, and vvakinge as
it were out of a dead sleep, by means of these punishments temperall,
considered of the pains eternal in hell fire: and unlooked for, cried out
unto the tormentors and said: how could they deuore infantes, which were
not suffered to suck the blood of brute beasts. For that she confessed her
self a Christian, she was appointed to take her chance among the Martyrs.
when that these tyrannical torments were taken away of Christ, through the
patience of the blessed saynctes: the deuell invented other mischiefs, to
vvete: the imprisoning of the saynctes in deep and dark dongeons, fettring of
them in the stocks, stretching their feet unto the fifth bored chinke, with
other punishments which furious ministers full of deuelis he rage, are wont
to putt in ure, and practice, upon poor prisoners. so that many were stisled
and strangled in prison, whom the Lord would have so to end this life, and
to shevve his glory. The saints being thus sore vvounded which seemed not
Many of the Martyrs died in prison.
possibly to live, (if all man's help and medicine were applied, thereunto,)
remained shutt up in close prison, destitute of all man's aid, only comforted
of the Lord, and confirmed in body and mind, so that they stirred up and
cherished the rest. the younger sort that were newly apprehended, whose
bodies had not before tasted of the lashe of the vvhippe, lothed the closeness
of the prison, and were choked up with stinche. blessed Pothinus to whom
the Pothinus. b. of lions after great torments is cast into prison where after
2. days he departeh this life.
charge of the by shopes seae of Lions was committed being above four score
and ten year old, vveake of body, scarce able to dravve breath: because of
the imbecilitie of nature, creping on apace and being strengthened with
cherefulnesse of the spirit, for the conceived joy of martyrdom which he
desired: was brought forth before the tribunal seat, faint in body, for
that he was old and sickly, his life being for this end reserved, that
Christ by the means of it might triumph. he was carried of the soldiers and
laid before the tribunal seat, accompanied with the potentates of the
city, and the whole multitude, diversely shoutinge, as if he had been Christ,
he has given a good testimony: and being demanded of the president who is
the God of the Christians, ansvvered: if thou become vvorthie, thou shalt
understand. after this answer he was cruelly handled, and suffered many
stripes, for such as were nerest unto him pricked at him with the hand, and
spurned him with the foot, reuerencinge his years nothing at all: and such
as stood a far of, look what each one hade in his hand, that was
thrown at his head, and such as ceased from pouringe out their poysened
malice, thought them selves to have greeuosly offended, supposinge by this
means, to revenge the ruin of their rotten Gods. but he almost breathless
is thrown into prison, where after two days, he departed this life. here
was shevved the great providence of almightye God, and the infinite mercy of
Jesus Christ, though very seldom outwardly appearing unto the A comparison or
difference between such as faynted and such as continwed faithful in
persecution.
brethren, yet never destitute of the power of Christ. and as many as faynted
in the first persecution, were all a like imprisoned and partakers of the
affliction, nether did they prevail or the denial profitt them, it was
thought a sufficient fault that they confessed to have been such: but these,
as murderers, and heinous trespassers, were twice more grievously plagued.
the joy of martyrdom, the hoped promises, the love toward Christ, and the
fatherly spirit comforted the one company: the other, vexed in conscience, so
that their outvvarde countenance bevvrayed there inward apostasy: they went
cheerful, with a great majesty and grace, their fetters becominge them as
the skirtes of the nevve married spouses, garnished with sundry colors, and
laid over with gold, and with all yelding a Christian fragrant smell, so
that many supposed their bodies to have been outwardly perfumed: but the other
all sadd and sorovvful, as vile, and abject caytifs, misshapen creatures, full
of all deformity, derided of the Gentiles the^ selves, deserving death, as
degenerating covvardes, destitute of the most precious, and glorious, and
lively name of Christiantie, with the sight hereof many were confirmed, so
that suddenly being apprehended without stay protested their faith, not hindered
with one thought of deuelishe persvvasion. A little after in the said Epistle
thus it follows: After these things the forms of martydome are framed, and
divided into diverse sorts, for of many fair colored and svvete smelling
flovvers, they offered unto God the father, one well tvvisted, and compacted
crown or garland. it behooved noble champions, having borne the brunte of so
variable a combatt, and gotten a magnificall victory, to triumph with an
incorruptible crown of immortality. Maturus then, and Sanctus, and Blandina,
and Attalus, were ledd unto the brute beasts, in the popular and public
spectacle of the Heathenish inhumanitie, even at the day appointed of set
purpose by our men for so beastly a buckling. where again, Maturus, and
Sanctus were diversely tormented, with all kind of punishments, as if they
had suffered nothing before, yea rather (as it were with many nevve means)
repellinge the aduersarye, they bear the victorious garlande, suffringe again
all the wonted reuilinges, all the cruelty of the sauadge beasts, and
whatsoever the outrageous multitude craved and commanded in compass, and
above all, they patiently suffered the iron chair, where in their bodies boiled
as in a frienge pan, filling such as were present with there loathsome
sauore of that fulsome froth neither were they thus contented but practiced
further to overcome the pacient sufferaunce of the saynctes. neither could
they get any other sentence of Sanctus, save that confession Maturus and
Sanctus beheaded.
which he cried at the first. At length when that these saynctes hade
endured this great and grievous trial, they were slain, after that all
that, day long they hade been made a spectacle unto this world, in that
variable combatt, as commonly it falls Blandina hanged in gibbets so low,
that the wild beasts might reach her.
out in equal matches. but Blandina was hanged in chains, an obiecte for the
vvilde beasts, to exercise their sauadge violence upon, no doubt so done by
the ordinance of God, that she hanging in the form of a cross, might by her
incessant prayer, procure cheerfulness of mind, unto the Saints that
suffered: whereas they in that agony behoulding with outvvarde eye in their
sister, him that was crucified for them, might persuade the faithful, that
all such as suffer for Christ's sake, shall have fellowship with the living
God. after that she had honge a Blandina is cast into prison.
long while, and no beast toutched her, she is taken down, cast into
prison, and reserved for further torment, that being conqueror of many
combatts, she might provide for the crooked serpent, inexcusable condemnation,
and animate the brethren unto cheerfulness, putting on as a small, a vveake,
and contemptible person, the great, the strong, and invincible champion Christ
Jesus, obtaining through her diuerous, and manifold patience, the
incorruptible crown of glory. Attalus also a famous man was greatly desired
of the people unto punishment, who Attalus brought forth and clapped in prison.
being ready, and of a clear conscience, came forth, for he was notably
exercised in the Christian profession, alvvaies a fauorer, and furtherer of the
truth. therefore when he was led in compass of the Theater, with a scrole
before him, wherein was written in the Romayne tongue: This is Attalus the
Christian: and the people had raged against him, the President knovving that he
was a Romayne, commanded him to be imprisoned, and closely kept with the
other prisoners, concerning whom he had written unto Caesar, and expected an
answer. The mean time passing between, was neither vain, nor frutelesse,
for the infinite mercy of Christ Jesus our Savior, shined in the world,
through their patience. the dead by the living were revived: the martyrs
profited such as were no martyrs: the pure virgin, and mother the Church,
was greatly comforted, and cherished, when as she recovered and received for
living, such as Many that fell repented them again. Ezech. 16.
before she had lost as untimely birthes, and dead fruit. for many which
before had faynted, by their means were now molded, borne again, stirred
up a fresh, learned to protest their faith, and now being quickened, and
strengthened, having tasted of him which will not the death of a sinner, but
is merciful unto the penitent: they come forth before the tribunal seat,
ready to answer unto the interrogatories of the president. And because that
Caesar had commanded by vvriting that such as confessed them selves
Christians, should be executed, and such as renounced, should depart the
frequented solemnity (which by reason of the concourse of the Gentyles from
every country, was about the beginning very populous) he brought forth from
prison the blessed confessors into the open spectacle and presence of the
people, to be scornfully gased upon, and when he had again made inquisition
of them, as many as he found to be privileged persons of Rome, those he
beheadded, the rest he threvv to be re^t a sunder, and torn in pieces of
vvilde beasts. Christ was greatly glorified in them which at the first
denied, and at last, beyond all the expectation of the heathen, boldly
confessed their faith. They severally were examined, to be set at liberty, but
after confession they were coopled to the number of the martyrs. They tarried
without which never had grain of faith, no feeling of the wedding garment,
no sparckle of the fear of God, but rather through their wicked conversation
blasphemed the way of God, as sons of perdition. All the other were coopled
to the Christian congregation. and at the time of examination, Alexander a
Phrygian borne, professing physic, Alexander a Phisician comforts the
martyrs.
having dvvelled in France many years, a man well known for his great
zeal Godvvardes, and boldenes of speech (he was not without the gracious and
Apostolic gift) stood hard by the tribunal seat, and nigh the examined
persons, exhorting them to boldness of confession, by signs and tokens, so
that by his sorovving, and sighing, by his hopping, and skipping to and froe,
he was discryed of the standers by, and when the people in compass had taken
in ill part, that they which before had recanted, again did confess: with
one consent they cry out against Alexander, as author thereof. When the
President had urged him, and demanded of him what he was, he ansvvered: I am
a Christian. for which answer the President allotted him unto the beasts,
of them I say to be rent in pieces and devoured. The second day after,
together with Attalus, he is brought forth, for the President to gratify the
Alexander torn in pieces of wild beasts.
people delivered him unto the beasts to be bayted the second time. And when
these had tasted of all the torments provided for them in compass of the
scaffolde, and suffered great pain, in the end they were put to death. of
which number Alexander not once sighed, neither uttered any kind of speech,
but inwardly from the heart talked with God. Attalus burning in the scaulding
iron chair, glovving hott, so that the savor of his broyled body filled their
nostrells: Attalus fried to death.
spoke unto the multitude in the Romayne tongue: behold this is to devour
men, for we neither devour men, neither commit any other heinous offense. And
being demanded what name God had, answered: God is not called after the
manner of men. after all these things, upon the last day of the spectacles,
Blandina, together with Ponticus, (a young man of fifteen years of age) was
brought forth (which thing was daily used, to the end they might behoulde
the torments of the rest) whom they compelled to swear, by their Idols
names. but they constantly perseuering in their sentence, and contemning their
Idols, set the multitude in such a rage against them, that they tendered,
neither pitied, the years of the young man, nether spared the woman kind,
but plagued them with all punishment possible, and that in compass,
compelling them now and then to swear, which when they could not bring
to pass: Ponticus Ponticus of the years of 15. martyred.
being succored of the sister in presence of the Paganes, who then beheld
how that she exhorted and confirmed the young man: after that he had suffered
all kind of bitter torment, yielded up the ghost. last of all blessed
Blandina, like a noble mother, having exhorted her children and sent them
before, as Conquerours unto the King, pondering with her self all the
punishments of her children: hastened after them ioying and triumphing at her
end, as if she had been invited and laued to a wedding dinner, and not to be
cast among vvilde beasts. after scurging, after buckling with vvilde beasts,
after the broyling of her body as it were in a frying pan, at length she
was vvrapped in a net, and tumbled before a vvilde bull, which tossed her
with his horns to and froe, yet had she no feeling of all these, Blandina
beheaded.
her mind being fixed, and wholy set upon the conference which she had
with Christ, in the end she was beheaded: the Pagans them selves
pronouncing* that never any woman was heard of among them, to have suffered
so many and so great torments. nether so did they cease from their cruelty
and rage toward the Christians, for the savage and barbarous Gentyles being
provoked by a furious and beastly ^iende, could not quiet them selves, but
that their furious rage, practiced an other kind of malicious spyte upon the
dead carkases. neither were they pleased in that they were overcome, and
void of natural feeling and sense, but proceeded further, like brute beasts,
both President and people were furiously provoked, Apocalyp. 22.
prosecuting us with like hatred, that the Scripture might be fulfilled,
which says* he that is wicked, let him be wicked still, and he that is
just, let him work righteousness still. for as many as were choked up with
the noisome stinche of the prison, were thrown to be devoured of Dead
carkases thrown unto dogs
dogs, charging a continual vvatch, day and night, that none of them should
be buried of us and they gathering together the relics of the Martyrs bodies,
some vndeuoured of beasts, some unburned by fire, partly torn, and partly
burned, with the heads and stumpes of others uncovered with earth,
committed them for the space of many days, unto the custody of soldiers.
others fretted and ^umed, snarling at them, with the gnashing of their teeth,
seeking further reuengement of them. others derided and skoffed them,
magnifying their Idols as causers of this our calamity. And such as were of
a milder nature and somevvhat sorovved at our suffering, vehemently reviled,
and said: where is their God? and what profited them this religion, which
they preferred before their lives? and such was the variable and deuelish
disposition of the infidells, to our great sorrow, because that it was not
lavvfully permitted for us, to bury the dead bodies of the Martyrs. neither
stood the night unto us in any stead for that purpose, nether vvoulde the
keepers bow for money, neither bend at our prayer, but kept the bruised
carkases of the Saints, as if some great commodity grevve unto them, by
keeping them unburied. Again after a few lines, thus they write: To be short,
after that the bodies of the blessed Saints had been every kind of way
spitefully, and scornfully entreated, lying whole six days along unburied, at
length they were burned to ashes, the ashes also they gathered and scattered
The ashes of the burned bodies were throwe^ into the river Rhodanus to take
away the hope of the resurrection.
in the river Rhodanus which passed by, so that no jot, or relic thereof
should longer remain upon earth. this they did to the end they might
overcome God, and hinder the reviving of the Saints. lest that (as they said)
there should be any further hope of the resurrection, whereof (say they) the
Christians being fully persuaded, bring amongst us strange, and nevve
religion, they contemn punishment, and hasten them selves chearefully unto
death. Now let us see whether they can rise, and whether their God can
help, and deliver them from our hands.


CAP. II.
How the blessed Martyrs of God, rec^^^ed after rep^^^ance, such as fell in
(...)*

SUch were the calamities which happened unto the Churches of Christ, under the
said Emperor, whereby me may (...) by all likely hoode, what befell unto other
provinces. neither shall it be amiss, if out of the same epistle we allege
farther testimony, concerning The French men write thus of their martyrs.
Philip. 2.
the mercy and meekness of the foresaid Martyrs, written in this manner: They
were such followers of Christ (who when he was in the form of God,
thought no robbery to be equal with God) that being set in such a glory,
they suffered torments, neither once, nor tvvyse, but often, and again being
reskued from the beasts, having the prynt of hott irons, and skarres, and
wounds in their bodies, neither called they them selves Martyrs, neither
permitted others so to term them. but if any of us so named them in our
epistles, they sharply rebuked us, they The suffering of Christ is rather to be
termed (...) redemption. 1. Pet. 1. then (...) martyrdom. Who be martyrs and
who confessors.
attributed the name of martyrdom with full mind unto Christ, who was the
faithful and true Martyr, the first fruits of the dead, the guide unto life.
they called to mind their miserable torments, which ended the race and course
of this life with blessed martyrdom, and said: They now are Martyrs, whom
Christ voutchsafed to receive unto him by confession, and through the passage
of this persecuted life, to seal their martyrdom among the number of the
blessed Saints: but we are mean, and base, and humble confessors. they
beseached the brethren with vvatrish eyes, and vvett cheeks to pray
incessantly for their happy ends. they expressed lively the power of
martyrdom, while they resisted the Heathens with liberty and boldness,
shevving their noble courage through patience, their constancy without fear,
or trembling, and being called Martyrs of the brethren, refused it with the
fullness of the fear of God. And a little after, thus they writ^: they humbled
them selves under the mighty hand of 1. Pet. 5.
God, by the which they are now highly exalted: they rendered unto all men an
account in the defense of their faith: they accused none, loosed all, and
bound no man: they prayed for their persecutors after the example of Stephan,
that perfect Martyr, which said: Lord lay not this Act. 7.
sin to their charge, if he prayed for them that stoned him, how much more
for the brethren? Again, a little after they say: the greatest combatt they had
with him (meaning the serpent) was for the syncerity of love. so that the
roaring lion being foiled before, now quickened and sturred up such as he
thought to have had devoured. they shevved no insolent atrogancye toward They
receive after repentance such as fell in persecution.
them that fell, but ministered unto such as vvanted of their abundance, being
affectioned with motherly pity and compassion toward them: and sheading many
tears unto God the father for their sakes, they craved life, and he granted
it them, which life they communicated to their neighbors: and so they
passing as Conquerours in all things, embracing peace, and shevvinge the same
unto us, departed this life with peace, and posted unto the heavenly and
celestial paradise: leaving no grief behind them unto the mother, no
sedition or war unto the brethren: but joy, and peace, and concord, and
love. I suppose these things not to be unprofitably spoken of us, toutching
the love of the blessed Martyrs toward the brethren that fell, whereby we may
note the unnatural, and mercylesse minds of such as after these examples
grievously afflicte the members of Christ.

CAP. III.
Of the vision that appeared unto Attalus the Martyr in his sleep.

THe same epistle of the foresaid brethren, contains an history worthy of
memory, which without let of the envious, may be laid down to the knowledge of
the Reader, and it is thus: There was among them one Alcibiades, who lived
beastly and miserly, feeding only The Frenchmen in their foresaid epistle writ
thu^ also of Alcibiades.
on bread and water. When he had so determined with him self to live in
prison, it was revealed unto Attalus after his torment on the Theater: that
Alcibiades behaved not him self aright, in that he used not the lavvfull
creatures of God, and thereby also gave an occasion of falling unto others,
hereof when Alcibiades was persuaded, he used all indifferently, and praised
God. for they were not destitute of the grace of God, but had the holy Ghost
for their directer. Montanus Theodotus and Alcibiades (not the former) false
prophets.
of these things thus much. When as Montanus, and Alcibiades, and Theodotus,
then fresh, and first of all, of many throughout Phrygia, were thought to be
endued with the gift of prophecye, (for many other miraculous operations,
wrought by the divine power of God in many places, persuaded them that these
had also the gift of prophecye) and because of them, sedition was raised:
again, the brethren inhabiting France, laid down in writing, their godly
and Catholic censure of them, and withal, alleged sundry epistles of the
holy Martyrs that suffered among them, which (being in close prison) they had
written unto the brethren throughout Asia, and Phrygia, in the which also they
called and provoked Eleutherius then* Bishop of Rome, to the defense of the
Ecclesiastical peace.

CAP. IIII.
The Martyrs in France commend Irenaus Bishop of Lions, by their epistle unto
Eleutherius Bishop of Rome,

THe same Martyrs highly commended Irenaeus, minister of the Church of Lions*
unto the foresaid Bishop of Rome, as their own words declare in this manner:
Father* Eleutherius The Martyrs in France to Eleutherius b. of Rome in the
commendation of Irenaeus b. of Lions.
we vvishe you health in all things, and alvvaies in God. We have requested:
Irenaeus our brother and fellovv laborer, to deliver you these letters, whom,
we pray you to accept of* as a zealous follovver of the will of Christ. for if
we understood that any man's degree yielded forth, and delivered righteousness
unto the graduate, namely as being minister of the Church* which this man is,
we vvoulde have chiefly commended this in him. To what end should I now out
of the same epistle, rehearse the catalogue of Martyrs, I mean of them which
were beheaded, and of them which were devoured of wild beasts, and of them
which dyed in prison, and the number of those confessors, who then as yet
lived? for if any man be disposed at large to read thereof, let him take in
hand my book of Martyrs, where the collection thereof is imprynted. Eusebius
wrote a book of Martyrs, which is not extant.
these things were after this manner in the time of Antoninus the Emperor.

CAP. V.
How that God in great necessity sent rain at the faithful Christian
soldiers prayers, unto the hoaste of Marcus Aurelius a Heathenish Emperor.

THe historyes do record, that when his brother Marcus Aurelius the Emperor,
warred Marcus Aurelius the brother of Antoninus.
against the Germans and Sarmatians, his host in manner perished with thirste,
so that he wist not what to do: and that the soldiers of the legion called
Melitana, moved again and again with faithfulness toward their Prince, bowed
down upon their bare knees (as our accustomed manner of praying is) in the
midst of the army, turning them to the enemies, and made supplication unto
God. When as this sight seemed straung unto the enemies, there was showed a The
Christian soldiers do pray for rain, immediately it lightened and rayned.
far more straung spectacle, to wit: lightening, which put the enemies to
flight and overthrow, and withal a shower of rain to refreshe the army,
which welnigh perishing with thirst, powered out their prayers before the high
throne of the majesty of God. This history is reported by such as favored not
the Christian faith, yet were careful to set forth the things which concerned
the foresaid persons. it is also written by our men. but of the heathen
Historiographers them selves, the miracle is mentioned, not expressly to
proceed by the means of our men, yet our writers as friends, and favorers of
the true doctrine, have delivered simply, and plainly the deed, as it was
done. whereof Apollinarius, is a witness of creditt, who reports that this
legion (by whose prayers this miracle came to pass) was from y^ time forth
called by ye Emperor in the Romayne tongue after a peculier name, the
Lightening legion. Tertullian also a man worthy of good creditt, dedicating The
lightening legion.
an Apology in y^ Latin tongue, unto y^ Romayne Senate, in the defense of our
faith (whereof we mentioned before) has confirmed this history with a mightier
and more manifest proof, for he writes y^ the most prudent epistles of
Marcus, are yet extant, where he testifies him self, y^ warring with the
Germans, through the scarsitie of water, his army welnigh perished, but yet
was saved through ye prayers of ye Christians. he says yt this Emperor
threatened them with death, which went about to accuse them. unto the aforesaid
things he adds: what manner of laws are these Tertullian in Apolog^^.
against us? impious, unjust, cruel, which neither Vespasian observed,
although conqueror of the Jews: which Traian partly frustrated, commanding
the inquisition, for the Christians, to cease: which neither Adrianus,
although busying him self with every matter, nether he which was called
Pius confirmed. but weye of this every man as pleases him, we will prosecute
that Irenaeus who in his youth was the auditor of Polycarpus succeeds
Pothinus in the Bishoprik of Lions in France.
which follows in order of historye. When Pothinus of the age of four score
and ten years, had ended this life, together with the other Martyrs in
France: Irenaeus succeeded him in the Bishoprike of Lions. whom we have
learned in his youth to have been the auditor of Polycarpus. this same
Irenaeus in his third book against the heresies, annecteth the succession of
the Roman Bishops, unto Eleutherius, whose times presently we prosecute, and
recites the cataloge of them, as if it were his special drift, writing in
this manner:

CAP. VI.
The cataloge of the Romayne Bishops out of Irenaeus.

THe blessed Apostles planting, and buylding the Church, committed unto Linus
the government Irenaeus lib. 3 cap. 3. 2. Timoth. 4. Paul. Peter. Linus.
Anacletus. Clemens. Euarestus. Alexander. Xystus. Telesphorus Hyginus. Pius.
Anicetus. Soter. Eleutherius.
of the ministry* This Linus, Paul remembered in his epistle unto Timothe* him
succeeded Anacletus, after him Clemens, the third from the Apostles: which
both savve them, had his conversation with them, and had both the preaching
and tradition of the blessed Apostles, graffed in his mind, and painted before
his eyes. neither was he yet alone, for there lived at that time, a great many
which were ordained by the Apostles. In the time of this Clemens there was
raised no small sedition among the brethren at Corinthe, wherefore the church
of Rome vvrote unto the Corinthians a worthy epistle, reconciling them unto
peace, and renewing their faith, and tradition, lately received of the
Apostles. A little after he says: After this Clemens, succeeded Euarestus:
after Euarestus, Alexander: after Alexander, Xystus: he was the sixth from the
Apostles. afterward Telesphorus, which was gloriously crowned with
martyrdom. him follovved Hyginus. then Pius. after him Anicetus, whom Soter
succeeded. Now Eleutherius was the tvvelfe Bishop from the Apostles. after
the same order, the same doctrine, and tradition of the Apostles, truly taught
in the Church, at this day continevved unto our time.

CAP. VII.
How unto that time, miracles were wrought by the faithful.

THese things Irenaeus agreeable unto the historyes mentioned before, has
laid down in those five books, which he wrote to the subversion and
confutation of the falsely named science. again in the second book of the
same argument, he signifies how that unto his time, signs and examples of the
strange, and wonderful power of God, were seen flourishing in certain
Churches, saying: they are far from raising of the dead, Irenaeus lib. 2
cap. 57.
as the Lord and his Apostles did, through prayer, and as many of the brethren
many times, the whole Church of some certain place, by reason of some urgent
cause, with fasting, and chaste prayer, has brought to pass, that the
spirit of the dead returned to the body. and man was by the earnest prayers
of the Saints, restored to life again. A little after he says: But if they
say the Lord wrought these things phantastically, we will lead Irenaeus
lib. 2 cap. 58.
them unto the practiced examples of the Prophets, and prove out of them, that
they all prophesied of him after this manner, and that these things were done
in deed, and that he was the only son of God. Wherefore in his name they
that be his true Disciples, receiving grace of him, bend their whole might to
this end, that every one, after the quantity of the talent received, do
benefitt the other brethren. some soundely and truly expel devils, so that
they being delivered of their evil spirits, embraced the faith, and were
received into the Church: others have the foreknovvledge of things to come,
they see divine dreams, and prophetical visions: others cure the deseased and
sickly, restore them to their health, by their laying on of hands. Now
according to our former saying, the dead were raised to life, and lived
together with us many years. for the gracious gifts of the holy Ghost are
innumerable, which the Church, dispersed throughout the whole world, having
received, disposes daily in the name of Jesus Christ crucified, under Pontius
Pilate, to the benefitt of the Gentyles: seducing none, neither selling to any
at any price, as she has received them freely, so freely she bestows them.
Again, in an other place Irenaeus writes: as we have heard of many Irenaeus
lib. ^
brethren in the Church which had the gift of prophesying: which were able
through the holy Ghost to speak with sundry tongues: which could reveal
the secrets of men where it so behooved, and expound the dark mysteries of
God. thus much of the diversity of gifts, which flourished among the worthy men
unto that time.

CAP. VIII.
What Irenaus wrote of, and concerning the holy Scriptures canonical, and
the septuagints translation,

FOr as much as in the beginning of this our treatise, we have promised in
their several places, to allege the testimonies of the ancient
ecclesiastical elders, and writers, which they have written to our knowledge,
and delivered to the posterity toutchinge the canonical scriptures of both
the old and new testament: now we will endeavor to perform the same. And
beginning with Irenaeus, first of all let us see, what he has written of the
new testament, his Irenaeus lib. 3 cap. 1. Matthewe. Marcke. Luke. John.
words are these: Matthewe delivered unto the Hebrews the history of the
Gospel, written in their own tongue. When Peter and Paul preached at
Rome, and planted the church, after their departure Mark the disciple and
interpreter of Peter also, delivered us in writing such things as he had
heard Peter preach. and Luke accompanyenge Paul, comprised in one volume the
Gospel preached of him. After these, John the disciple of our Lord, which
also leaned on his breaste, published a Gospel unto the posterity remaining
at Ephesus. This has he written in his third book. And in the fifte of the
same argument he reasons of the revelation Irenaeus lib. 5
of Saint John, and the calculation of Antichrists name: These things being
thus, when as in all true and ancient copies, this number is laid down:
and they also testify the same which savve John with their eyes, and the
word it self teaches us, that the number of the beasts name, according
unto the numbering of the Gentiles, is declared by the letters, expressed in the
word it self. (A little beneath of the same thus he says,) We doubt nothing
of the name of Antichrist, of the which we affirm sure and certainly. for if
his name at this present When the revelation of Saint John was first seen
were openly to be published, no doubt it had been done by him which
pronounced the revelation* neither was the revelation seen long ago, but
vvelnighe in this our age, under the end of Domitians reign. thus much he
said of the revelation of Saint John. He has made mention of the first
Epistle of John citing thence many testimonies. also of the former of Peter.
and he, not only knew, but allowed of the book of Hermes entitled Pastor,
saying: That writing has Irenaeus allea geth pastor lib. 2. ma^dat. 1.
very well pronounced which says: before all things believe there is one
God, which has created and made perfect all things, etc. He has used also
certain sentences selected out of the book of VVisdome of Solomon, where he
says: The sight of God brings incorruption, incorruption draws a man
unto God. He cyteth the works of some one Apostolic elder, whose name he
passes over with silence, yet pronounces his interpretation of holy
scripture. Moreover he remembered Justinius Martyr and Ignatius, alleging their
writings for testimonies. he has promised to confute Marcion in a several
volume. but of the translation of the Marcion. Irenaeus lib. 3 cap. 23. 24.
Esaias 7. Theodotio^. Aqnila. Irenaeus lib. 3 cap. 25.
old testament by the septuagintes hear what he writes in these words: God
then was made man and the Lord himself has saved us giving us a Virgin for
a sign, not as some say which presume to interpret the Scriptures: behold
a damsel shall conceive and bring forth a son as Theodotion the Ephesine,
and Aquila of Pontus translated, which were both Jewish proselytes, whom
the Ebionites following, have taught that Christ was borne of Joseph and
Marie. After a few lines he adds saying: Before the Roman empire grevve
to be of such force when as yet the Macedonians held Asia, Ptolomaeus the
son of Lagus fully minded to erect a library at Alexandria, and to
replenishe the same with all such good books as were extant: requested of
the Jews inhabiting Jerusalem, that they would send him their books,
translated into the Greek tongue. they (forasmuch as they were as yet
subject unto the Macedonians) The septuagints.
sent unto Ptolomaeus, seventy elders, from among them, very skillful in their
books, and both the tongues. God no doubt disposinge this thing after his
pleasure. Ptolomaeus for trials sake, fearing, if they conferred together they
would conceal the truth revealed in their books: commanded them severally
every man by himself to write his translation, and this in every book
throughout the old testament. When as they all came together in presence of
Ptolomaeus, and conferred the translations one with an other, God was
glorified, and the Scriptures divine in deed, were known. for all they from
the beginning to the endinge, had expressed the self same thing, with the
self same words, and the self same sentences. so that the Gentiles then
present, pronounced those scriptures to have been translated, by the instincte
and motion of the spirit of God. neither may it seem maruailous unto any man
that God brought this to pass, for when as in the captivity of his people
under Nabuchodonosor, the scriptures were perished (the Jews returning into
their own region, after seventy years, in the time of Artaxerxes King of
Persia) he inspyred Esdras the priest of the tribe of Le^^, that he restored
again all the sayings of the former Prophets, and delivered unto the people
the law given by Moses. thus far Irenaeus.

CAP. IX.
Of Iulianus Bishop of Alexandria, and Pantaenus there professor of divinity.

WHen Antoninus had reigned ninetene years, Comodus succeeded Antoninus, Anno
Domi 1826. Agrippinus b. of Alexandria. Iulianus b. of Alex. Pantaenus mo
derated the schole of Alex. Evangelists.
Comodus took the rule of the imperial scepter: in the first year of whose
reign Iulianus was chosen Bishop over the Churches of Alexandria, after that
Agrippinus had governed there twelve years. There moderated there, at that
time, the schole of the faithful, a famous learned man, called Pantaenus. for
that of old, exercise and disputation in holy Scripture flourished among them,
instituted (as we are given to understand) by such men as excelled in
eloquence, and study of holy Scripture. it is written that among them which
then lived, this Pantaenus was in great estimation, brought up among the sect
of Philosophers, called Stoickes. he is said to have showed such promptnes of a
willing mind, toward the publishing of the doctrine of Christ, that he became
a preacher of the Gospel, unto the Eastern Gentiles, and was sent as far as
India. there were, (I say) there were then, many Evangelists prepared for this
purpose, to promote, and to plant the heavenly word with godly zeal, after the
guyse of the Apostles. Cap. 10. after the greek. The Gospel of Matthewe in
Hebrew at India. Bartholomew preached in India Cap. 11. after the Greek.
of these Pantaenus being one, is said to have come into India, where he found
the Gospel of Matthewe, written in the Hebrewe tongue, kept of such as knew
Christ, preached there before his coming by Bartholomewe, one of the Apostles,
and as they report, reserved there unto this day. This Pantaenus then after
he had done many notable things, governed the Church of Alexandria, where by
rote, and by writing, he published much precious doctrine.

CAP. X.
Of Clemens Alexandrinus.

TOgether also at that time was Clemens found at Alexandria, well exercised in
holy Scripture, of the same name with him which of old was bishop of Rome, and
disciple of the Apostles, and namely in his books entitled Hypotyposeon he
makes mention of Pantaenus by the name of his master. I suppose him to have
meante the same, in his first book entitled Stromaton when he recited, the
most renowned, and famous men, of the Apostolic succession, Clemens.
Alexandrinus lib. 1. Stromaton.
whom he embraced saying: If it be best to confess the truth, this present
taicte of mine is not made for any ostentation, but for a monumente graffed in
mind: or rather a medicene, to expel the forgetfulness of mine old age, that
it may be unto me a simple resemblance, or a sleyght kind of portracture, of
those notable and lively men, whom sometimes I hard with mine ears, of
which both sayings, and saints, on was of Greece an Ionicke, an other of
great Greece, one of Caelosyria, an other of Aegypte: some from the east,
whereof one was an Assyrian: an other of Palaestina of the Hebrevve blood.
he which is last in order of name, was the first in renowned virtue. I
remained in Aegyptshiftinge out such things as lay in secrett, when I found
him. these have observed the right tradition of true doctrine, which before
they had received of Peter, James, John, Paul, holy Apostles, as a son of the
father, yet very fevve like their fathers. God no doubt disposing that those
fatherly and Apostolic seeds should by them be laid up and reserved for us.

CAP. XI. Cap. 12. after the greek.

Of the byshopes of Jerusalem.

AT this time was Narcissus bishop of Jerusalem, a man very famous, the
fifteeneth in succession Narcissus. b. of Jerusalem Marcus. Cassianus. Publius.
Maximus. Iulianus. Caius. Symachus. Caius. Iulianus. Capito. Valens.
Dolichianus Narcissus. Cap. 13. after the Greek.
from the overthrow of the Jews, under Adrian. from which time we have
signified before the Church after the Jews, to have been governed by the
Gentiles, and the first bishop of them to have been Marcus, next him was
Cassianus, after him Publius, after Publius Maximus. after Maximus, Iulianus.
after Iulianus, Caius. after Caius, Symachus. after Symachus an other Caius.
after him, an other Iulianus. him succeeded Capito. after him Valens. after
Valens, Dolichianus. after all Narcissus, the thirtieth in succession from the
Apostles.

CAP. XII.
Of Rhodon, and the repugnancy which he found in the heresy of Marcion.

ABout the same time flourished one Rhodon, an Asian, sometime at Rome, by his
own report the disciple of Tatianus, who wrote many books, and together with
others impugned the heresy of Marcion. he paynteth this heresy in his time to
have been severed, into sundry sects. the Authors of which schism, and their
false positions, severally invented, he has sharply and in few words
reprehended. hear him if you please, writing thus: Wherefore they varied
Rhodon an Asian. Apelles. Philumaena. Marcion. Pontinus. Basilicus. Lycus.
among themselves, coursing an unconstant sentence. of that crew was Apelles,
pretending a political kind of conversation, and sad gravity: confessing
one beginning, and saying, that prophecyes are of a contrary spirit: fully
crediting the sentences and deuelishe doctrine of a maid called Philumaena.
others some (as the rouer Marcion) have laid down two beginninges, of
which opinion are Pontinus, and Basilicus. these follovving Lycus of Pontus,
not perceauing the right distinction of things, (no more did he) run
headelong out of the way, and published barely, and nakedly without show, or
proof of reason, two principal beginnings* again others some, falling far
worse, have dreamed, not only of two, but of three natures, whose author
and ringeleader is Synerus, by the report of them which favor his doctrine.
The Synerus. Rhodon reports of the disputati on between him and Apelles.
same Rhodon writes, that he had conference with Apelles, saying: by
reasoninge with this old Apelles, I took him with many falsehoodes,
vvhereupon he said: that no man was to be examined of his doctrine, but every
man to continevve quietly, as he believed. he pronounced salvation for such as
believed in Christ crucified, so that they were found exercised in good
works. his doctrine of the God of all things, was marvelous dark, and
obscure. he confessed on beginning agreeable with our doctrine. after he had
laid down his whole opinion, he says: When I demanded of him how prouest
thou this? how can thou affirm that there is one beginning? tell us. he
made answer that he misliked with the prophecies them selves, for that they
uttered no truth, but varied among them selves that they were false, and
contrary to them selves. how that there was one beginning, he said: He knevve
not, but yet he was so persuaded. afterward I charged him to tell me the
truth. he swore he said the truth, neither knevve he how there was one God
unbegotten, yet believed he the same. I truly condemned him with laughter, for
that he called him self a doctor, and could not confirm his doctrine. In the
same book Rhodon speaking to Calliston, confesses him self at Rome to have
been the disciple of Tatianus. he reports that Tatianus wrote a book of
Problemes. Wherefore when as Tatianus promised to sifte out, the dark speeches
and hidd mysteries of holy Scripture: Rhodon promised also Rhodon in Hexameron.
Apelles the Heretic wrote infinite books.
in a peculiar volume, to publish the resolutions of his Problemes. his
commentaries upon the six days works, are at this day extant. but Apelles
wrote infinite tractes, impiously against the law of Moses, reus^ing in most
of them, the holy Scriptures, very paynfull and earnest in the reprehension,
and (as he thought) in the overthrow of them. of these things thus far.

CAP. XIII. Cap. 14. after the greek.

Of the false prophets in Phrygia, and foul schism raised at Rome by Florinus
and Blastus.

THat sworn enemy of the Church of God, hater of all honesty, embracer of all
spite and malice, omitting no opportunity or subtle shift to snare men in,
stirred up again strange heresies, to molest the Church, and of those
Heretics some crept into Asia, and Phrygia, after Montanus. Priscilla.
Maximilla.
the manner of venomous serpents. whereof the Montanists brag and boaste of
Montanus as a comforter and of his women Priscilla and Maximilla as
Prophetisses of Montanus. others some prevailed at Rome, whose captain was
Florinus, a Priest excommunicated out of the Church. Cap. 15. after the greek
Florinus. Blastus. cap. 16. after the greek
and together with him one Blastus, subject to the same danger of soul. both
these have subtly circumuented many, and persuaded them to their purpose, every
one severally establishing new doctrine, yet all contrary to the truth.

CAP. XIIII.
The censure of the old writers toutching Montanus, and his false prophets.

THe victorious and invincible power of the truth always prevailing, has
raised up Apollinarius of Hierapolis (of whom we spoke before) as a stiff and
strong defense, together with many other discreate persons of those times, to
the confutation of the foresaid Phrygian heresy. which have left behind them
matter sufficient, and very copious, for this our historye. Wherefore one of
them taking pen in hand, to paynte out these heretics, signifies at the
entrance how he rebuked them with unwritten elenches, he begins thus: It is
now Apollinarius b. of Hierapolis toutching Montanus and his original.
a great while ago (well-beloved Auircus Marcellus) since thou did enjoin
me this task* that I should publish some book against the followers of the
heretic Miltiades, whereupon I doubted unto this day, what was best to be
done. not but that I was able to confute their falsehoode, and give testimony
unto the truth: but that I feared greatly, lest by vvriting, I should add
something unto the perfect words of the new testament. vvhereto nothing may
be added, and vvherefro nothing may be taken away, by him, that will lead a
life agreeable to the Gospel. I being of late at Ancyra in Galatia, found the
Church throughout Pontus, filled, not with Prophets, (as they call them) but
rather, as it shall be proved, with false Prophets: where through the Lord,
as much as in me lay, I disputed in the Church, the space of many
Apollinarius disputed and confuted Mo^tanus figme^ts at Ancyra in Galatia.
Zoticus Otrenus.
days, against them, and their several objections. so that the Church
reioysed, and was thereby confirmed in the truth. but the contrary part yet
repyned, and the gaynesayers were very sorovvefull. and when the Elders of
that place required of me, in the presence of our fellow minister Zoticus
Otrenus, that I would leave them in vvriting, some commentary of such things
as were uttered against the adversaries of the truth: At that time I did not,
but promised, that I vvoulde shortly, through the help of the Lord, write
somevvhat thereof unto them. these and the like things laid down in the
proeme, in process of his book he writes thus: Wherefore the original of
them, and their nevve found opinion against the Church of God, was after
this sort: there is a certain village in Mysia, (a region of Phrygia) called
Ardabau, where Ardabau. Montanus.
histories record, that first of all, one Montanus, a late convert, in the
time of Gratus, Proconsul of Asia, pufte up with an immoderate desire of
primacy, opened a gappe for the adversary to enter into him. and being mad
and suddenly estraunged, and berefte of his vvitts, waxed furious, and
published strange doctrine, contrary to the tradition, and custom, and
ancient succession (now received) under the name of prophecy. they which
then were auditors of this unlawful preaching, some chasticed and checked
him, for a lunaticke, and one that was possessed of the spirit of error, and
forbad him to preach, being mindful of the forevvarning, and threatening of our
Savior, tending to this end: that we should take diligent heed of false
prophets: others Matthew. 24.
some waxed insolent, boasted and bragged of him not a little, as if he were
endued with the holy Ghost, and the gift of prophecye: being forgtefull of the
forevvarning of God, they called upon the dissembling, the flattering and
seducing spirit of the people, (by the which they were snared, and deceived)
that through silence he should no more be hindered. the devil through a certain
art, or rather the like subtle method, vvorking the destruction of
disobedient persons being more honored the^ his merit did require: stirred up
and kindled their minds, svvarued already from the faith, and slumbring in
sin, so that he raised two women, possessed of a foul spirit 2. women the
prophetisses of Montanus.
which spoke fond, foolish, and fanaticall things (even as he had before)
they rejoiced, and gloried in the spirit which pronounced them happy, and
puffed them up, with infinite fair promises. yet sometimes by signs and
tokens he rebuked them to their faces, so that he seemed a chasticing spirit.
there were fevve of the Phrygians seduced, notvvithstanding, that boulde and
blind spirit, instructed them to blaspheme, and revile generally, every
Church under heaven, because they neither did homage, neither courteously
received among them, that false spirit The Churches, the synodes and faith
full of Asia* condemned Montanus. Apollinarius of the ends of the false
prophets
of prophecye. the faithful throughout Asia, for this cause men often and in
many places, examined the nevve found doctrine: pronounced it for profane*
they excommunicated, rejected, and banished this heretical opinion, out of
their churches. When he had written these things, in the beginning, and
throughout his first book reprehended their error: in his second book he
writes thus of their ends: because they charge us with the death of the
Prophets, for that we receive not their disordered fantasies (these say they
are the Prophets which the Lord promised to send his people) let them
aunsvvere me, I charge them in the name of the living God, oye good people: is
there any one of the sect of Montanus, and these women, which has been
persecuted by the Jews, or put to death by any tyrant? not one of them
bearing this name, was either apprehended, or crucyfied. neither was there
any woman of them in the Synagogues of the Jews, either scurged, or stoned
at all. but Montanus, and Maximilla, are said to dye an other kind of death.
many do write that Montanus and Maximilla hanged them selves.
both these, through the motion of their mad spirit, not together at one
time, but at several times, hanged them selves, and so ended their lives,
after the manner of Indas the traitor. even as the common report goes of
Theodotus, that jolly fellow, the first founder Theodotus the heretic
flying up, broke his neck.
of their prophecye, who being frenticke, persuaded him self on a certain
time through the spirit of error, to take his flight up into the heavens, and
so being cast into the air, tombled down and dyed miserably. thus it is
reported to have come to pass. yet in so much we savve it not with our
eyes, we can not (Ovvorthy Sir) allege it for certain, whether Montanus,
Theodotus, and the woman dyed thus, orno. Again he writes in the same book,
how that the holy Bishops, going about to rebuke the spirit, which spoke in
Maximilla were hindered by others, that wrought with the same spirit, saying
as follows: let not the spirit of Maximilla say as it is in the Epistle to
Asterius Vrbanus: I am chaced as a wolf from the sheep. I am no wolf. I am
the word, the spirit, and power: but let him manifestly express that
power, by the spirit, and prevail. let him compel such men as then were
present to try, and confer with that talkatyue spirit. namely these
worthy men and Bishops: Zoticus of Comanum, and Julian of Apamia: to confess
the same. whose mouths when the companions of Themison had stopped, they
suffered not the lying spirit, and seducer of the people to be rebuked. In the
same book after he had laid down other things to the confutation of
Maximilla his false prophecyes, he declares with all, the time when he wrote,
and their prophecyes foreshewing wars and sedicions, whose fond fantasies he
confuteth in this sort: And how can it otherwise fall out but that this be
Apollinarius of the salse prophecies of the Montanists.
found a manifest untruth and open falsehoode. For now it is more then
thirtene years ago since this woman dyed, and yet in all this space, has
there happened in this world neither civil, neither general vvarres, but
especially the Christians, through the mercy of God have had continual peace.
Thus much out of the second book. out of the third book we will allege a
few lines, against them which gloried that many of them were crowned with
martyrdom, for thus he writes: When as they are in the premises blanked,
confuted, and void of arguments, Apollinarius lib. 3.
they fly for shift and refuge unto martyrs, reporting them selves to have
many, affirming that to be a sure and a certain proof of the prophetical
spirit raygning among them. neither is this a most evident proof as it
appears, for diverse other heretical sects have many Martyrs, unto whom
for all that, we neither condescende, neither confess that they have the Not
the death but the cause of it proves a Martyr.
truth among them. And first for all the Mareionites affirm they have many
Martyrs, when as for all that their doctrine is not of Christ him self
according unto the truth. a little after he says: these that are called to
their trial, and to testify the true faith by suffering of Martyrdom, are of
the Church: they communicate not with any of the Phrygian heretical Martyrs,
but are severed from them, consenting no not in one jot with the fond
spirit of Montanus, and his woman, and that this which I say is most true,
it shall evidently appear by the examples of Caius, and Alexander, Martyrs of
Eumenia, who suffered in our time at Apamia, situated upon the river Maeander.

CAP. XV. Cap. 17. after the greek.

Of Miltiades and his works.

IN the before said book, this Apollinarius remembered the Commentaries of
Miltiades, who likewise wrote a book against the foresaid heresy. the words
by him cyted were in this sort: these things have I briefly alleged, and
found written in some one of their commentaries, Apollinarius out of Miltiades
works alleges this.
which confute the book of Alcibiades, where he declares that it is not the
property of a Prophet, to prophecye in a trance. a little after he rehearses
the Prophets of the new Testament, among whom he numbreth one Ammias, and
Quadratus, saying as follows: A false Prophet in a trance, where license,
and impunitie do concur, begins with rash ignorance, and ends with
furious rage and frenzy of mind, as it is said before. of this sort, and in
such trance of spirit they shall be able to shevve us non of the prophets,
either of the old, or of the nevve testament, neither shall they be able to
glory of Agabus, of Judas, of the daughters of Agabus. Jude. The daughters of
Philip. Aminias. Quadratus.
Philip, of Ammias the Philadelphian, of Quadratus, neither of any other,
which may any thing avail them: Again he writes: If that as they say, after
Quadratus, and Ammias the Philadelphian, these women of Montanus, succeeded in
the gift of prophecy: let them shevve who afterward succeeded Montanus,
and his women. for the Apostle thinks good, that the gift of prophecy
should reign in every Church, even unto the end, but now for the space of
these fouretene years, since Maximilla dyed, they are able to shevve us not
one. so far he. this Militiades whom he remembers, leaft unto us in writing
other monumentes Miltiades books.
of his labor, and industry, in the holy Scriptures: as well in the books he
wrote against the Gentiles as also in the books against the Jews. satisfieng
and confuting in two books their several arguments, and opinions. afterward
he wrote an Apology of the Christian philosophy, which he embraced unto the
potentates and princes of this world.

CAP. XVI.
Apollonius his judgment of the same heresy. Cap. 18. after the greek.


TO be brief this Phrygian heresy was confuted by Apollonius an
ecclesiastical writer who then (I say at that time) flourished in Phrygia: he
published a several book against it, he refuted their prophecyes, accompting
them for vain lies: he plainly opened and revealed the conversation of such
as were principal and chief patrons of this heresy of Montanus, he wrote in
this manner: But what kind of nevve Doctor this is, his works and doctrine
Apollonius against the Montanistes.
do declare. This is he which taught the breakinge of vvedlocke: this is he
which prescribed laws of fasting: this is he which called Pepuza and
Timium (peltinge parishes of Phrygia) Jerusalem, to the end he might entice
all men from every where to frequent thither. this is he which ordained
tolegatherers and taxers of money* this is he which under pretense and color
of oblations, has conningely invented the art of bribinge: this is he which
gives great hyre unto the preachers of his doctrine, that by feedinge of the
panche his prophecies may prevail. Thus much of Montanus, and immediately of
his Prophetisses he writes: We have shevved before, these first prophetisses,
from the time they were filled with their false spirit, to have forsaken
their husbands, how shamefully then do they lie calling Priscilla a virgin?
He adds saying: Does not the-vvhole Scripture forbydde, that a prophet The
prophetisses of Mon tanus receive gifts. Themison a montanist with money
delivered himself from prison.
should receive rewards, and money? When I see a prophetisse receive gold
and silver, and precious garments, how can I choose but detest her? Again of
an other he says: And besides these, Themison also inflammed with the
burninge thurst of covetousness, tasted not of the tarte conyzance of
confession, before the tyrant, but shifted himself out of fetteres, with much
money. And when as therefore he should have humbled himself, yet he all in
braggery, as if he were a martyr after the example of the Apostle vvrote a
catholic epistle, very presumptuously, to enstructe them which believed
better then he did, and to exhort them to strive for the nevve doctrine
together with him, and to revile the Lord, and his Apostles, and his holy
Church. Again speakinge of one of their highlye esteemed Martyrs he writes
in this sort: And that we trouble not our selves with many, let the
prophetisse tell us toutchinge Alexander, who called himself a Martyr: with
whom she has banqueted: Alexander a thief yet a martyr of Montanus sect.
Math, 10. Luke 9.
whom also many do adore: whose theftes and other heinous crimes which he
suffered for, I will not presently rehearse, for they are publickely known
and registered, whose sins has he pardoned? whether does a prophet yield
theft unto a Martyr, or a martyr an immoderate desire of plenteousnesse and
gathering unto a prophet? when as Christ commanded you shall not possess
gold, neither silver, neither two coats, these of the contrary, seek after
the possession of unlawful substance. we have declared, that they, whom
they call prophets, and martyrs, have extorted money, not only of the rich,
but of the poor, the fatherless, and the widow. but if they plead
innocence, let them stay and join with us in ishvve, in the same matter,
upon this condition that if they be overthrown at least wise from hence
forth, they will cease to commit the like sin again. We have to prove
the works of Prophets. The tree is to be known by his fruit. And that
Math. 7.
the case of Alexander may be known, of such as desire it ^ he was
condemned at Ephesus by Aemilius frontinus, liuetenant, not for his pofession,
but for presumpteous and Stibium is a white stone found in silver mines by
rubbinge the skin it makes it look very fair. Thraseas a martyr.
boulde enterprised theft, being a lewd person, and under false pretense of
Christian profession, vvherevvith he cloked the matter, seducinge the faithful
of that place: he was pardodoned and set at liberty. the congregation
whereof he was pastor, because he was a thief, vvoulde not admit him. They
that will know further of his offenses, I refer them unto public
records* for by confutinge him, whom the prophet has not known by
dvvellinge together many years, we declare unto the world by him the
steadfastness of the prophet. We are able to shevve at large the conformity
of both parts. But if they have any confident perseverance, let them bear
the reprehension. Again in an other place of the same book, he writes of
their Prophets thus: If they deny their Prophets to have been bribers, let
them affirm it condicionally that if it be proved: they be no longer
Prophets. hereof we are able to allege many particular proufes. all the
works of a Prophet are necessarily to be proved. tell me (I beseech you) is
it seemly for a Prophet to paynte himself in colors? is it seemly for a
Prophet to smothe himself with the white glisteringe stibium? is it seemly
for a Prophet neatly to pyncke and gingerly to set forth himself? is it
seemly for a Prophet to dise and to card? is it seemly for a Prophet to be
an usurer? let them answer me whether these be lavvefull, or vnlavvefull. I
will prove these to be their practices. This Apollonius in the same book
shows the time of his wryttinge, to be the fortyeth year since Montanus
invented this false, and forged prophecy. Again he declares how that Zoticus
(mentioned before by the former Author) went about at Pepuza, to reprehende,
and confute the feigned prophecy of Maximilla, and the spirit which wrought in
her: but yet was forbidd by such as favored her folly. he remembers one
Thraseas a martyr of that time. This tradition first is to be suspected for
that christ ( Matthew. 28. Marc. 16.) commanded the Apostles to pass throughout
the world and to preach the Gospel. secondly for that he charged them ( Luc.
24. Act. 1.) to tarry in Jerusalem but until they were endued with power from
an high which was fifty days after the ascension. Cap. 19. after the Greek.
he declares as received by tradition, that the Lord commanded his Apostles
not to depart from Jerusalem until the twelfe years end. he alleges
testimonies out of the Revelation, and reports how that Saint John raised
at Ephesus, by the divine power of God, one that was dead to life again.
other things he writes by the which he has fully confuted, and overthrown
the subtle sleighte of the foresayed heresy, these things of Apollonius.

CAP. XVII.
The censure of Serapion bishop of Antioche toutching the Phrygian heresy.

THis Serapion remembered the works of Apollinarius, where he confuted the
said heresy, who then is said to have succeeded Maximinus in the byshopricke
of Antioche. he makes mention of him in a peculier Epistle unto Caricus
Ponticus where also the said Serapion bishop of Antioch Epist. ad Cari cum
ponticu^
heresy is confuted thus: I vvoulde have you to understand this also, how
that the operation of this deceatefull purpose called the nevve prophecy, is
impugned, and counted for detestable, and cursed doctrine of all the Churches
throughout Christendom. I have sent unto you the learned vvrytinges of
Claudius Apollinarius that holy byshope of Hierapolis in Asia. In this Epistle
of Serapion there are subscriptions of many bishops, one subscribeth thus: I
Aurelius Cyrenius martyr vvishe you health. An other thus: Aelius Publius
Julius bishop of Debeltum a city of Thracia, as sure as the Lord lives in
heaven, when as holy Zotas of Anchia vvoulde have cast out the deuell which
spoke in Priscilla, the dissemblinge hypocrites vvoulde not permit it. And
many other bishops gave the same censure, and subscribed with their own hands
to the said Epistle. the affairs then went after this forte.

CAP. XVIII.
The Industry of Irenaeus in refutinge the heresies blased at Rome by Blastus
and florinus.

I Renaeus wrote diverse Epistles to the confutation of such as corrupted at
Rome the sincere rites of the Church. he wrote one to Blastus of schism, an
other to Florinus of Monarchy or the rule of one. or she winge that God is not
the author of evil. which opinion Florinus seemed to be of, but afterward he
being seduced with the error of Valentinus: Irenaeus, wrote against him that
book entitled: ogdoas by interpretation the number of eighty, where he
signifies himself Immediately to have succeeded the Apostles. the end of
which book has this notable protestation necessarily to be graffed in this
our history for it is read as follows: Cap. 20. after the Greek. Irenaeus
lib. de Ogdoade which is not extant.
I charge thee in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and his glorious
coming, at what time he shall come to judge the quick and the dead, who so
ever thou be that copiest this book: that thou peruse this copy, and
diligently correct it after the example of my own hand vvrytinge, and that
thou putt to likewise this charge and set it down after the vvrytten copye.
This was profitably spoken and faithfully remembered of us, that we may behoulde
the aunciente and right holy men, as a most exquisite and right pattern of
earnest care and diligence. Again Irenaeus in his epistle to Florinus,
reports, that he had conversation with Polycarpus Irenaeus unto Florinus the
schismaticke. Florinus a courtier then a schismatic last an heretic.
saying: This doctrine (O Florinus) if I may boldly pronounce the truth,
sauoreth not for sound: this doctrine disagreeth from the Church, and
brings such as give care unto it into extreme impiety: this doctrine no, not
the heretics which were out of the Church, ever durst to publishe: this
doctrine such as were elders before us, and disciples of the Apostles, never
delivered unto thee. I savve thee when I was yet a boy with Polycarpus in
the lovver Asia, living gorgeously in the Emperoures palace, and busienge thy
self with all might, to be in favor and creditt with him. For I remember
better the things of oulde then the affairs of late. For the things we
suck of a child, sincke farther in our minds, and grovve together with us.
So that I remember the place where Polycarpus sat, when he taught: his
goinge out, and his coming in: his trade of life, the figure and proportion
of his body: the sermon he made unto the multitude: the report he made of his
conversation with John and others, which savve the Lord: how he remembered
their saynges, and what he heard out of their mouths toutching the Lord, of
his power, and doctrine: recitinge precepts, and all things consonante to
holy Scripture, out of their mouths I say who themselves had seen with
their eyes the word of life in the flesh. these things at that time, through
the mercy of God which wrought in me, I diligently marked, and painted it not
in papyr, but printed it in my heart, which continually through the grace of
God I ponder, and meditate. And I am able to testify before God, that if that
holy and Apostolic elder, had heard any such thing, he vvoulde have
straight reclaimed, and stopped Polycarpus used often to re peate this saying.
his ears, and after his manner pronounced: good God into vvvhat times have
thou reserved me, that I should suffer such things, yea and vvoulde have
straight shunned the place where he sitting or standing had heard such
speeches. to be short this may be reported for true out of the epistles
which he vvrote to the confirmation of the borderinge Churches, or out of the
Epistles which he vvrote to certain brethren for admonition and exhortation
sake. thus far Irenaeus.

CAP. XIX.
The Church enjoys peace under Commodus: the Martyrdom of Cap. 21. after the
Greek.
Apollonius a Christian Philosopher.

THe same year under Comodus the Emperor, the rage of the Gentiles was
mitigated toward us, so that peace was granted through the grace of God,
unto the universal Church through out the world. When as the heavenly
doctrine lead the minds of all mortal men to the embracinge of the true
Religion of the only and universal God: so that many of the nobles of Rome
brewe near, to their souls health and salvation, together with their whole
houses and families: It was a thing altogether intolerable for the deuell,
whose nature is altogether envious, and spiteful, therefore he takes us in
hand again, and inuenteth diverse snares to entrape us in. he procures at
Rome, Apollonius, a man among The accuser of Apollonius with the breaking of
his legs died miserably.
the faithful of that time, for learning and philosophy very famous, to be
brought forth before the tribunal seat, raising his accuser among them, that
were fit ministers for so malicious a purpose. But the unhappy man came out
of season to receive the sentence of judgment. because it was decreed by the
Emperor, that the accusers of the Christians should dye the death: Perennius
the Judge forthwyth gave sentence against him, that his legs should be
broken. Then the beloved Martyr when the judge had earnestly, and with many
words entreated him to render an account of his faith before the noble
senate: he Apollonius a Christian philosopher exhibited an Apollogie unto the
senate of Rome, and afterward is beheaded. A cruel law. Cap. 22. after the
Greek. Anno Dom. 192. all these bishops flourished at one time. Victor. b. of
Rome. Demetrius. Serapion. Theophilus. Narcissus. Banchillus. Polycrates.
exhibited in the presence of them all a notable Apollogie of his faith in the
which he suffered martyrdom. Yet nevertheless by decree of the senate he was
beheaded and so ended this life. For the ancient decre was of force and
prevailed among them, that the Christians which were once presented before
the tribunal seat and not revoked their opinions should no more be set at
liberty. Wherefore the words of Apollonius which he answered to Perenius,
standing at the bar and his whole Apollogie offered to the senate who lysteth
to know: let him read our book of Martyrs.

CAP. XX.
Of the succession of Byshopes in the most famous churches.

IN the tenthe year of the raygne of Comodus, when Eleutherius had governed
the bishopric of Rome thertene years: Victor succeeded him. at what time also
Iulianus after he had continewed ten years, in the bishopes seae of
Alexandria, dyed, and Demetrius came in place. at what time likewise Serapion,
(mentioned a little before) was known to be the eight Bishope of Antioche
after the Apostles. Then was Theophilus bishope of Caesarea in Palestina, and
Narcissus (before remembered) bishope of Jerusalem, and Banchillus bishope of
Corinthe in Hellada, Polycrates bishope of Ephesus, and an infinite number more
(as it is very likely) besides these, excelled at that time. but we rehearse
them by name and that, iustlye by whose means and writings the catholic
faith has been continewed unto our time.

CAP. XXI.
Of the controversy about the kepinge of Easter day. Cap. 23. after the
greek. Anno Dom. 199. Exodus 12.


AT the same time there rose no small contention because that all the churches
throughoute Asia, of an aunciente tradition, thought good to observe the high
feast of Easter in the foreteenthe moon. on which day the Jews were
commanded to offer their Pascall Lamb. as much to say as upon what day
soever in the week, that moon fell, the fasting Easter and the fasting days
going before laid down by decree. Theophilus and Narcissus were chief in
Palaestina: Victor at To. Palmas a^ Po^tus: Irenae us in France: The bishops
of Ostroena in their provinces: Banchillus at Corinth and not the bishope of
Rome over all.
days finished, and ended. when as the other churches throughout the world,
accustomed not to celebrate Easter after this manner, but observed the
Apostolic tradition and custom, as yet retained, to wete: the fasting days
on no other day to be broken up, before the day wherein our Savior rose from
death to life. Wherefore synodes and meetinges of Byshopes were summoned, where
all with one accord ordained an ecclestasticall decree which they published
by their epistles unto all churches: That upon no other then the sunday the
mystery of our saviors resurrection should be celebrated. And that one that
day, and no other, the fasting used before Easter should have an end. Their
epistle is at this day extant, who at that time for this cause assembled
together in Palaestina, whereof Theophilus bishope of Caesarea, and Narcissus
bishope of Jerusalem were chief. At Rome likewise there was a synod gathered
together for the same cause, the which Victor their bishope published. Again
there was an other of bishopes at Pontus, where Palmas, as the most ancient,
did govern. An other of bishops throughout France which Irenaeus did
ouersee. to be short an other of the bishopes throughout Ostroena, and the
cities therein contained, and specially of Banchillus bishope of Corinth with
many others, al which with one and the same sentence, and judgment, ordained
the same decree, and their uniform assent, was thus made manifest unto the
world.

CAP. XXII.
By the report of Polycrates the churches in Asia celebrated Easter the
fouretenthe moon. cap. 24. after the greek


POlycrates moderated the bishops throughout Asia, which affirmed that their
aunciente custom delivered them of old was to be retained. This Polycrates in
his epistle unto the church of Rome, shows the custom of Asia, observed
unto his time in these words: We celebrate the unviolated day of Easter,
neither addinge any thing thereto, neither taking ought therefro. for
notable pillars of Christian religion, have rested in Polycrates byshope of
Ephesus writes to Victor and the church of Rome. John the Apostle being a
priest wore the priestly attire.
Asia, which shall rise at the last day, when the Lord shall come from
heaven with glory, and restore all the saints to joy: Philip one of the
twelve Apostles, now lienge at Hierapolis, and his two daughters who kept
them selves virgins, all the days of their lives, the third also after the
end of her holy conversation rested at Ephesus. Again John who lay on the
Lords breast, being a Priest, wore the priestlie attire, both a Martyr, and a
Doctor, slept at Ephesus. Moreover Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna, and a Martyr.
Thraseas an Eumenian, both a Bishop and a Martyr, slept at Smyrna. What shall I
speak of Sagaris both a Bishope and a Martyr, lyenge at Laodicea. And of
blessed Papyrius, and Melito an eunuche, who was led and guided in all
things that he did by the holy ghost, and now rests at Sardis, vvaytinge
the message from heaven, when he shall rise from the dead. Cap. 25. after the
greek
All these celebrated the feast of Easter according unto the Gospel, in the
fouretenth day of the month, svvaruing no where, but obseruinge the rule of
faith. to be short and I Polycrates the meanest of you all, do retain the
tradition of my forefathers, of which some I have imitated, for there were
seven Bishopes before me, and now I the eighth, which alvvaies have
celebrated the feast of Easter on that day, in the which the people removed
the leaven from among them. I therefore (my brethren) which now have lived
threescore and five years in the Lord, have conferred with the brethren
throughout the world, have read, and ouerreade the holy scriptures, yet will
not be moved at al with these things, which are made to terrify us. for my
auncetors and elders have said that we ought rather to obey God then men.
Afterward he speaks of the bishops that consented, and subscribed to his
epistle, after this manner: I could repeat the bishops which were Act. 4.
present whom you requested me to assemble, whom also I have assembled
together, whose names if I should write would grovve to a great number:
they have visited me a simple soul, and a man of small account, and have
consented unto this epistle. they also know that I bear not this gray hear
in vain, but alvvaies have had my conversation in Christ Jesus.

CAP. XXIII.
The censure of certain bishops toutching this controversy.

IMmediately upon this, Victor Bishope of Rome, goes about to sever from the
unity in the communion, all the churches of Asia together with the adjoining
congregations, as savoring not aright, and iuueyeth against them in his
epistles, and pronounces flattly, all the brethren there for excommunicated
persons. but this pleased not all the bishops, for they exhorted him to seek
after those things which concerned peace, and unity, and love between
brethren. Ca. 26. after the Greek. where then was the saying that the bishope
of Rome must judge all and be judged of none? Irenaeus bishop of Lio^s. Victor
bishop of Rome.
Their words are at this day extant that sharply reprehended Victor, of which
number, Irenaeus, in the name of all the brethren in France that were under
his charge, wrote and allowed the same sentence, to wete: The mystery of the
resurrection of our Savior to be celebrated on the sunday only. Yet as it
was very meet he put him in remembrance at large of his duty that he should
not estraynge or cut of all the churches of God, which retained the tradition
of old custom. his words are these: Nether is this controversy only of the
day, but also of the kind or manner of fasting. Some think they ought to
fast one day, some two, some more, some forty, and telling the hours
throughout day and night they count a day. nether began this variety of
fasting in our time, but long before, through them who then bare rule, and
as it is very likelye, through their double negligence, they despised and
altered the simple and common custom retained of old. yet for all this were
they at unity one with an other, and as yet we retain it, for this variety
of fasting commends the unity of faith. After this he adioyneth a certain
history, which I will allege as peculierly incident to this place* They
(says he) that were bishops before Soter, of that sea which now thou
gouernest, I mean* Anicetus, Pius, Hyginus, Telesphorus and Xystus, nether did
they so observe it them selves, nether did they publishe any such president
unto the posterity, and for all that, they (though not observing the same
custom) were at unity nevertheless with them, which resorted unto them
from other churches, and did not observe the same, although their observation
was contrary to the minds of such as observed it not. nether was the like
ever heard of, that any man, for such kind of fasting was excommunicated. yea
the bishopes them selves which were thy predecessors, have sent the
Eucharist unto the brethren of other churches, that observed a contrary
custom. And Polycarpus being at Rome, in the time of Anicetus, they both
varied among them selves about trifling matters, yet were they soon
reconciled, and not a word of this matter. Neither was Anicetus able to
persuade Polycarpus that he should not retain that, which he had alvvaies
observed, with John the disciple of our Lord, and the rest of the Apostles,
with whom he had been co^uersant: neither did Polycarpus persuade Anicetus,
to observe it, but told him, that he ought to observe the ancient custom of
the elders, whom he succeeded. These things being at this point, they
communicated one with an other. and in the church Ruffinus tra^slati^g these
words understands that Anicetus granted the ministratio^ of the communion
unto Polycarpus, which is very like to be true. Irenaeus signifies a peace
maker.
Anicetus granted the Eucharist unto Polycarpus, for reverence he ovved unto
him. in the end they parted, one from an other in peace. and al such as
retained contrary observations throughout the whole universal church, held
fast the bond of love and unity. Thus Irenaeus not degenerating from the
etymology of his name, passing all other in ye gift of reconciling the
brethren practiced for the ecclesiastical peace. he wrote not only to Victor,
but also to sundry governors of diverse other churches, in several epistles,
concerning the said controversy.

CAP. XXIIII.
The censure of the Bishops in Palaestina toutching the said controversy of
Easter, the repetition of the books of certain ecclesiastical writers.

THe bishops of Palaestina (mentioned a little before) Narcissus, Theophilus
and with the^ Cassius Cap. 27. after the greek.
bishope of Tyrus, and Clarus bishop of Ptolomais, together with other bishops
in their company, when they had reasoned at large toutching the celebration of
Easter, and the tradition delivered unto the^ by succession from ye Apostles,
in the end of their epistle they write thus: Send The provincial council held
at Palestina write thus unto the province throughout. Certain works of
Irenaeus. Comodus was emperor 13. years. Pertinax 6. months. Seuerus created
emperor anno Dom. 195. under this Seuerus the 5. great persecution was raised.
out with speed the copies of our epistle throughout the parishes that we be
not charged with their error, which easily are brought to snare eue^ their
own souls. we signify unto you that at Alexandria, they celebrate the
feast of Easter upon the self same day with us. their epistles are brought
unto us and ours unto the^ that we may uniformly and together solemnize this
holy feast. Besides these alleged, and translated letters, and epistles of
Irenaeus, there is exta^t an other book of his very learned and necessary
against the gentiles, entitled of Science or knowledge. an other unto
Marcianus his brother entitled A declaration of the Apostles preaching. and an
other book of diverse tracts* where he makes mention of the epistle unto y^
Hebrews, and the book of VVisdome, called Solomon's: whence he alleges
testimonies. these are the works of Irenaeus which came to our knowledge. when
Comodus had been Emperor. xiii. years, and Pertinax after him not fully the
space of six months: Seuerus succeeded him in the empire. there are reserved
at this day in many places many notable works of diverse ecclesiastical
persons, whereof these came to our hands. the commentaries of Heraclitus upon
Paul. Maximus of y^ common question in heretics mouths: whence evil
proceeds: and that this substance was made. Candidus of the creation of
work of the six days. Appion of the same argument. Sixtus of the
resurrection, and a certain tracte of Arabianus, with a thousand mo. all
which writers, time does not permit, neither is it possible to publishe them
in this our history because they minister no occasion to make mention of them.

CAP. XXV.
Of such as from the beginning impugned the heresy of Artemon, the behavior
of Cap. 28. after the Greek.
the heretic and his presumption in rejecting and corrupting the scriptures.

AMong these books there is found a volume written against the heresy of
Artemon* which Paulus Samosatenus in our days endeavored to revive: wherein is
contained ah history worthy to be published, among these our histories,
diversely and from every where collected* when this The opinion of Artemon the
heretic*
book had confuted y^ said presu^ptuous heresy, which affirmed Christ to be a
b^^e and naked man, and that the authors thereof had gloried of it, as an
ancient opinion after many lines, and leaves, to the co^fu^acion of this
blasphemous untruth, he writes thus: They affirm that all our aun^^^ours*
yea and the Apostles them selves were of that opinion, and taught the same
with them, and that An ancient writer (as I suppose Maximus) in the
confutation of the sect of Artemon.
this their true doctrine (for so they call it) was preached and embraced unto
the time of Victor the thirtenth bishop of Rome, after Peter, and corrupted by
his successor Zephyrinus. this peradventure might seem to have some
likelyhoode of truth, unless first of all, the holy scriptures reclamed,
next the books of sundry me^, long before the time of Victor, which they
published against the gentiles, in the defense of the truth, and in the
confutation of the heretical opinions of their time. I mean Justinius,
Meltiades, Tatianus, and Clemens, with many others in all which Christ is
preached and published to be God. Who knovveth not that the works of
Irenaus, Melito and all other Christians do confess Christ to be both God and
man? to be short how many psalms and hymns, and Canticles, were written
from the beginning, by the faithful Christians, which ^ounde and singe
Christ the word of God, for no other then God in deed? how then is it
possible according unto their report, that our auncetors unto the time of
Victor, should have preached so? when as the ecclesiastical censure, for so
many years is pronounced for certain, and known unto all the world. and
how can they choose but be ashamed, thus Theodotus a tanner and an heretic.
untruly to report of Victor, when as they know for surety that Victor
excommunicated Theodotus a tanner, the father and founder of this Apostasy,
which denied the divinity of Christ? because that he first affirmed Christ
to be but only man. if Victor (as they report) had been of their blasphemous
opinion, how then could he have excommunicated Theodotus, the author of that
heresy. but Victor was thus affectionated. when he had governed y^
ecclesiastical function Zephyrinus b. of Rome. Anno Dom. 203. A worthy
history of Natalius an heretical bishope repenting him self
the space of ten years Zephyrinus succeeded him, about the tenth year of
the reign of Seuerus. The same author which wrote the aforesaid book against
the founder of this heresy, declares a certain history that was done in the
time of Zepherinus after this manner. Therefore to the end I may advertise
diverse of the brethren, I vvil rehearse a certain history of our time,
which as I suppose if it had been in Sodom, they would have fallen to
repentance. There was one Natalius, who not long before, but eue^ in our time
becam a co^fessor. this Natalius was on a time seduced by Asclepiodotus, and
an other Theodotus an exchau^ger, they both were disciples of Theodotus the
ta^ner, who the^ being author of this blasphemous opinion (as I said before)
was excommunicated by Victor bishop of Rome. for Natalius was persuaded by
the^ for a certain hire, and reward, to be called a bishop of this heretical
opinion, to vvete: a hundredth and fifty pe^ce, monthly to be paid him. Now he
being thus linked unto the^, the Lord warned him often by visions. for God and
our Lord Jesus Christ full of mercy and compassion, would not that the
witness of his passions, should perish without the church. and for that he
was altogether careless, and negligent in marking the visions from above
being now as it were hooked with the svveete baits of primacie, and honor,
and filthy lucre, vvherby thousands do perish: at length he was scurged by an
Angel of the Lord. God sends his Angel to scourge by night.
and for the space of a whole night chasticed not a little, so that when he
rose early in the morning covered in sackcloth, and sprinkled in ashes, with
much vvoe, and many tears, he fell down flat before the feet of Zephyrinus
bishope of Rome, not after the manner of a clergy man, but of the lay
people, beseaching the church (prone alvvayes to compassion) with vvatrishe
eyes, and vvette cheeks, for the mercy of Christ, to tender and pity his
miserable case, so that vsinge many petitions, and shevvinge in his body the
printe of the plaguye stripes, after much ado he was received unto the
communion. We think best to add unto these other relations of the same
author, for thus he writes. They corrupted the holy and sacred scriptures,
without The practices of the heretical sect of Artemon.
any reverence: they rejected the canon of the ancient faith: they have been
ignorant of Christ: not searching what the holy scriptures affirmed, but
exercisinge them selves therein, and siftinge it to this end: that some figure
or form of a syllogism might be found to impugn the divinity of Christ:
and if any reasoned with them out of holy scripture, forthwith they demand
whether it be a coniuncte, or a simple kind of syllogism. layenge aside
holy scripture, they practice Geometry, as being of the earth they speak
earthlye and know not him which came from above. Euclides among a great
many of them measures the earth busielie. Aristotle Euclides. Aristotle.
Theophrast* Galen. Heretics presume to correct, alter and translate holy
scripture.
and Theophrastus are hyghlye esteemed. Galen is of diverse worshipped. but
what shall I say of these, who (being far from the faith) abuse the art
of infidels to the establyshinge of their heretical opinion, and corrupt the
simplicity of holy scripture, through the subtle craft of sinful persons? for
to this purpose they put their profane hands to holy scripture, saying:
they would correct them. and that I report not this untruly of them, or
parciallie against them, if any man please he may easily know it. for if any
will peruse their copies, and confer one with an other, he shall find in
them great contrariety. The books of Asclepiades agree not with them of
Theodotus. there is found between them great difference, for their disciples
vvrote obscurely such things as their masters had ambiciously corrected. again
with these the copies Hermophilus do not consent. neither are the copies of
Apollonius at concord among the^ selves. if their alligatio^s be co^ferred
with their tra^slatio^s, and alteratio^s, there shall be found great diversity.
A notable dilemma.
belike they are altogether ignorant what presumption is practiced in this
lewd fact of theirs. either they persuade them selves, that the holy
scriptures were not endited by the instinct of the holy ghost, and so are they
infidels: or else they think the^ selves vviser the^ the holy ghost, and what
other thing do they in that, then show the^ selves possessed of a devil? they
ca^ not deny this their bold enterprise, for they have vvritte^ these things
with their own hands. they can not show us who instructed them, who
delivered them such scriptures, and whence they translated their copie^
diverse of them voutchsafe not to corrupt the scriptures, but flattly they
deny the law, and the prophets, under pretense of their detestable, and
impious doctrine of feigned grace, they fall into the bottomless gulf of
perdition. but of them thus much shall suffice.

The end of the fyft book.
THE SIXTH BOOK OF THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORYE OF EVSEBIVS PAMPHILVS BISHOP OF
CAESAREA IN PALAESTINA.
CAP. I.
Of the persecution under the Emperor Seuerus.

WHen as Seuerus persecuted the church of God, there were noble martyrdomes of
Anno Dom. 204.
such as suffered for the profession of the true faith* but specially at
Alexandria, whither chosen champions out of Egypt, and all Thebais, as unto a
most notable Theater of God, were brought, and after a most pacient
sufferance of simdry torments, and diverse kinds of death, were crowned of
God with garlandes of immortalltie. Of this number was Leonides called the
father of Origin, and there beheaded, who left Leonides the father of Origin
beheaded.
his son very young, and of tender years. how also he was disposed, and
affected toward Christian religion from that time forth, it shall not be at
this time unseasonably written. Specially for that he is famous and renowned
throughout the whole world. Some man will say it is no small piece of work
to printe in paper the life of this man, and that it will require a whole
Seuerus went on the tenth year of his reign, when the great persecution was
raised. Laetus ruled Alexandria and Egypt.
volume to it self: but at this present cutting of many things, using as much
brevity as may be, we will run over certain things which concern him,
selected out of their epistles and histories, which were his familiars, whereof
some lived in our time, and reported certain things of him. To be short we
will declare such things as shall seem worthy of memory, and that were done
from his cradell unto this time. Seuerus then had ended ten years, Laetus
then governed Alexandria, and the rest of Aegypte* Demetrius lately after
Iulianus had taken upon him the oversight of the congregations there.

CAP. II.
Origin desirous of Martyrdom was in great danger, and being delivered, he
professed divinity at Alexandria with earnest study, and led a maruaylous
honest life.

THe heat of persecution was very vehement, and an infinite number of persons
were crowned with Martyrdom: when as Origin yet very young, bare in his mind
a fervent desire of Martyrdom, so that he hazarded himself, skipped, and
brake forth, and coueted voluntarily to be doing in that dangerous combatt.
Cap. 3. after the Greek.
Yea narrowsie did he escape, for it had cost him his life, had not the divine
and celestial providence of God stayed him, by the means of his mother, to
the further commodity and profit of many. She at the first entreated him
with many Origin by the means of his mother auoydeth great peril. Origin
being a child, exhorts his father to mar tyrdome. Origin of a child
brought up in holy Scriture.
words to tender her motherly affection: but perceauing him to be more
vehemently incensed and kindled* knowing his father to be kept in close prison,
and wholly minded to suffer Martyrdom, she constrained him to remain at home,
hydinge from him all his apparel. He then being able to do no other thing,
more prompte in mind than ripe in years, could not rest, wrote unto his
father a letter, in the which he exhorts him thus: O father, faint not,
neither imagin^ amiss because of us. Let this be the first token of the
industry and sincere mind of Origin in his childhood toward christian
religion set forth in this our history* for he being of a child trained up and
exercised in holy scripture, showed then no small signs of the doctrine of
faith. his father furthered him not a little to the knowledge of them, when as
besides the study of liberal arts, he instructed him in these, not as the
lesser part. For first of all before the exercise of profane literature, he
instructed him in holy Scripture, and demanded of him daily a certain task,
of that he learned and rehearsed. And this trade was not unprofitable for him
being a child, but he grew thereby unto such facility and promptnes, that he
contented not him self with the bare and casual reading of the words, but
sought farther, searching the perfect and profound understanding thereof, so
that diverse times he would set his father demanding of him what was meant by
this and that place of holy Scripture. But his father checked him to his face
in outward sight, admonishing him not to search ought above the capacity of his
years, and more then plain letter gave to understand. Yet to him self he
rejoiced greatly, yelding unto God the author of all goodness hearty thanks, for
that he had made him the father of such a son. The report goes that the
father often uncovered the breast of his son in his sleep, and solemnly
kissed it as if the holy ghost had taken there the inner part for his privy
closset, and thought him self happy of such an ofspringe. These and the like
things they remember to have happened unto Origin, being yet a child. When
his father dyed a Martyr, he was left an orphane of the years of seventeen
with his mother, and other children his brethren, to the number of six, his
father^ substance was confiscated to y^ Emperors treasorie, y^ want of
necessaries pinched him together with his mother and brethren, he casts his A
certain Matrone of Alexandria receaueth Origin with* his mother and brethren.
care upon the divine providence of God, he is received and refreshed of a
certain matrone which was very rich and also religious, which harbored in her
house a certain man of Antioche, an errant heretic of the sect then fresh at
Alexandria, one that was accepted of her, for her son and dear friend.
Origin then of necessity using his company, showed forth manifest proofs of
his cleaning fast unto y^ right and true faith. For when as an infinite
multitude not only of heretics, but also of the true faith frequented unto
Paulus (so was he called) for he was counted a profounde and a wise man: he
could not be persuaded to be present with him at prayers, but observed the
canon of the Church from a child, and detested* (as he witnesses him self in
a certain place) the Origin takes heed of Heretics. It Is. 3. Origin studieth
rhetoric.
doctrine of heretics. he was of his father absolutely instructed in the
profane learning of y^ Gentiles, but after his fathers death, he applied a little
more diligently the study of rhetoric, and having before meanly applied
humanity, now after the death of his father he so addicteth him unto it, that
in short space he got sufficiency to serve his turn, both tolerable for the
time, and correspondent to his years. for he being idle at schole (as he him
self in a certain place reports) when as none occupied the rowme of
Catechizing at Alexandria, because that every one was feign to fly away by
reason of the threatening thunderbolts of persecution, diverse of the Gentiles
came to him, to hear the preaching of the word of God. whereof he says the
first to have been Plutarch, Plutarch a martyr. Heraclas after Demetrius b. of
Alexandria. Origin a catechizer being 18. year old. Origin corn forteth the
martyrs.
who besides that he lived well, was crowned with martyrdom. The second was
Heraclas y^ brother of Plutarch, who after he had profited very much, and
sucked at his lips, the juice of christian religion and heavenly philosophy:
succeeded Demetrius in the bishopric of Alexandria. Origin went now on y^
eyghtenth year when he catechized in the school of Alexandria, at what time
he happily prospered whilst that under Aquila Lieuetenant of Alexandria, in
the heat of persecution he purchased unto him self a famous opinion among all
y^ faithful, in that he chearefully embraced all the martyrs, not only of his
acquaintance, but such as were unto him unknown. he visited not only such as
were fettered in deep dungeons, and close imprisonment: neither only such as
looked for the last sentence of execution, but after judgment given and
sentence pronounced he was present with the martyrs, boldly accompanying them
to y^ place of execution, putting him self in great peril, oftentimes boldly
embracing, kissing and saluting them, so that once the furious rage of the
fond multitude of the Gentiles, had stoned him to death if the divine power
of God, had not maruelously delivered him. y^ same divine and celestial grace
of God at other times again and again, so often as can not be told, defended
him, being assaulted of the adversaries, because of his noble hardines and
prompt mind to publish the doctrine of Christ. so extremely was he dealt
withal of the Infidels, that soldiers were commanded to watch his house in
compass, for the banishing of the multitude that came to be instructed of him,
in the Christian faith. The persecution daily prevailed and was so vehemently
bent against him, that he could no where pass safely throughout Alexandria,
but often chau^ging lodging^, he was from every where pursued, because of the
multitude which frequented unto him for instructions sake. for his works
expressed most Orige^ as he taught he lived and as he hued he taught.
notable rules of the most true and christian philosophy. they say, as he
taught so he lived, and as he lived so he taught. Wherefore the divine power of
God specially preuayling with him (...) infinite number were sturred up by his
zeal. when he perceived many Disciples to frequent (...) to him, and that the
charge of the school was now by Demetrius the Bishop, committed unto him
alone, he supposed the reading of humanity to be out of season, and
transformeth the school as altogether unprofitable by reason of profane
literature and humanity opposite unto sacred letters, to the exercise of godly
discipline. again after good advise taken for necessary provision he soulde
the profane writers which he had diligently perused, and lay by him, enioyning
the buyer, to pay him daily Orige^ sold his philosophy books.
four halfepence of the set price, wherewith he contented him self. and this
philosophical trade continewed he y^ space of many years, cutting of from him
self all occasion of youthly concupiscence* for throughout the whole day he
took no small labor in this godly exercise, and the greater part of the night
also he spent in meditating of holy Scripture, and in his philosophical life,
as much as lay in him, he used fasting, taking his rest at certain temperate
times of the year, not on his bed, but very warely on y^ bare ground.
specially above al other places, he supposed y^ sayings of our Savior in the
Gospel to be observed, which exhorted us not to wear two coats, neither
shoes, neither to care for the time to come with a greedy, or covetous desire.
for he endured cold and nakedness more chearefully then became his years,
and suffered such extreme need and necessity, which greatly amazed his
familier friends, and offended many that willingly would have supplied his
want and necessity, for the paynfulnes they saw him take, in setting forth the
heavenly doctrine of Christ Jesus our Savior. but he being given to pacient
sufferance, passed many years without the wearing of shoes, joining naked
foot to bare ground. and he is said moreover for the space of many years,
to have abstained from wine, and other such like (necessary sustenance only
excepted) so that he ran in great danger, lest that through weakness of
lymmes, and faintness of body, he should destroy and cast away him self.
this philosophical trade of life being wondered Origin had many followers.
at of others, stirred up a great many Disciples, to imitate the like trade and
study. so that of the faithful and unfaithful, of the learned and wise, and
the same not of the meaner sort, a great number became zealous and earnest
followers after his doctrine. in so much that the heavenly word of God taking
deep root in their faithful minds, flourished and continewed steadfastly
during the persecution of that time, so that some of them were apprehended and
suffered martyrdom.

CAP. III.
Of the martyrs that suffered out of the school of Origin. Cap. 4. after the
Greek. Plutarchus a Martyr.


THe first of them was Plutarchus remembered a little before. whom Origin
accompanied to the place of execution, not without great danger of his life,
when as his own citizens went about to practice violence toward him, as being
author of Plutarchus death. yet the wisdom of God delivered him then. The
next of the disciples of Origin after Plutarchus, was Serenus, who is said to
be the second Martyr which gave trial and proof of the faith he received,
and Serenus burned. Heraclides beheaded. Heron beheaded. Serenus beheaded.
Rhais a woman burned. Cap. 5. after the greek.
that by fire. The third Martyr out of the same school was Heraclides, the
fourth after him Heron. of the which two latter, the first was a Catechumenist,
the second lately baptized, but both beheaded* as yet out of the same school
came forth the fifth champion, a second Serenus, who after patience in great
torments and grievous pain, was beheaded. and of the women also, Rhais, as yet
a Catechumenist, baptized (as Origin him self reports) in fire, departed
this life.

CAP. IIII.
The martyrdom of Potamiaena a virgin, Marcella her mother, and Basilides a
soldier.

BAsilides shall be numbered the seventh among the former Martyrs, which led forth
the renowned virgin Potamiaena to execution, of whom unto this day a great
fame is blased abroad among the inhabitants of that province, how that for the
chastity of her body and purity of mind, she strove very stoutly with her
lovers. she was endued with ripenes of mind, and goodly bewty of body. when she
had suffered infinitely for the faith of Christ, last of all after great and
Potamiaena burned. Marcella burned.
grievous, and dreadful, and terrible torments to be told of, together with
her mother Marcella, she is burned with fire and consumed to ashes* the report
goes that Aquila the judge commanded her whole body to be scurged over, and
that very sore, and threatened her, he would deliver her body shamefully to be
abused of Fencers and ruffians: and after she had muzed a while with her self,
and they demanding an answer, to have said such things as pleased not the
Gentiles, and therefore immediately after sentence pronounced, to have been
taken and ledd of Basilides (a soldier of authority among the host) to
execution. When the multitude molested her sore, spitefully handling her with
opprobrious terms: Basilides repressed and rebuked their railing speeches,
pytying her very much, and practicing great courtesy toward her. she of the
other side approved and acknowledged his courteous dealing toward her, and bad
him be of good cheer, saying: that after her departure she would entreat her
Lord for him, and shortly requite the courtesy showed unto her. When she had
ended this communication, pitche scalding hott was powered by a little and a
little over all her body, from the crown of her head to the soul of her
foot, the which she manfully endured in the Lord, and such was the sore
combatt which this worthy virgin sustained. but not long after, Basilides
being required of his fellow soldiers to swear for Basilides before a Pagan
now a Christian, before a murderer, now a martyr
some occasion or other, affirmed plainly it was not lawful for him to
swear, for he said he was a Christian, and that he would in very deed
protest the same. at the first he was thought to daly, but when he constantly
auoutched it, he is brought before the judge, and there having confessed the
same, is clapped in prison. but when the brethren had visited him, and demanded
of him the cause of his sudden and marvelous alteration, the report goes he
declared them how that Potamiaena three days after her martyrdom, appeared
unto him by night, and covered his head with a crown and said: she had
entreated the Lord for him, and obtained her purpose, and that not long after
Basilides baptized in prison, afterward beheaded.
he should end this life. after these sayings, and the seal of the Lord
received by the brethren he was beheaded, and so suffered martyrdom. they
write that many others in Alexandria, embraced plentifully the doctrine of
Christ, for that Potamiaena appeared unto them in sleep, and called them to
the faith. of these things thus much.

The translator unto the reader, for the removing of suspicion rising of two
things which Eusebius laid down in the chapter going before.
THere are two things in this former chapter of Eusebius with good aduisement
to be considered. The first whether Potamiaena after her martyrdom prayed for
Basilides. the second whether after her martyrdom she appeared unto him, and
to others, as Eusebius (by hear say) lays down. Toutching the first if we
may credit Augustine: The souls of the departed are in such a place where
they see not August. lib. de cur. pro mort. agend. cap. 13. Pet. Martyr. in 8.
cap. ad Romans
those things which are done, and which happen unto men in this life, he
says further that they have a care over us, as we have over them, although we
are altogether ignorant what they do. Peter Martyrs opinion, is this:
although I could easily grant, that the Saints in heaven do vvish with most
fervent desires the salvation of the elect, yet for all that, I dare not
affirm that they pray for us, in so much that the Scripture has no where
laid that down. Potamiaena this holy virgin and martyr, seeing the kindness
this soldier showed unto her, was greatly pleased with him, and in the
feruency of her christian love toward him said: that she would entreat the
Lord for him after her departure. In the like sort also I read that Cyprian
Bishop of Carthage moved Cornelius Bishop Cyprian lib. 1. epist. 1.
of Rome, that whether of them both should first depart this life, the same
without intermission should pray unto God for the other. such was the
feruencye of love between them. In the like sense men commonly say: God have
mercy on his soul. which saying the learned and zealous do not so well like of
for though the good motion (as they say) and disposition of the mind be
expressed thereby yet does it the dead no good at all: when as his soul being
already in the hands of God, needs not our prayer. God no doubt was as ready
to grant Basilides the light of his spirit, as Potamiaena was to pray for him.
Toutching the second, whether she appeared unto him after her death the godly
can judge. Saint Augustine says: If the souls of the dead departed, were
present at the affairs of the living, then August. li. decur. pro mor. agend.
cap. 13
vvoulde they speak unto us, when we see them in our sleep, and to omit
others, mine own tender mother, vvoulde forsake me never a night, which
follovved by sea and by land, to the end she might live together with me.
God forbid that she should become cruel in the happier life, so that (if
ought at any time grieve my heart) she comfort not her sorrowful son,
whom she loved entyrely, whom she vvoulde never see, sadd. but in good
soothe that which the sacred Psalm sounds out, is true: my father and my
mother have Psalm. 27.
forsaken me, but the Lord took me up. If our fathers have forsaken us, how
are they present at our cares and business? If our parents be not present,
what other of the departed be ^say 63. 4. Reg. 22.
there which know what we do, or what we suffer? The Prophet Esaias
says: Abraham has been ignorant of us, and Israel has not known us. God
of his great goodness promised King Josias, that he should dye, and be
gathered unto his people, lest that he should see the plagues which he
threatened should happen to that place and people. Chrysostom says: the soul
that Chrysostom. in 8. cap. Matthew.
is severed from the body, can not wander in these regions: Again he says:
It may not be that the soul departed from the body, can be conversant here
with us: a little after he says: It may be proved by many testimonies of holy
Scripture, that the souls of just men, wander not here after their death.
and lest any think that the wicked do wander, thus he writes. that neither
the souls of the wicked also can linger here, harken what the ritche man
says, vveye what he requesteth, and obtayneth not. for in case that the
souls of men could be Luke 16.
conversant here, then had he come according unto his desire, and certified his
friends of the torments of hell. by which place of Scripture it plainly
appears, that the souls after their departure out of the body are brought
into some certain place, from whence at their will they can not return, but
wait for that dreadefull day of judgment. Theophilact also the Theophilact
in 8. cap. Mat Origin lib 7 contra Celsu^ Chrysst in 8. cap. Matthew. 1. Reg. 28.
Augustinus Lib. 2. de mirab. sacrae Scrip. cap. 11 Cyprian de Idol. vanitate
Summarist of Chrysostom, has the same words. Origin writing against
Celsus, is of the same opinion: affirming that the souls wander not, but such
as wander to be devils. Chrysostom writes that the devil uses to say unto
the living, anima talis ego sum. I am such a man's soul* to the end he may
deceive him. Samuel whom the wytch raised, was not Samuel, but the devil in
his form, as Augustine writes. Cyprian says: the wicked spirits do hide
them selves in pictures and images consecrated: these inspyre the minds of the
Prophets: they bolden the heart stringes and entralls: they govern the flying
of birds: they sort lotts: they fifte out oracles: they mingle alvvayes
falsehoode and truth together. for they deceive and are deceived: they trouble
the life: they disquiet the sleep: and creeping into the bodies, they fraye
the secrets of the mind: they bring the lymmes out of fashion: they distemper
the health: they vex with diseases, that they may compel the poor seely
vvretches to the worshipping of the^: that being filled with the sauore from
the altars and burnt bowels of beasts, loosing the things which they
bound, they may seem to cure. for this is their curing and healing, when
they cease to hurt: Now seeinge this harmony of learned fathers, affirming
the souls not to wander, and that they which wander be plain devils, let us
examine what credi^t can be given to Eusebius, and how it may be understood
that Potamiaena appeared not only to Basilides in sleep, but also to many
others for their conversion. Pharaos cuppbearer dreamed he saw a vine having
three Pharaos cup bearer.
branches, but it was not so (according unto the letter) Joseph tells him
that the three branches are three days. Pharao dreamed he saw seven lean
kyne, it was not so: Joseph tells him they are 7. Pharao.
years of famyne. Mardochaeus dreamed he saw two dragons ready to wage
battle with the just, Mardochaeus
it was no so: but Haman and the King wholly bent to destroy the Jews.
Polycarpus dreamed he Polycarpus.
saw the pillowe set all on fire under his head, it was not so: but a sign
or token of his martyrdom. Sophocles having robbed the temple of Hercules,
dreamed that Hercules accused him of theft, it Sophocles.
was not so: but his conscience pricked him that he could find no rest* even
so Basilides, with diverse Basilides.
others, having fresh in memory the martyrdom of Potamiaena, and the
villanye they practiced against her, dreamed of her, their conscience pricked
them, and bearing them wittnes of the fact, to their repentance and
conversion. so that she appeared not (after the letter) but her martyrdom was
a corize unto their conscience, crowning them with garlands of heavenly glory,
if happily they would repent.

CAP. V. Cap. 6. after the greek.

Of Clemens Alexandrinus Origens master, and of his books stromaton.

CLemens succeeded Pantaenus, and unto that time he was a catechizer in the
Church of Alexandria, Pantaenus, Clemens and Origin were catechizers in the
schole of Alexandria
so that Origin became one of his Disciples. This Clemens writing his books
stromaton, compriseth in the first volume a Cronicle, containing the times unto
y^ death of Comodus, so that it is evident, he finished his books under
Seuerus, the history of whose time we do presently prosecute:

CAP. VI. Cap. 7. after the greek.

Of Jude an ecclesiastical writer and his books.

About this time there flourished one Jude, who published comentaries upon the
70 weeks Jude.
of Daniel, ending his Chronographie the tennth year of Seuerus reign, he
thought verily that the coming of Antichrist was then at hand because the
great heat of persecution raised against us at that time, vexed out of
measure the minds of many men, and turned vpside down the quiet state of the
Church.

CAP. VII. Cap. 8. after the greek.

Origin embracing chastity, gelded him self. the censure of others toutching
that fact of his.

AT that time Origin executing the office of a Catechizer at Alexandria
practiced a certain Origin geldeth himself.
act, which expressed the show of an imperfect sense, and youthly hardines,
but a notable example of faith and chastity. he understanding simply and
childishly the sainge of the Lord: There be some which make themselves
Eunuchs for the Kindome of heavens sake: and Math, 19.
with all purposing to fulfill the words of our Savior, for that he being
young in years preached, and made manifest, not only to men, but also to women
the mysteries of God: sought means to cut of, all occasion of wantonness and
the sclaunder of the infidels, practiced upon himself to perform the words of
our Savior, carefully minding to conceal from his familiar friends this fact
of his. but it was impossible to cloak and cover so great a matter, which thing
when Demetrius Demetrius bishop of Alexandria one while likes another while
misliketh through envy with the gelding of Origin. The bishops of Caesarea and
Jerusalem allowed of Origin and made him minister.
bishop of that place had understood he wondered at his bold enterprise, yet
allowed of his purpose, and the sincerity of his faithful mind, he bidds him
be of good cheer and continewe the office of a Catechizer. Though Demetrius
was then of that mind, yet not long after, seeing Origin luckely to prosper,
to be highely esteemed, reverenced, renowned and famous among all men: he was
pricked with some humane passion, so that he painted and published abroad, unto
all the bishops throughout the world the geldinge of Origin as a most foul
and absurd fact. yet the best accepted and worthiest bishops throughout
Palaestina, to wete of Caesarea and Jerusalem, because they had found him
worthy of dignity and great honor, made him minister through the laying on of
hands. then after that he came to great estimation, and was well accepted of
all men, and gotten no small commendation for his virtue and wisdom:
Demetrius having no other thing to charge him withal, accused him of the old
fact done of a child, and for company wrapped with accusations such as
advanced him unto the order of the ministry, which were putt in practice
within a while after. from that time forth Origin without let or hinderance
fulfilled the work he had in hand, preached at Alexandria day and night the
word of God unto such as frequented unto him, appliyng his whole mind unto
holy Stripture and the profit of his disciples. when Seuerus had held the
imperial scepter the space of eightene years, his son* Antoninus succeeded
him. Antoninus was created Emperor anno Domini. 213.
And of them which manfully perseuered in the persecution of that time, and
after confession and sundry torments and conflicts, by the providence of God
were delivered: on was Alexander whom a little before we signified to have been
bishop of Jerusalem. He because he perseuered constante in the confession of
the name of Christ, was there chosen bishop, Narcissus his predecessor being
yet a live.

CAP. VIII.
Of Narcissus bishop of Jerusalem, his miracle and aproued Cap. 9. after the
Greek.
innocencye.

THe Citizens of that seae remember many miracles wrought by Narcissus, which
they received If thou think (gentle Reader) this miracle to be a tale, take
it, as cheap as thou find (...) it be true marvel not at all thereat, for
God brings stranger things then this to pass.
ceaued by tradition delivered from one to an other, among which, such a
miracle is reported to have been done. when on a certain time the solemn
vigills of Easter were celebrated, the ministers wanted oil, the whole
multitude being therewith much grieved: Narcissus commanded such as had charge
of the lights speedely to bring unto him water drawn up out of the next
well, that being done, he prayed over it and bad them pour it into the lamps
with fervent faith toward God, which when they had fulfilled, y^ nature of the
water beyond all reason and expectation, by the wonderful power of God was
changed into the quality of oil. and they report farther that a small
quantity thereof for miracles sake was reserved of many of the brethren a long
while after, even unto this our time. many other notable things worthy of
memory they report of this man's life, whereof this is one: certain lewd
varletts seeing the constancy and uprightness of his life, could not brook
nether away with it, fearing that if through his means they were attainted
there was no other way but execution: therefore they in conscience being priuey
to infinite lewd practices, prevent the same and charge him with a grievous
accusation. afterward to persuade the hearers y^ sooner, they confirm their
accusatio^s with oaths. y^ first swore: if I lie let me be burned to ashes. the
second: if I report not the truth let my whole body be tormented and wasted
away with some cruel disease. The third: if I bear false witness let me be
s^itten with blindness. but for all their swering and staring, not one of the
faithful believed them, the chastity and upright conversation of Narcissus so
prevailed among all men. He took grievously their despitefull dealing, and
because that of old he had been of the Philosophical sect, he fledd and
forsook his Church, hidd himself privily in the deserte and obscure places,
for the space of many years. yet the great and watchful eye that justly
auengeth, would not permit such as had maliciously practiced this lewdnes to
have perfect rest: but speedely and swiftely compassed them in their own
craft, and wrapped them in the same curses (if they lied) they had craved unto
themselves. The justice of God against pe^iuted persons.
The first therefore without any circumstance at all in plain dealinge, had a
small sparcle of fire fallen in the night time upon the house where he dwelt,
whereby he, his house, and his whole family by fire were consumed to ashes. The
second was taken with the same disease from top to toe which he had wished
unto himself before. The third seeing the terrible end of the two former,
and fearinge the inevitable vengeance of God that justly plagueth perjured
persons, confesses unto all men their compacted deceate, and pretended
mischief against that holy man, and wastes away with sorowefull mourninge,
punishes his body and pineth with tears so long, till both his eyes ran
out of his head. and such were the punishments of false witnesses and
perjured persons.

CAP. IX. Cap. 10. after the greek.

Of the succession of bishops in the Church of Jerusalem

AFter the departure of Narcissus when it was not known where he remained, the
bishops of the borderinge and adioyninge Churches ordained there an other
bishop whose name was Dios, whom (after he had continewed but a small space)
Germanion succeeded, and Dios. Germanion. Gordius. Narcissus and Alexander his
helper.
after Germanion, Gordius. In whose time Narcissus showed himself again as if
he had risen from death to life, and is entreated of the brethren to enjoy his
byshopricke again, being much marueiled at, for his departure, for his
philosophical trade of life, and especially for the vengeance and plagues God
powered upon his accusers. and because that for his old years and heuie age he
was not able to supply the rowne, the divine providence of God through a
vision by night revealed unto him provided Alexander bishop of an other
province to be Narcissus his fellow helper, in discharging the function due
unto the place.

CAP. X. Cap. 11. after the greek.

Of Alexander bishop of Jerusalem and Asclepiades bishop of Antioche.

FOr this cause therefore (as warned by a vision from above) Alexander who
before was bishop of Cappadocia took his journey to Jerusalem for prayer sake,
and visitinge of the places there: whom they of Jerusalem receive bountifully,
and suffer not to return whom again, and that did they according unto the
vision which appeared unto them in the night, and plainly pronounced unto the
chief of them: charging them to hasten out of the gates of their city and
receive the bishop ordained of God for them. this they did through thaduise of
the bordering bishops, constraining him of necessity to remain among them.
Alexander himself in his epistles (at this day extant) against the Antinoites,
makes mention of this byshopricke, in commen between him and Narcissus,
writing thus about the later end of an epistle: Narcissus greeteth Alexander. b
of Jerusalem Epist contra Atinoitas. Ascleprades.
you, who governed this byshopricke before me, and now being of the age of a
hundredth and sixtene years prays with me and that very carefully for the
state of the church, and beseacheth you to be of one mind with me. These
things went then after this sort. when Serapion had departed this life,
Asclepiades was stalled bishop of Antioch and constantly endured the time of
persecution. Alexander remembers his election writing to the church of Antioch
after this manner: Alexander. b of Jerusalem unto the church of Antioch.
Alexander the servant of the Lord, and the prisoner of Jesus Christ unto the
holy church of Antioch sends greeting in the Lord. The Lord eased and
lightened my fetters and imprisonment when that I heard Asclepiades, a man
well practiced in holy Scripture, by the providence of God, for the worthiness
of his faith to have been placed bishop of your church. This epistle he
signifies in the end to have been sent by Clemens. This epistle I have sent
unto you my Masters and brethren by Clemens a godly minister, a man both
virtuous and well known, whom you have seen, and shall know, who also
being here present with me by the providence of God has confirmed and
furthered the church of Christ.

CAP. XI. Cap. 12. after the greek.

Of the works of Serapion bishop of Antioch.

IT is very like that sundry epistles of Serapion are reserved among others,
unto our knoweledge only such came as he wrote unto one Domnus which renounced
the faith of Christ in Domnus. Pontius. Caricus.
the time of persecution and fell to Jewish Apostasy: and unto one Pontius and
Caricus ecclesiastical persons. again epistles unto other men. and also a
certain book of the Gospel which they call after Peter written to this end
that he might confute the falsehoode specified in the same for that diverse of
the church of Rosse, went astray after false doctrine under color of the
foresaid Scripture. it shall seem very expedient if we allege a few lines
out of it, whereby his ce^sure of that book may appear. thus he writes: We
(my brethren) receive Peter and the other Serapion bishop of Antioch unto the
Church of Rosse toutching the Gospel after Peter. Marcianus an heretic.
Apostles as messengers of Christ himself, but their names being falsely
forged we plainly do reject, knovving we received none such. I truly
remaining amongst you supposed you were all sound and firm in the right
faith, and when I had not perused the book published in Peter's name entitled
his Gospel, I said: if this be only the cause of your grudginge and
discoraging let it be redd: but now in so much I perceive a certain
heretical opinion to be thereby cloked and colored by occasion of my words
I will hasten to come unto you. wherefore my brethren expecte shortly my
coming. For we know well enough the heresy of Marcianus who was found
contrary to himself, he understood not that which he spoke as you may gather
by the things which we vvrote unto you. we might peradventure our selves,
lay down more skilfully the ground of this opinion unto his successors,
whom we call coniecturers. for by perusing the expositio^s of their doctrine
we have found many things savoring of the true doctrine of our Savior, and
certain other things borovved and interlaced which we have noted unto you.
Thus far Serapion.

CAP. XII. Cap. 13. in the greek

Of the works of Clemens bishop of Alexandria.

THe books of Clemens entitled Stromaton are in all eight, and extant at this
day, bearing (...)
this inscription: The diuerous compacted books of Titus Flauius Clemens, of
the science of true Philosophy. There are also of the same number books of
his entitled: Dispositions or Informatio^s, where he namely remembers his
master Pantaenus, expounding his (...)
interpretations and traditions. there is extant an other book of his for
exhortation unto the gentiles, and three books entitled the schoolemaister, and
other thus: what rich man can be saved? again a book of Easter and
disputations of fasting, and of sclaunder. an exhortation to nevvenes of life
for the late conuerts. The canon of the church, or against the Jews dedicated
unto Alexander the bishop above named. In the books Stromaton he explicated
not only the divine but also the heathenish doctrine, and he repeating their
profitable sentences, makes manifest the opinions both of Grecians and
barbarians, the which diverse men highely do esteem. and to be short he
confuteth the false opinions of Graunde heretics, dilatinge many Historyes
and ministringe unto us much matter of sundry kinds of doctrine. With these
he mingleth the opinions of philosophers, fittlye entitling it for the matter
therein contained a book of diuerous doctrine. He alleges in the said book
testimonies out of writers not allowed and out of the book called the
wisdom of Solomon, Jesus Sirach, the Epistle to the Hebrvves, Barnabas,
Clemens, Jude. He remembers the book of Tatianus against the Gentiles, and of
Cassianus as if he had written a Chronographie. Moreover he remembers Philo,
Aristobulus Josephus, Demetrius, Eupolemus Jewish writers, and how that all
they pronounced in their writings that Moses and the nation of the Hebrews
and Jews were far more ancient then the Gentiles. The books of the
aforesaid Clemens contain many other necessary and profitable tractes. In the
first of his books he declares that he succeeded the Apostles, and there he
promises to publish comentaries upon Genesis. In his book of Easter he
confesses himself to have been over treated of his friends that he should
deliver unto the posterity in writing those traditions which he heard of the
elders of old. he makes mention of Melito and Irenaus and of certain others
whose interpretations he alleges. To conclude, in his books of Dispositions
or Informations: He recites all the books of y^ Canonical Scripture neither
omitted he y^ rehearsal of such as were impugned. Cap. 14. in the greek.
I speak of the Epistle of Jude, the Catholic epistls, the epistle of
Barnabas, the Revelation under the name of Peter.

CAP. XIII.
Clemens bishop of Alexandria of the Canonical Scripture. Alexander bishop of
Jerusalem, of Clemens and Pantaenus. Origin comes to Rome in the time of
Zephyrinus.

THe Epistle unto the Hebrews he affirms to be Paul's for undoubted, and
therefore written in the Hebrewe tongue for the Hebrews sakes, but faithfully
translated by Luke and preached unto the Gentiles, and therefore we find there
the like phrase and manner of speech used in the Acts of the Apostles, it is
not to be misliked at all, that: Paul an Apostle is not prefixed to this
Epistle. For (says he) writing unto the Hebrews because of the ill opinion
they conceived of him very vvisely he concealed his name, lest that at the
first he should dismay them. Again he says: For even as Macarius the elder
said: for so much as the Lord Clemens alleges this out of Macarius.
himself was the messenger of the almighty and sent unto the Hebrevvs; Paul
for modesty his sake being the Apostle of the Gentiles, vvrote not himself the
Apostle of the Hebrews, partly for the honor due unto Christ, and partly also
for that he freely and boldly being the Apostle of the Gentiles vvrote unto the
Jews. Afterward of the order of the Evangelists according unto the Clemens
of the order of the Gospells. Matthewe. Luke. Mark.
tradition of the elders he writes thus: The gospels which contain the
genealogies are placed and counted the first. The Gospel after Mark, was
written upon this occasion. When Peter preached openly at Rome and published
the Gospel by rote, many of the auditors entreated Mark being the hearer and
follover of the Apostle a long while, and one that well remembered his words:
to deliver them in writing such things as he had heard Peter preach before,
which thing when he had signified to Peter he nether forbad him neither
commanded him to do it* John last of all seeing in the other Evangelists the
humanity of Christ set forth at large, being entreated John.
of his friends and moved by the holy Ghost vvrote chiefly of his divinity.
Thus far Clemens bishop of Alexandria. Again the aforesaid Alexander in a
certain epistle unto Origin, Alexander bishop of Jerusalem unto Origin.
writes how that Clemens and Pantaenus were become familiar friends after
this manner: This as you know very well was the will of God that our
friendship should continevve and remain immovable, begone even from our
progenitors and become yea more fervent and steadfast. we tak^ ^^em for our
progenitors who going before, have taught us they way to follow after,
with whom after a while we shall be coopled, I mean blessed Pantaenus my
Master, and holy Clemens my master also, which did me much good and if there
be any other such, by whose means I have known you thoroughly for my master
and brother. So far Alexander. but Adamantius (so was Origin called) writes
in a certain place that he was at Rome when Zephyrinus Origin came to Rome
about Ann. Domini. 210.
was bishop there, for he was very destrous to see the most ancient church of
the Romans, where after he had continewed a little while, he returned to
Alexandria executing most diligently y^ accustomed office of Catechizing, when
as Demetrius also bishop of Alexandria used all means possible together with
him to the end he might profitt and further the brethren.

CAP. XIIII. Cap. 15. after the Greek.

Of Heraclas Origens campanion in catechizinge

WHen Origin saw himself not sufficient neither able alone to search out the
profound mysteries of holy scripture neither the interpretation and right
sense thereof, because that such as frequented unto his school granted no
leisure at all* for from morning Heraclas catechizer at Alexandria.
to night in several companies, one ouertakinge an other they flocked to his
preachinge: he ordained Heraclas of all the other his familiers, his fellow
helper, and Usher, a man expert in holy scripture, discrete and wise, and a
profounde philosopher, committing unto him the instruction of the inferior
sort and lately come to the faith, reserving unto himself the hearing of
such as were father and better entered.

CAP. XV.
Origin studied the Hebrewe tongue, and conferred the translations Cap. 16. in
the Greek.
of holy scripture.

Origin had so great a desire of searching out the deep mysteries of holy
scripture that he studied the Hebrevve tongue and bought the copies used among
the Jews, which were written in Hebrevve letters. he searched and conferred
the septuagints translation of holy scripture with others at that time extant.

CAP. XVI. Cap. 17. in the Greek.

Origin compiled and set forth the translations of holy scripture, terming
the one edition Tetrapla, that is fourefolde the other Hexapla, that is
sixfolde.

Origin found certain other translations besides the common and vulgar,
variyng among Many Greek translations of the old testament. The septuagints.
Aquila. Symachus. Theodorion 5. 6. 7. Hexapla. Tetrapla. Symachus an Ebionite.
The heresy of the Ebioonites.
them selves, to wete: the translation of Aquila, of Symachus, and of
Theodotion* which I wot not where lying hid of a long while he searched out
and set forth unto the world. of the which, by reason they were obscure, dusty
and mothe eaten, he knew not the authors, but this only he signified that the
one he found at Nicopolis on the shore Acti^eke, the other in some other odd
place. In the sixefolde edition of the psalms after the four famous
translations he annexed not only the fifte but the sixte and the seventh,
reportinge again how that he found one of them at Hiericho in a tun in the
time of Antoninus the son of Seuerus. These being compacted together in one
volume and the pages divided into pillars or columns, every copy set right
over against the other, together with the Hebrevve, he published the same and
entitled it Hexapla: joining withal severally the translations of Aquila, of
Symachus, of Theodotion, and of the Septuagints entituling them Tetrapla. yet
have we to understand that of these interpreters, Symachus was an Ebionite.
The Ebionites opinion was recounted an heresy for that they taught Christ to
be borne of Joseph and Marie, and that Christ was but a bareman. They taught
that the law was to be observed after the Ievvishe manner, as we have
learned by histories heretofore. The commentaries of Symachus are at this day
extant, wherein he inueyeth against the Gospel after Mathewe, endeavoring to
establishe and uphold the foresaid (...) opinion. These works of Symachus
together with other tra^slations of holy scripture, Origin t^porteth him self
to have found with a certain woman called Iuliana, which said that Symachus
delivered her them to keep.

CAP. XVII.
Origin reuoketh Ambrose from the heresy of Valentinus, he professes Cap. 18.
in the Greek.
divinity and philosophy with great admiration.

AT that time Ambrose addicted unto the Valentinian heresy and (...) by
Origin, was lyghtened with the truth which shyned as the son beams, and
embraced the sound doctrine of the church, together with many other learned
men, which resorted unto him. When the rumor was now every where bruted
abroad of the fame of Origin, they came to try the truth of his doctrine, and
to have experience of his vtteraunt^ in preachinge. Heretics also very many
and philosophers specially of the most famous* whereof not a few gave
diligent ear and attentive heed, and were instructed of him, not only in
divine but also in profane literature. as many as he perceived towardly and
sharp wi^^e^ (...) them unto philosophical discipline, expoundinge unto them
Geometry and Arithmeticke, with the other Origin reads the liberal arts
exhorting both the subtle and simple to study them.
liberal arts. against the absurd opinions of philosophers he alleged
philosophers autorities, and expounded them, consideringe severally of them as
by way of commentary, so that he was renowned, famous and recounted among
the Gentiles for a great philosopher. he persuaded also unto the study of the
liberal arts, many of them which were dull witted, affirminge they should
thence procure unto them selves great commodity, and help to the
contemplation and increase of knowledge in holy scripture, for he was of this
opinion that the exercise of profane and philosophical discipline was very
necessary and profitable for him self.

CAP. XVIII.
What diverse men thought of Origin. Cap. 19. after the Greek.


THe heathenishe philosophers who then flourished are witnesses approved of his
good purpose and industry in this behalf, in whose commentaries we find
often mention made of this man, whereof some have dedicated their books unto
him, other some have delivered up their works unto him as unto the censure of
their master. But what shall I speak of them, when as Porphyrius himself,
then in Sicilia, striuinge and strugglinge against us with his books
endeavoring to confute holy scripture remembered the interpreters thereof? And
being not able to charge, neither to impugn to any purpose our doctrine, any
kind of way, now void of reason he fell to railing speeches and sclaundering
of the expositors. of which number namely he goes about to accuse Origin,
whom he reports to have known of a child, yet through his unadvised
forgetfulness he commends the man, sometime reporting truly when as he
could not otherwise choose: sometime untruly thinking thereby to delude
others, and whilst that now he accuses him for being a Christian, anon he
paynteth forth, and wondereth at his singular gift and Porphyrius an Atheist
(whose words these are lib. 3. contra Christianos) wrote fiftene books
against the Christians, whom Euse bius confuted in 30. books of the which
20. were exta^t in the time of Ierom but at this day not one.
excellency in philosophical discipline. hear him therefore, for thus he
writes: Many being desirous to find out, not the imperfection and impiety of
Ievvishe scriptures but the resolution, have turned them selves unto
expositions not cohaerent, and interpretations of the scriptures inconvenient,
and not only allovvinge of forged scriptures, but also approving and
extollinge the commentators. for they alleging the dark speeches which are
said to be manifest in Moses, and publishing them as Oracles replenished with
hydd and concealed mysteries: they frame a charmed judgment through the
arrogancy of their mind and show forth their expositions. Again after a
few lines he says: This is the absurd manner and guyse of that man, with
whom I being very young have had conference, who then was very famous, and
at this day also by reason of the commentaries he left behind him (I mean
Origin) is much spoken of, whose great praise is blased far and nyghe
among the masters and favorers of that doctrine. For when he was the
disciple of Ammonius, who in our time excelled for his fame in philosophy, he
profited very much under him being his master, and obtained great knowledge
in the sciences: but as toutchinge the right institution of life, he took in
hand an other trade quite kame from his. for Ammonius being a Christian and
brought up of christian parents when he had grown into rypenesse of
judgment and the knowledge of philosophy, forthwith he framed his trade of
life conformable unto the laws: but Origin being a Gentile and brought up in
the sciences of the Gentiles, degenerated and fell into that The blasphemy of
Porphyrius against Christianity.
barbarous temeritie, vvherevvith being taken he corrupted both him self and
the perfection of those sciences, leading a life after the manner of the
Christians, contrary unto the laws, according unto their opinions of
celestial matters and of God, preferring strange fables before the science of
the gentiles. He continevvally perused Plato, he readde over the works of
Numenius, Cronius, Apollophanes, Longinus, Moderatus, Nicomachus, and the rest
of the Pythagoreans, counted wise and Origin learned of the Grecians to write
allegorically.
profounde men. he was well seen in Chaeremon the Stoicke, and in the works
of Cornutus, whence he borovvinge of the Grecians manner, the allegorical
interpretation of mysteries, applied it unto the Ievvishe scriptures. These
things has Porphyrius written in his third-booke against the Christians,
truly reporting of this man's exercises, and sundry kinds of knowledge but
untruly in that he said, he should degenerate from the Gentiles. For how can
he pronounce the truth when as he practices to write against the Christians?
he says that Ammonius from leading a good and a godly life fell into
heathenish idolatry. for the doctrine of Christ the which Origin received of
his forefathers the same he retained as we have largely declared before. And
Ammonius also (contrary to his report) kept still and retained the sound and
uncorrupted Porphyrius sclaundered Origin and Ammonius.
philosophy of God even unto his last end, as his commentaryes at this day
bear record which he left behind him. namely that famous work entitled:
The agreement of Moses and Jesus, and other tractes whatsoever other men have
found written. These things are laid down to the commendation of Origin,
against the sclaunderous mouth of that despitefull man, and of the great
skyll of Origin in the Grecians discipline and doctrine. Toutchinge the which
when he was reprehended of so^e for his study therein, he defended him self
in a certain epistle writing after this manner.

CAP. XIX. Cap. 20. in the Greek.

How Origin defended him self against such as reprehended him for studying
Philosophy. Of his voyage into Arabia and Palaestina.

WHen that I studied for the increase of knowledge, and that a rumor or fame
was Origin in a certain epistle writes thus of him self for his study in
philosophy.
spredde abroad of the perfection of my learning and doctrine, heretics, and
specially such as were profounde in philosophy and in the doctrine of the
Gentiles, resorted unto me: wherefore I thought good to search out the self
opinions of heretics and what soever might be said out of philosophy for
the confirmation of the truth. This have I done first of all after the
example of Pantaenus who profited a great many before my time, and had
singular skyll and knowledge therein. secondly after the example of Heraclas,
now a minister of the church of Alexandria, whom I found with a
professor of philosophy which was his master, five years before I applied
my mind to the study of their sciences. Who also in times paste used the
common and usual attire, now layinge that aside he took the philosophers
habit the which he retayneth as yet, and cease not unto this day with
earnest labor and industry to read over the philosophers books. These
things has he written to the clearinge of him self for his study in
profane writers. When as at that time he continewed at Alexandria, there came
a certain soldier from the governor of Arabia, with letters unto Demetrius
Byshope of that seae, and unto him who then was Liuetenante of Aegypte,
requestinge them with all speed to send Origin unto him which might
communicate unto him some part of his doctrine. Origin then being sent of
them takes his voyage into Arabia. Not long after when he had accomplished
the cause of his journey he returned into Alexandria. In the mean while there
was raised such a sedition in the city and the wars were so hot that there
was no being for him there, he left Alexandria, and foreseeynge that he
could be safe no where in all Egypt, he went into Palaestina and remained at
Caesarea, where he was entreated by the byshopes of that province, to dispute
in the open church and to expound holy scripture, being as yet not called
to the ministry. Which thing may evidently appear by that which Alexander
bishope of Jerusalem, and Theoctistus bishope of Caesarea wrote in defense of
the fact unto Demetrius concerning him after this manner: (he laid this
down in his letters that there was never such practice heard Alexander. b.
of Jerusalem and Theoctistus b. of Caesarea write thus unto Demetrius b. of
Alexandria which found fault that a lay man in presence of Bishops should
dispute or interpret.
of, that there could no where the like president be found; that lay men in
presence of bishops have taught in the church) We know not for what cause
he reports a manifest untruth, when as there may be found such as in open
assemblies have taught the people. yea when as there were present learned men
that could profit the people, and moreover holy bishops at that time also
exhortinge them to preach. For example sake: at Laranda Euelpis was requested
of Neon, at Iconium Paulinus was requested by Cellus, at Synada Theodorus was
requested by Atticus, who were godly brethren. It is like also that this was
practiced in other places though unknown to us. Thus was Origin honored
being a young man, not only of his acquaintance, but of bishops that were
strangers unto him. Afterward when Demetrius had called him whom by his
letters and diverse Deacons of the church had earnestly solicited his return,
he takes his voyage again into Alexandria, and there diligently applies his
accustomed manner of teachinge.

CAP. XX. Cap. 21. in the greek

Of the famous writers in Origens time and how the Emperors mother sent for
him.

THere flourished at that time many other learned and profounde ecclesiastical
persons, whose epistles writing from one to an other are at this day to be
seen and found reserved in the library builded at Jerusalem by Alexander, who
was bishope there at that time. from whence we have compiled together the
substance of this our present history. of this number Beryllus. Hippolytus.
Beryllus (besides his epistles and commentaries^) has left unto the
posterity sundry monumentes of his sound faith, for he was bishope of Bostra
in Arabia. Likewise Hippolytus bishope of an other place. There came also into
our hands the disputation of Gaius a notable learned Gaius against Proclus.
man had at Rome in the time of Zephyrinus against Proclus a patron of the
Phrygian heres^e* in the which (to the confutation of the temeritie and bold
enterprise of the contrary part in alleaginge of new found scriptures) he
makes mention of therteene epistles of Saint Paul, not 14. epistles of Paul.
naming the epistle unto the Hebrews in the number. For neither as yet of
diverse Romans is that epistle thought to be Paul's. an. do. 220: Macrinus
succeeds Antoninus in the empire. Antoninus. 2 emperor: an. dom. 221.
Calistu^. B. of Rome. Vrbanus. B. of Rome. Alexander Emperor an. dom. 224.
Philetus. b. of Antioche.
When Antoninus had been Emperor seven years and six months Macrinus
succeeded him in the empire. And after that this Macrinus had departed this
life, in the first year of his raygne, an other Antoninus took the imperial
scepter to rule over the Romans, in the first year of whose coronation
Zephyrinus bishop of Rome dyed: when he had governed the ecclesiastical seae
the space of eyghteene years, whom Cal^stus succeeded. who continewing the
space of five years left the church to Vrbanus. Again after that Antoninus
had been Emperor four years full, he dyed, in whose rowme Alexander
immediately followed: at what time Philetus succeeded Asclepiades in the church
of Antioche. Then Mam^^ the Emperors mother, a woman (if there was then any
such in the world) very godly and religious (when the fame of Origin was
spredde far and nyghe enen unto her ears) thought her self a happy woman
if she might see him, and ^eare his wisdom in holy scripture which all men
wondered at, Wherefore remaining at Antioche she sent of her guard for him, who
also came, and after that he had continewed there a while and published many
things to the glory of God and of the power of his doctrine he returned
again unto his accustomed school.

CAP. XXI. Cap. 22. in the Greek.

The catalogue of Hippolytus works. Origin begins to comment.

AT that time Hippolytus amongst many other of his monumentes wrote a book of
Easter, The works of Hippolytus
where after supputation of times laid down, he set forth a certain canon
of Easter comprisinge the compass of sixteen years, endinge the raygne of
the Emperor Alexander in the first year. Of his other works these came to
our knowledge* of the six days creation: of the things which follow the
six days works. Against Marcion. upon the Canticles of Solomon. upon
certain pieces of Ezechiell. of Easter. against all heresies, with many
others the which thou shalt find extant among other men. About that time,
Origin began to commente upon holy scriptures, Ambrose diversely prouokinge
him not only with words and fair speeches, but also ^rginge him with large
offers of necessary expenses. Origens notaries and scriueners.
For Origin had at certain times appointed for him, mo in number then seven
swyf^e notaryes, every one supplyinge the rowme by turn, and writing that
which he uttered unto them: and as many more scriueners together with maidens
well exercised and practiced in penninge. whose necessary expenses and charges
Ambrose exhibited yea and that abundantly. who Pontianus. b. of Rome. Zebinus.
b. of Antioch.
also together with him bestowed great diligence in the exercise and study of
the sacred scriptures, whereby chiefly he provoked him to write commentaries
upon holy scripture. When these things were thus adoynge, after Vrbanus had
governed the church eyghte years Pontianus succeeded him in the seae of Rome,
and in the church of Antioche Zebinus succeeded Philetus.

CAP. XXII. Cap. 23. in the Greek.

Origin is made minister at Casarea.

AT that time when the necessity of the ecclesiastical affairs so
constrained, Origin being sent into Greece was made minister at Caesarea in
Palaestina of the bishops there abidinge. But what stir fell out toutchinge
that matter in his behalf, and what was decreed by bishops concerning the
controversies about him, and what other things he suffered preachinge the word
of God: in so much they require a several volume we will pass them over,
referringe the reader unto the second Apollogie which we published in the
defense of him, where we have lightly run them over.

CAP. XXIII. Cap. 24. in the Greek.

Of certain commentaries of Origin.

THese things are also to be annexed unto the rest, how that in the sixte
book of his annotations upon John, he declares the five first to have been
written by him at Alexandria. But all the tracts that came to our knowledge
upon this Evangelist, mounted to the number of twenty and two tomes. In his
nynth tome upon Genesis (whereof all are twelve) he signifies not only the
former eight to have been written at Alexandria, but also his annotations upon
the first five and twenty psalms. Again he wrote upon the lamentations,
(of the which we have seen five tomes) where he made mention of his books of
the resurrection, in number two. He wrote also of principal beginninges,
before his departure out of Alexandria. and the (...)
books entitled Stromateis in number ten: he wrote in the same city in the
time of the Emperor Alexander, even as all the titles prefixed to the tomes
declare the same.

CAP. XXIIII. Cap. 25. in the Greek.

The catalogue of the books of the old and n^we Testament alleged out of
Origens works.

IN his exposition upon the first psalm he recites the books of the old
testament writing Origin in Psalm. 1. Genesis. Exodus. Leuiticus. Numeri.
Deuteronomium. ^osue. Judges and Ruth. 1. and 2. of Samuel. 3. and 4. of
Kings. 1. and 2. of. Paralip. 1. and 2. of Esdr^^. Psalms. Proverb.
Ecclesiast^s. Canticu^ Ca^^^orum. Iere. la. epist. Daniel. Ezechiel. Job
Hister. Machabees. Origin hom. 1. in Math. Matthewe.
thus: We may not be ignorant that there are two and twenty books of the
old testament after the Hebrews which is the number of the letters among
them. Again a little after he says: The two and twenty books after the
Hebrews are these: The first Genesis, of us so called, but of the Hebrews
Beresith, the title being taken of the beginning of the book, which is as
much to say as: In the beginning. Exodus in Hebrevve, Veellesemoth, that is:
these are the names. Leuiticus in Hebrevve V^ikra, that is: and he called
Numeri in Hebrevve Hamisparim or Pecudim. Deuteronomium, Elle haddebarim, that
is: these are the words. Jesus the son of Nave, Iosue ben Nun, that is:
Iosue the son of Nun. Judges and Ruth with them one book, in Hebrevve
Sophetim, that is: Judges. The first and second of Kings with them one
book, in Hebrevve Samuel that is: called of God. The third and fourth of
Kings with them one book, in Hebrevve V^hamelech David, that is: and the
raygne of David. The first and second of Paralipomenon with them one book
in Hebrevve Dibre ^a^^mim, that is: the words of days. The first and
second of Esdras with them one book, in Hebrevve Ezra that is: a helper. The
book of Psalms in Hebrevve Sepher tehillim* The Proverbs of Solomon in
Hebrevve Misloth. Ecclesiastes in Hebrevve Coheleth. The Canticle of Can ticles
we may not read as some think the Canticles of Canticles, in Hebrew Sir
hasirim. Esaias in Hebrevve Iesaia. Ieremias with the lamentations and the
epistle, in one book* in Hebrew Ieremia. Daniel in Hebrevve Daniel. Iez^chiel
in Hebrevve Ie^^^chiel. Job in Hebrevve ^^o^. Hester in Hebrew Hester. besides
these there are books of the Machabees entitled in Hebrew Sarbet Sarbaneel.
These things has Origin laid down in the foresaid commentari^* And in the
first tome upon the Gospel after Mathewe, obser^ing the ecclesiastical canon
he testifyeth there be four only gospels writing thus: As I have learned by
tradition of the four Gospels (which alone without contradiction are
received of all the churches under heaven) the first is written by Mathewe
who was first a publicane, then an Apostle of Jesus Christ. he published the
same in writing unto the faithful Jews in Hebrevve letters. The second is
after Mark who wrote the same according unto the preaching of Peter, who in
his catholic epistle Mark.
calls him his son, saying: The church which is in Babylo^elected together
with you saluteth you, and my well-beloved son Mark. The third is after
Luke written for their saks who of the Luke.
Gentiles turned to the says which also was allowed of Paul. The fourth is
after John. Again in his fyfte come of annotations upon John, the same Origin
toutchinge the epistles of the Apostles John.
says thus: Paul habled a minister of the nevve Testament, not according
unto the letter Origin hom. 5. in Johan. Paul's epistles Peter's. 2. epistles.
but after the spirit, preached the Gospel abundantly every where from
Jerusalem unto Illyricum, vvrote not unto all the churches which he
instructed, but unto whom he vvrote, he vvrote in fevve lines: but Peter upon
whom the church of Christ was builded against the which the gates of hell
shall not prevail, left behind him one epistle, whereof we are certain.
Be it that he left an other: but this is in controversy. What shall I say
of John, who leaned on the breaste of our Lord Jesus, who vvrote one Gospel
and confessed vvithall, so many Gospells might have been written, that if they
had been written the world could The Apocacalyps.
not have contained them. He vvrote also the revelation being commanded to
conceal and not to write the words of the seven thunders. He left behind
him an epistle comprising very fev ve verses. be it that the second and the
third be annexed, though some take them not Ioh. 3. epistles.
for his. In both which there are not an hundredth verses. Moreover of the
epistle unto the Hebrews in his homelyes expoundinge the same he writes
thus: The character of the epistle unto the Hebrews sets not forth the
style of Paul, who confessed him self to be rude in Origin in epist. ad Romans
speech, for the phrase of that epistle sauoreth very much of the Greek
tongue. Whosoever he be that has any judgment in discerninge of phrases
will confess the same. Again that the doctrine of this epistle is sound and
not inferior to those epistles which without contradiction are known to be
the Apostles, who so ever will with judgment read the Apostle, he will
also confess the same to be most true. A little after he says thus: I truly
of mine own part, if I may speak what I think, do say: that the
doctrine of this epistle is the Apostles for undoubted, but the phrase and
style an other man's, which noted the sayings of the Apostle, and contrived
such things as he had heard of his master, into certain scholyes.
Wherefore if any church heretofore has received the same as the epistle of
Paul, ^et her still embrace and receive the same under this name. For the
learned men of old have not without great consideration delivered the same
unto us for the epistle of Paul. But who wrote it God the only truth knows.
yet histories have declared unto us that some thought it to have been written
by Clemens bishop of Rome, some by Luke who wrote both the Gospel and the Acts
of the Apostles. but of these things thus much in this sort.

CAP. XXV. Cap. 26. in the Greek.

Origin professes divinity at Caesarea. Heraclas is chosen bishop of
Alexandria.

IT was in the tenth year of the raygne of the aforesaid Emperor when Origin
left Alexandria, an. Dom. 234
and got him to Caesarea, when also he committed the office of catechizinge
there, unto Heraclas. In a while after Demetrius the bishop of Alexandria dies
when he had continewed in the same rowme the space of three and forty years:
him succeeded Heraclas. There flourished also at that same time Firmilianus
bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

CAP. XXVI. Cap. 27. in the Greek.

Of the bishops that were Origens familier friends.

THis Firmilianus so highly esteemed of Origin that one while he sent for him
unto his own Firmilianus.
province to edify his churches. an other while he took his voyage unto
Iudaea unto him, where for a certain space, he continewed with him for farther
understanding of the holy Alexander.
scriptures. Besides him Alexander bishop of Jerusalem, and Th^^ctistus bishop
of Caesarea, continewally were of his side and embraced him, permittinge unto
him alone, as master, the interpretation Theoctistus.
of holy scripture with the rest of the ecclesiastical function.

CAP. XXVII. Cap. 28. in the Greek.

Of the persecution which Maximinus the Emperor rays^^.

AFter that the Emperor Alexander had ended the reign of therteene years,
Maximinus Maximinus was created Emperor an. Dom. 237 under whom the sixte
persecution was raised. Gordianus created Emperor anno Dom. 240. Anterus. b.
of Rome.
^^sar succeeded him. who being i^censed with the anger, spite* and grudge he,
^are unto the house of Alexander, which ^arhored many of the faithful*
sty^red (...) the fyrye flame of p^rsecution, and gave commandment that ^he
gouernou^s ^nely of the churches, as principal authors of the doctrine of our
savior should be put to death* ^^t that ^^m^ Origin wrote a book of Martyrs
the which he dedicated unto Ambrose and Protoctaetus minister of Caesarea, for
that both they suffered no small affliction in that troublesome time. When as
also they had endured most constantly examination and confession, Maximinus
him self continewinge Emperor no longer then three years. Origin noted the
time of this persecution both in the two and twentieth tract of his
commentaries upon John and in sundry of his epistles: When Gordianus had
succeeded Maximinus in the empire of Rome: Anterus also followed Pontianus after
he had governed six years in the bishops seae of Rome.

CAP. XXVIII. Cap 29. in the Greek.

Of the strange election of Fabianus bishop of Rome. of the succession of
bishops at Antioche and Alexandria*

AFter that Anterus had enjoyed the ecclesiastical function the space of one
month, Fabianus Fabianus. b. of Rome.
succeeded him. who as report goes came from the country after the death of
Anterus, together with certain others for to dwell at Rome: When such a thing
as never was seen before at the election of a bishop, happened then by the
divine and celestial grace of God. For when all the brethren had gathered them
selves together, for the election of a bishop* and many thought upon diverse
notable and famous men, Fabianus him self there present together with others,
when as every one thought least, nay nothing at all of him, suddenly from
above there fell a Do^e and rested upon his head, after the example of the holy
ghost which in likeness of a Dove descended upon our sauiour^ the whole
multitude being moved thereat, with one and the same spirit of God cried out
cheerfully with one accord that he was worthy of the bishopric, Babylas. b.
of Antioche. Dionysius. b. of Alexandria.
and immediately (as they report) he was taken and stalled bishop. At that
time when Zebinus bishop of Antioche had departed this life, Babylas came in
place. and at Alexandria, when Heraclas the successor of Demetrius had finished
his mortal race: Dionysius (one of Origens disciples) supplied the rowme.

CAP. XXIX. Cap. 30. in the Greek.

Of Gregorius and Athynodorus disciples of Origin.

WHen Origin executed his accustomed manner of teachinge at Caesarea, many
flocked Theodorus. Gregorius Na^^anzenus. Athynodorus.
unto his lessons, not only that country men but also infinite forayner^, who
forsaking their native foil became his disciples. of which number as chief
we have known Theodorus, he was the same Gregorius the most renowned bishop
among us, and his brother Athynodorus. he being most studious in the Greek
and Roman discipline so persuaded them, that they embracinge the sincere love
of philosophy, altered their former studies unto the exercise and study of
holy scripture. And after that they had continewed with him the space of five
years, they profited so much in holy scripture that both being as yet young
men they were ordained bishops of certain churches in Pontus.

CAP. XXX. Cap. 31. in the Greek.

Of Aphricanus an ecclesiastical writer and his books.

ABout that time also was Aphricanus renowned and much spoken of, the author
of th^se The history of Susanna doubted of.
commentaries entitled of Cestes or wedding g^rdels. there is extant also an
epistle of his unto Origin to this effect that he doubted whether the history
of Susanna commonly read in Daniel was true or feigned: Whom Origin fully
satisf^ed. There came also to our hands of the same Aphricanus doing, five
volumes of Cronicles curiously penned, where he reports himself to have
travailed unto Alexandria because of the great fame of Heraclas, whom,
excellinge in philosophical sciences and discipline of the Gentiles, we have
showed before to have been chosen bishop of Alexandria. There is also of the
same author, an epistle unto Aristides of the difference or disagreeinge in the
Genealogy of Christ, written by Mathewe and Luke, where manifestly he proves
the consent and agreement of the Evangelists, out of a certain history which
came to his hands. whereof in his proper place that is in the first book of
this present history we have made mention before.

CAP. XXXI. Cap. 32. in the Greek.

When, and where Origin wrote upon the Prophets.

ABout this time Origin published commentaries upon Esaye, afterward upon
Ezechiel. of the which upon the third part of the Prophet Esaye unto the
vision of the fourefooted beasts in the wilderness there came unto our hands
thirtye tomes. and upon the Prophet Ezechiel in the whole five and twenty,
the which he wrote being at Athens. He began to comment upon the Canticles,
so that thereupon he finished five books, and afterward returninge from
Caesarea he made them out ten books. What need we presently to recite an
exact catalogue of his works, for it requires a several volume? when as we
have run them over in the life of Pamphilus who suffered martyrdom in our
time. where we (commendinge the life of Pamphilus, his earnest and great
study) have made catalogues and indexes for the library which he builded,
gatheringe together both the works of Origin and also of other ecclesiastical
writers. ^here, if any man be so disposed, he shall readily find all the
perfect volumes of Origin, as many as came to our knowledge. Now let us
proceed on further, to the discourse of that which follows in this present
history.

CAP. XXXII. Cap. 33. in the Greek.

Origin reduces Beryllus into the right way, who aforetyme sauored not a
right of the divine nature in Christ.

BEryllus bishop of Bostra in Arabia, of whom we have spoken a little before,
went about Beryllus denied Christ to be the second person in Trinity before he
was made man.
to establyshe forrayne and strange doctrine from the faith, to the overthrow
of the ecclesiastical canon. he was not afraid to say that our Lord and
savior, before his incarnation, had no being according unto the
circumscription of a proper and severed substance, neither had a proper, but
only his fathers divinity, dwellinge in himself. When as by reason of this
matter many bishops had dealt with him by conference and disputation, Origin
also amongst others was sent for, who conferred with him at the first to
understand the ground of his opinion, which being understood and
perceauinge him not to believe aryght, rebuked him, persuaded him with reasons,
convinced him with manifest proof, restrained him with true doctrine, and
restored him again to his former sound opinion. The acts of Beryllus, the
synodes summoned for his sake, the questions moved by Origin unto him, the
disputations held in his own congregation, with all the other circumstances
thereunto appertayninge, are at this day extant, and many mo infinite things
have our elders remembered of Origin, all which I pass over as impertinent to
this present purpose. Such things as concern him and are necessary to be
known may be gathered out of the Apollogy the which we wrote in his behalf
together with Pamphilus Martyr (a man that flourished in our time) against
contentious quarellers.

CAP. XXXIII. Cap. 34. in the Greek.

Of Philip a Christian Emperor and his humility.

WHen Gordianus had been Emperor of Rome six years, Philip together with his
Philip crowned Emperor Anno Dom. 246.
son Philip, succeeded him. of this man it is reported that he being a
Christian, and desirous, upon the last day of the Easter vigils to be partaker
and joined with the multitude in their ecclesiastical prayers: could not be
admitted before he had first rendered an account of his faith and coupled him
self with them which for their sins were examined and placed in the rowme of
penitents, otherwise he should not be addmitted, because that in many things
he was fautye: which Emperor willingly obeyed and declared by his works his
sincere and religious mind toward God.

CAP. XXXIIII. Cap. 35. after the greek.

Dionysius succeeded Heraclas at Alexandria.

IT was the third year of the raygne of Philip, and the sixteenth year^ of
Heraclas Bishop of Anno Domi 249.
Alexandria, when Dionysius succeeded him in the Bishops seae.

CAP. XXXV. Cap. 36. after the Greek.

What time Origin set his scriueners ^m^rke, and when his other works were
written.

ABout that time, faith (as it was very requisite) taking root, and the
Gospel freely preached throughout the world: Origin as they report above
threescore year old, being much worn and wasted by reason of his long study
and painful exercise: now at length first permitted and not before, that
those things which he had publicly preached and disputed should by notaries
be coppied out. Then wrote he against the book of Cellus the Epicure, entitled
the word of truth, eight books. after them, five and twenty tracts upon
the Gospel after Matthewe. and others upon the twelve Prophets, whereof we
have found five and twenty in the whole. there is extant an epistle of his
unto the Emperor Philip, and an other unto his wife, the Empress Seuera,
with sundry others unto other men, of the which as many as we could find
being scattered here and there (which exceeded the number of a hundred) we have
collected and comprised in several volumes, to the end they should no more be
dispersed. He wrote also to Fabianus Bishop of Rome, and to sundry other
Bishops and governors of Churches of his sound opinions and doctrine. the
specialities thereof thou may see in the sixth book of our Apollogie written
in his behalf.

CAP. XXXVI. Cap. 37. after the Greek.

Origin confuted the Arabians which taught that the souls were mortal.

THere rose certain at that time in Arabia which were authors of pernicious
doctrine they Of this opinion was John the 22. b. of Rome.
taught that in this present life the souls dyed and perished together with
the body, and that in the general resurrection, they rose together and were
restored to life again. A great synod was summoned together for this cause,
so that again Origin was sent for, who publicly so discoursed and disputed of
this question that he purged and withdrewe their seduced minds from this foul
error.

CAP. XXXVII. Cap. 38. in the Greek.

Origin opens and confuteth the heresy of the Helcesaits.

THen also sprange up the poyson^d opinion, namely the heresy of the
Helcesaitae, which was no sooner risen but it was rooted out. Origin made
mention thereof, expounding in the open audience of the congregation the
fourscore and second Psalm, where he says thus: In these our days stepped
forth one which faced out, that he was able to auoutche the Origin in 8^
Psalm.
most detestable opinion, called the heresy of the Helcesaitae, lately sown
in the Church* what cancred poison is contained in this opinion, I will tell
you, lest that ye also be deceived. This heresy disalovveth of some of the
holy Scripture wholy, again allows of some other both in the old and new
testament. This heresy denies Paul wholy. This heresy counts it an
indifferent thing if thou deny or not deny with thy mouth in the time of
persecution, so that thou persist faithful in thine heart. They use a
certain book which as they say came down from heaven, the which
whosoever hears and believes (say they) shall obtain an othergets remission
of sins then that which Christ purchased for us. thus went the affa^res then.

CAP. XXXVIII. Cap. 39. after the greek.

Of the persecution under Decius, the martyrdom of many Bishops, and how that
Origin was persecuted.

AFter that Philip had been Emperor seven years, Decius succeeded him, who
because of Decius crowned Emperor Anno Domi. 254. under whom as Orosius says
the 7. persecution was raised. Fabianus b. of Rome martyred. Cornelius b. of
Rome. Alexander b. of Jerusalem died in prison. Mazabanes b. of Jerusalem
Babylas b. of Antioche died in prison. Fabius b. of Antioche. Orige^ is
persecuted. Cap. 40. after the Greek.
his offense and grudg toward Philip, raised persecution against the Church,
in the which persecution, Fabianus Bishop of Rome was martyred, whom Cornelius
did succeed. In Palaestina Alexander Bishop of Jerusalem, when he had the
second time endured confession for Christ his sake (before the tribunal seat
of the President of Caesarea) is cast into prison, where after a notable and
famous testimony of his true faith given before the judgment seat of the
Lieuetenant, he ended his mortal life. After whom Mazabanes was chosen Bishop
of Jerusalem. And Babylas likewise Bishop of Antioch, (even as Alexander Bishop
of Jerusalem) after he had rendered an account of his faith, died in prison,
whom Fabius succeeded. but what things and how great they were which happened
to Origin in that persecution: and how he dyed: the spiteful devil deadly
pursuing him with his whole troop, striving against him with all might, and
every kind of slight that possibly could be invented: and specially against
him above all the rest which then were persecuted to death: and what and how
great things he sustained for the doctrine of Christ: imprisonments and
torments of body, scurging at iron stakes, stinch of close prison: and how that
for the space of many days his feet lay stretched four spaces a sunder in
the stocks: and how that constantly he endured the threats of fire, and all
that the enemy could terrify him with: and how that he ended after that the
judge had wrought all means possible to save his life: and what languages he
gave very profitable for such as need consolation: sundry of his epistles
truly, faithfully and curiously penned, do declare.

CAP. XXXIX.
How Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria reports the perils him self stood in.

TOutching Dionysius, I will allege out of his own epistle unto Germanus,
where he of him self, writes thus: I take God to witness of that I speak,
and he knovveth that I lie not. ^ fled away not greatly regarding mine own
person, and yet not without the will of God. Long before that the persecution
under Decius prevailed, Sabinus sent the purueyer of corn to seek me, for
whose coming I remained at home three days. but the searching all places,
high vvayes, and floodes and fields, where he coniectured that either I hid
my self in, or passed by, was I vvott not how blinded, so that he found not
my house. He little thought that I continevved at home in that heat of
persecution. at length with great difficultye (God no doubt disposing my
departure) the fourth day I and my children, together with many other
brethren left the city. and that our departure was caused by the divine
providence of God, the sequels declared, wherein peradventure I stood unto
many in good stead. A little after he reports the casualties which happened
after his flight, in this sort: About sun set I was led by the soldiers
together with my company, unto Taposiris, but Timothe (as God would) was
neither present, nor taken. At length when he came he found the house
desolate, the servants keeping it, but he perceived that we were taken and
gone. Again after a few lines: And what a vvonderfull chance was that? I
will truly report it you: one met Timothe by the way as he fledd and
seeing him troubled and disquieted in mind demanded of him the cause of his
so quick a speed, who forthwith opens unto him the whole matter. the
which when the passinger had learned, he passes by and goes still on his
journey, which was to a banquetthig ^^idehouse ( This custom in diverse places
is now adays in vie.
the manner was at such meetinges to vvatch all night) and being come thither,
he told the gestes at table, all that he had heard by the way. They
altogether headely as if it had been a made match, rose up and with all
speed pursued us, with a clamorous tumult, the soldiers which guarded us
fledd away, then they fall upon us as we lay in our bedds. I (God knovveth)
at the first took them for thieves, and thought their coming was to rob
and spoil, as I lay in my naked bed, I vvrapped me in the sheet and reached
them the rest of my beddings. but they commanded me to rise and quickly to
depart, then understanding their drift, I cried out praying and beseaching
them that they vvoulde suffer us to be gone. If they would benefitt me at all,
I prayed them to prevent such as vvoulde bring me (...) and to beheade me them
selves. When I had cried thus as my companions and partakers do very well
know, they violently brake out. I truly then cast my self prostrate upon
the pauement, they took me by hand and foot, they lugged me forth and carried
me away. there follovved after such as can testify all these things, namely:
Gaius, Faustus, Peter and Paul which led me out of my lodging and laid me
upon the bare back of an ass. Thus Dionysius wrote of him self.

CAP. XL. Cap. 41. in the Greek.

Dionysius bishop of Alexandria reports t^^^onstancy of such as were martyred
at Alexandria under Decius.

THe same Dionysius in his epistle unto Fabius Bishop of Antioche, describes
their sundry Dionysius un to Fabius b. of Antioche.
torments which suffered martyrdom at Alexandria under Decius, writing thus:
This persecution was not begone by the Emperors edict, but one whole year
before. for there came unto this city a certain southsayer and inuenter of
mischief, who moved and stirred up the whole multitude of the heathe^s
against us, and inflamed them to defend the superstition of their native soil.
by whom they being thus provoked, and having purchaced on their side such as
were of power and authority, to perpetrate al impious acts: they persuaded
them selves that the only worship of devils and our slaughter was piety it
self. First then they apprehend a certain minister whose name was Metras,
and command him to utter blasphemy, who for disobedience Metras after
torments is stoned to death. Quinta stoned to death.
therein is beaten with clubs, his face and eyes they pricked with sharp
quills, afterward they led him forth into the suburbs and stoned him to
death. Again they bring into the temple of Idols a faithful woman named
Quinta, and constrained her to worship, who contrarying and abhorring their
Idols, had her feet bound together, and by them trayled and lugged all along
the streets, which were sravved with sharp pimple stones, she was beaten
against milstones, and sore scurged. last of all she was brought forth to the
same place and executed. which being done they all with one accord violently
rush into the houses of the religious, and every one of the wicked leads the
heady multitude unto their neighbors houses, whom they knevve to be godly and
well disposed. so that in the end they destroy, they spoil, they steal and
bear away the precious jewels: but the vile, the base and the vvodden stuff
they throvve out into the street and burn it to ashes. shevving forth thereby
a resemblance or spectacle of a city taken and ransacked by the enemy. The
brethren gave back and vvithdrevve them selves aside, taking in good part and
very cheerfully the loss of their goods, much like unto them of whom Paul
has testified. Neither do I remember any (one only excepted) of them which
were apprehended, unto this day that denied the Lord. furthermore they take
hold upon the elderly and reno vvined virgin Apollonia, they beat her
cheeks, and knock out all the teethe in her head. over against Apollonia is
burned.
the city they prepare a pyle, and threaten to burn her quick, unless she
would together with them vvtter blasphemye. but she lingering a little while,
as though she vvoulde take further deliberation, suddenly leapes into the fire
and is consumed to ashes. To be short they lay hold upon Serapion who
continevved in his own house, whom they vex with sundry grievous Serapion
was thrown down and his neck broke.
and bitter torments, brusing all the members of his body, and throvving him
down headlonge from an upper chamber. There was no way for us to pass, no
not the high and common, no strayte cricke for passage, either by day or by
night, they cried out all, and exclaymed every where, there was no other
choice but either to utter blasphemy, or to be drawn and burned at the
stake. And these things (the more is the p^tye) endured toe toe long. but in
the end this sedition and civil war ouertooke the seditious persons them
selves, and turned upon them the self same cruelty which they before had
practiced upon us, so that for a little season we refreshed our selves, their
furye vvhervvith they raged against us being somevvhat abated. For all this in
a while after the alteration of the imperial scepter was declared and openly
known, which before time was very sauorable unto us, but now threatens
great mischief to ensue, specially above all other unto the christians, for
the Emperors edict is proclaimed, The edict of Dec^ aga^^t the Christi^^ (...)
^4.
and that most dreadful saying of our Savior prognosticated long ago now
takes place that if it were possible the very elect them selves should be
offended* all do tremble and quake for fear, some forthwith of the mightier
sort fly away doubting what vvoulde be fall them, some of their own accord
are carried away with their vvorldly affairs, some are persuaded by their
neighbors, and being ^^lled by their names, are present at their profane and
impious sacrifices: some waxed pale and trembled, not as though they vvoulde
sacrifice, but like to become sacrifices and oblations to the Idols, so that
the whole multitude in compass derided them, for they seemed manifestly to be
timorous both to dye, and also to do sacrifice: some went stoutely unto the
altars and affirmed boldly, that they were never Christians, of whom the
Lord has most truly fore told: that such should hardely besaued. some
other there Matthew. 19.
were that held with both sides: some fledd, some were taken, where of
diverse endured fetters and imprisonment. other some after long imprisonment
before they came unto the tribunal seat renounced their faith: some others
after they had stoutly endured torments, in the end denied Christ. but others
that were blessed and valiant as pillars or bulvverkes of the Lord, being
strengthened by him and stout in protesting their faith, having gotten unto
them selves worthy constancy and courage sufficient, became renowned Martyrs
of the kingdom of heaven. The first was Iulianus a goutye man, not able
either to stand or go, he was brought forth Iulianus burned. Cronion was
burned.
by two which bare him on their shoulders, where of the one aftervvar^s fell
from the faith, The other called Cronion, whose sir name was Eunus, together
with the old Iulianus, confessed and acknowledged the Lord (as their
bounden duty required) with a perfect and sound faith. they were both laid
upon camels and scurged aloft, in the end being thrown into the flashing
fire, they were burned to ashes, in presence of the people which compassed
them round about. when as they were brought forth, a certain soldier
rebuked such as reviled A soldier be headed.
them, wherefore they exclaymed against him, so that this valiant vvarrier of
the Lord was brought forth to fight, who after that he had stoutly behaved
him self in that great skirmish for the Christian faith, was beheaded. After
him an other by nation a Libyan, by appellation and blessing the true Macar,
was often admonished by the iudgeto deny Christ and renounce Macar is burned.
Epimachus is burned. Alexander is burned. ^ women burned. Ammonario^ is
beheaded. Mercuria and Dionysia beheaded. Hero^ burned Ater burned. Isidorus
burned. Dioscorus a confessor.
his faith: who for not consenting unto it was burned quick. After them
Epimachus and Alexander, when they had been long punished with fetters,
tormented with sharp rasors and bitter scurges, were thrown into a fire
pile together with four women. Ammonarion also a holy virgin, whom the
judge wrested to and fro, for that she foretold him, she would obey him in
nothing (which in deed she performed) was brought forth to execution. The
rest as Mercuria a very honest matron, and Dionysia a very fruitful woman,
for child bearing, the which children for all that, she preserred not before
the Lord, when they had confounded the judge, which used all kind of
persuasions, and now was of the women overcome, after they were so
tormented, that they past all sense and feeling, they were beheaded with the
svvorde. but Ammonarion passed them all, notably enduring all kind of torment.
Heron also and Ater and Isidorus being Egyptians, together with Dioscorus a
young man of fifteen year old, were committed. First of all the judge took
the young man in hand with fair speeches as though he were easy to be
entreated, afterward with torments as though he were soon terrified, but
he for all his persuasions vvoulde neither bow at his flatteries, nor break
at his threats. the rest after they had endured the most cruel renting and
vnioynting of their bodily members, he commanded to be burned with fire: but
Dioscorus he set at liberty, vvondering at his gracious countenance which
gave a glistering shine, and the wise aunsvveres which proceaded out of his
mouth, saying he vvoulde grant him longer space to repent and to remember him
self for his tender years sake. so that even at this day the most renowned
Dioscorus remains among us vvay^ing for a larger and a longer combatt.
Nemesion Nemesion a Martyr.
also an Egyptian is accused of the^te, whereof, after he had openly purged
him self before the Oenturion, again he is accused of Christianity,
wherefore he was bound and brought before the President. but the most cruel
and unjust judge, delivered him among the thieves, to be twice more
grievously tormented and vexed, making him thereby the more blessed and honored
after the example of Christ. There stood before the tribunal seat certain
soldiers: Ammon, Zenon, Ptolom^us, Ingenuus, and together with them, old
Theophilus, who Ammon. Zenon. Ptolomaeus. Ingenuus. and^ Theophilus.
confessors.
(when any of the Christians came to hear the sentence or judgment, and
now was ready to shrink) so strugled that they were ready to burste
within them selves, they nodded with their countenance and beckened with
their hands, exhorting them to constancy with all signs and iestures of the
body. the which when the multitude in compass had perceived, before that any
laid hands on them, preventing their doings: they step forth before the
bar and proclayme them selves to be Christians. so that the President and his
assistantes were amazed, and the Christians upon whom the sentence had
paste, (...) thereby boldened to suffer, and the judges maruelously afraid.
those departed from the tribunal seat very cherefull, rejoicing in the
testimony of their faith, God gloriously triumphing in them.

CAP. XLI. Cap. 42. in the greek

Of Ischyrion the martyr with others* of receiving after repent as fell in
persecution.

MAny others (says Dionysius) throughout the ^it^es and villages were
quartered and dis Dionysius. b. of Alexandria unto Fabius. b. of Antioch.
Ischyrion was beaten to death with a cudgill.
membred by the Ethn^ckes, whereof, one for examples sake I will reli^^^s^*
Ischyrion being a noble man's hired servant and by office his st^vvarde, was
commanded by his master to do sacrifice, he obeyed not, wherefore he was
reviled all to naught. The heathen master seeing his christian servant so
constant, persisting in his former opinion, takes a great cudgill in his hand
and beats his body and bowels till breath departed, and death had ended the
combatt. what shall I say of the multitude of them which wander in the
desert and vvast mountains, consumed with famine and hunger, and cold and
diseases, spoiled by thieves and devoured of beasts whose blessedness and
victories they that remain alive are able to testisie? Of these also I will
allege one for example. There was one Chaeremon a very old man, bishop of
Nilus, who together with his wife ^^e^d unto the waste mountains of
Arabia, he returned Chaeremon b. os Nilus was married.
whom no more, his company could never afterward be seen. And for all
that they were often times sought out of the br^thren yet cold neither they
nor their car^ases ever be found. Many also in these deserts of Arabia were
taken captives of the barbarous Saracens, whereof some were hardly for great
somme^ of money ransomed, some not as yet, no never unto this day appeared. And
these things (brother) I write not in vain but that thou may understand,
what and how great euels and mischiess have happened amongst us, vvherof
they know more which among al others have ^elt most. And after a few lines
again he writes thus: The Martyrs themselves which lived amongst us, now
associates with Christ, coheres of his kingdom, partakers of his judgment in
that they shall judge together with him, have received again certain of the
brethren which svvarued from the faith and fell to offer sacrifice unto
Idols, beholdinge their conuersion^* and repentance, knovvinge for surety that
they were to be received, In somuche as God will not the death of a sinner,
they embraced them, Ezechiel. 18.
they retained them, and made them partakers of their prayers and trade of
life. but what do ye advise us my brethren concerning such? What have we
to do in this case? Shall we be one and the same with them? Shall vveretaine
their sentence and favor? And shall we tender such as they have pitied? Or
shall we reiecte their censure and s^^tin judgment upon their sentence?
Shall we do injury unto pity? Shall we destroy order? Shall we provoke
God against us? These things to good purpose has Dionysius mentioned toutching
them which fell in time of persecuton.

CAP. XLII. Cap. 43. after the greek.

Of receiving again such as fell. The testimony of Cornelius bishop of Rome.
The heresy of Nouatus, and his impiety. A synod held at Rome for the
condemning of his heresy.

NOuatus a priest of Rome puffed up with pride against such as fell in time of
persecution through infirmity of the flesh, as though there were no hope of
salvation left for them, yea if they accomplished all that appertained unto
true conversion and right confession The Nouatians call themselves (...) i.
pur^^ans.
of the faith: became him self the author and ryngleader of his own heretical
sect, to wete: Of such as through their swelling pride do call themselves
puri^^nes. Wherefore there was a synod gathered together at Rome, of
threescore hyshops, besides many ministers and deacons, Again there met
severally many pastors of other provinces determining what was to be done in
this case: where by uniform consent of all it was decreed: that Nouatus
together with such as swelled and consented unto this unnatural opinion,
repugnant to brotherly love, should be excommunicated Nouatus is excommunicated.
and banished the church: and that the brethern fallen through the infir^nitie
of y^ flesh, in the troblesome times of persecution should be received after
that the salve of repentance, and medecin of consession were applied unto
their maladies. Th^re came to our hands the Epistles of Cornelius bishop of
Rome written unto Fabius bishop of Antioch toutchinge that synod held at Rome,
shewinge therein what was decreed by all the bishops of ^talye and Aphricke,
and of other provinces. Again other epistles of Cyprian in the Roman tongue
with the subscription of diverse other bishops, wherein they showed their
consent in this behalf: that such as shrinked were to be vpholden and cured:
and that according unto justice the author of this heres^e together with his
adherentes was to be banished the Catholic Church* unto these there was
annexed an other Epistle of Cornelius of the Synods decrees. Again an other of
the cause that moved Nouatus thus to fall from the Church, whereof it will not
be amiss here to allege some part that the reader may understand what manner
of man he was* and to the end he would certify Fabius of Nouatus his
disposition, Cornelius writes thus: I give thee to understand that this
Cornelius. b. of Rome unto Fabius. b. of Antioch Maximus. Vrbanus. Sidonius and
Celerinus. forsook No uatus. Thequalities of Nouatus.
^olly Nouatus longed of old after a byshop^^ke, and to the end he might
conceal this his pi^^^sh desire, used this cloak of arrogancye. but first I
will declare how he linked to his side certain confessors. Maximus one of
our ministers and Vrbanus, who by confessinge of their faith procured unto
them selves twice a notable name and estimation among us: again Sidonius and
Celerinus, who through the goodness of God endured constantly all kind of
torments, confirminge the weakness of the flesh through the strength of his
faith, and valiantly overcame the adversary: these men when they had
considered better of him, and perceived his guile and inconstancye, his
perjury and falsehood, his inhumanitie and suspicious head, returned unto the
holy Church, revealed and detected unto many bishops and elders and lay people
which then were present, all his sleyghtes and deuelishe subtletyes, the
which of long time they had concealed, vveepinge and vvaylinge that they had
believed this deceatefull and malicious monster, and that they had forsaken the
Church, yea although it was but a little while. Again after a few lines in
the same epistle he says: We have seen in him (well-beloved brother) a
vvonderfull alteration, and sudden chainge in a short space. This good man
vvh^ he had protested with certain dreadful oth^s, that he never coueted any
byshopricke, suddenly as it were by certain iugglinge feats, he stepped forth
a bishop. this lavvemaker and protector of the ecclesiastical science, when
that he presumpteously endeavored to challenge unto himself, the title of a
bishop, not granted unto him from above: chose two men of a desperate
condition, to be partakers of his heresy, whom he might send to a certain
corner or les ser part of Italy, and thence to seduce three bishops, plain,
simple and country men, by some crafty means, auoutching and affirming, that
they must in all the haste come to Rome, fayninge How Nouatus the heretic
was made bishop
that they together with other bishops meetinge for the same purpose, should
appease and remove a certain schism raised in the City* who being simple
men (as we said before) not knovving their crafty and mischievous fetches,
aftertheir coming were enclosed by such lewd persons, that were like unto
themselves and suborned for the purpose: about ten of the clock when as
they were some what tipsie and well crommed with vitayles, they were
constrained to create him bishop, with imaginatiue and frivolous layinge on of
hands, the which craftily and subtlely not compatible for his person he
challenged unto him self. One of them afterward repented him, and returned
unto the Church, bevvaylinge his fall and conconfessing his fault, the whole
multitude also intreatinge for him, whom we received unto the company and
communion of the laytie. In the rovvmes of the other bishops we ordained and
sent from us such as should succeed them. Wherefore this jolly defender of the
Gospel was The order of the cler^^^ in the church of Rome in the ^ime of
Cor^elius.
ignorant that there ought to be but one bishop in the catholic church, in
the which he knovveth (for how should he be ignorant) that there are six
and forty priests, seven deacons, seven subdeacons, two and forty acolytes,
two and fyfty exorcists, and readers, with porters, widow, and impotent
persons above a thousand and fifty souls, who all are releaued through the
grace and goodness of almighty God. whom so great a multitude and so necessary
in the Church, and by the providence of God so copious and infinite, yea a
number of innumerable people, could not convert and turn him to the Church
from this his desperate and damnable presumption. Again in a while after he
writes: Now forvvardes I will orderly declare by what means and by what
trade of life, he purchaced unto himself the title of a bishop. Think you
that therefore because of his conversation in the Church from the beginning, or
because he endured many skyrmishes or conflicts for his name, or that he stood
in manifold and great perils for piety his sake? none of all this was true
in him. The occasion of beleeuinge he took of Satan which entered into him and
made there long abode. When he was delivered by the Exorcists, he fell into
a dangerous disease, and because he was very like to dye, was baptized in the
bed where he lay: If it may be termed a baptism which he received. For he
obtained not after his recovery that which he should have done according
unto the canon of the Church, to vvete: confirmation by the hands of the
bishop. In so much then he obtained not that, how came he by the holy Ghost?
And again a little after he says: He being Nouatus fell in time of
persecution and denied his order.
loathe to dye and desirous of life, in the time of persecution denied himself
to be a priest. When he was entreated by the deacons and admonished ^o come
forth out of the house wherein he had enclosed himself, and to minister unto
the necessity of the brethren which vvanted, he was so far from doing and
obeynge the Deacons that he went away and departed in a cha^e, saying that he
vvoulde no longer play the priest, but addicte him self unto an other trade
of Philosophy. and again to this he annecteth that which follows: this good
man forsook the Church of God, wherein he was baptized, and where also he
took priesthood upon him, by favor of the bishop which allotted him
thereunto through the layinge on of hands, and when all the clergy yea and
many of the layeti^ vvithstoode the fact: that none baptized in bed as he
was should be chosen into the ecclesiastical order, yet they all requested
that he might be permitted to enter into orders. An other insolency of The
comunion was the^ ministredand delivered into their hands, not popt in their
mouths.
this man passinge all the former he reports thus: When he distributed the
oblation and delivered to every man part thereof, he added this vvithall
(constrayninge the seely souls, before they received of his oblation to
svvere, holdinge both their hands together not loosed before they had thus
sworn, I will use their own words) swear unto me by the body and blood
of our Lord Jesus Christ, that thou vvilt never forsake me and fly unto
Cornelius. The vvretched man tasted not thereof before he had vowed unto him,
and in steed of that when he receauinge the bread should have said Amen: he
ansvvered I will not go unto Cornelius. Again a little after he says: Now
thou may understand that he is all bare and foresaken, Moses a martyr.
rejected and left of the brethren who daily return unto the Church, whom
blessed Moses a martyr who of late endured amongst us a marvelous and notable
martyrdom, being alive and perceauinge his temerytie and arrogancy did
excommunicate, together with five other priests, which severed themselves
with him, from the Church. In the end of the epistle he recites the
catalogue of bishops, who at their being at Rome condemned the madd fantasy
of Nouatus, wrytinge both their names and the provinces where they governed. he
recites also the names and Cities of such as were absent and had subscribed by
their letters. These things has Cornelius signified by his letters unto
Fabius bishop of Antioch.

CAP. XLIII. Cap. 44. after the greek.

Dionysius Alexandrinus reports of Serapion that fell in persecution, how at
his end he was desirous to receive the sacrament of the Lords supper.

Dionysius also bishop of Alexandria wrote to the aforesaid Fabius who in
manner yielded to the schism, many things in his letters of repentance,
paintinge forth their patience which lately had been martyred at Alexandria.
whereof omitting many things this one strange act worthy of memory we have
thought good to publishe in this our history for thus he wrote: I will
certifee thee (says he) of this one example which happened amongst us. There
Dionysius, ^. of Alexandria unto Fabius bishop of Antioch.
was one Serapion dwelling among us a faithful old man, which of a long
time lived without reprehe^sion, but being tempted in persecution fell from
the faith. he entreated very often that he might be received again, but none
gave ear unto him for he had done sacrifice: and falling unto a dangerous
disease lay speachlesse and benumbed of all his senses the space of three
days, the fourth day after, being somvvhat recovered he called unto him a
nephew of his, his daughters son and said unto him: how long (O my son)
do ye vvithholde me? I beseech you make have and absolve me quickly, call unto
me one of the Priests, the which as soon as he had spoken he was
speachelesse again. The boy ran unto the Priest, it was night, the Priest
was sick and could not come with him. And because I gave commandment
(says Dionysius) that such as were about to dye, if humbly they requested
should be admitted to the end they being strengthened in faith might depart
in peace: he delivered unto the boy Men of old received the communion a little
before their deaths.
a little of the Eucharist, and commanded him to crimble or soke it and so
drop it by a little and a little into the old man's mouth. the boy returns
and bringes with him the Eucharist. when he was hard by before he came in,
Serapion said: come thou my son? the priest cannot come, why then dispatch
thou that which he commanded thee to do and let me depart. the boy immixed
or looked the eucharist and with all let it by drop meal into the old man's
mouth, whereof when he had tasted a little, forth with gave up the Ghost* is
it not manifest that this old man was so long held back until he were
absolved and loosed from the link of sin by confessing in the presence of
many the fault he had committed? Thus far Dionysius.

CAP. XLIIII. Cap. 45. in the greek.

The epistle of Dionysius bishop of Alexandria unto Nouatus.

Now let us see what he wrote unto Nouatus who at that time molested the
Church of Rome. Because that he pretended the cause of his fall and the
occasion why he embraced that Apostasy and schism to rise through the
persuasion of certain brethren, as Dionysius b. of Alexandria unto Nouatus the
heretic.
if he were thereunto compelled by them, Mark how he writes unto him:
Dionysius unto the brother Nouatus sends greeting. If thou vvast constrained
against thy will (as thou say) thou vvilt declare the same, if thou return
willingly* thou should have suffered anything rather then to rent a sunder
the church of God. neither is this martyrdom which is suffered for not
seueringe and deuidinge the Church of less glory, then that which is
tolerated for denial of sacrifice unto deuels* yea in my judgment it is
offarre greater glory. For in the one, martyrdom is suffered for one soul, in
the other for the universal church. but if thou either persvvad the brethren,
or constrain them to return to unity, this notable fact will be far greater
then the fault that went before. and the one will not be imputed, the other
will be commended. If thou can not persuade the rebellious and disobedient,
save at least wise thine own soul. I desire thy health in the Lord and thy
embracing of peace, and unity. Thus he wrote to Nouatus.

CAP. XLV. Cap. 46. after the Greek.

The catalogue of Dionysius Alexandrinus Epistles concerning repentance.

HE wrote an Epistle of repentance unto the brethren throughout Egypt, where
he lays down his censure of such as fell, and describes means to correct
vices. of the same matter Conon b. of Hermopolis.
there is extant an epistle of his unto Conon bishop of Hermopolis, and an
exhortation unto his flock of Alexandria. among these there is an other written
unto Origin of martyrdom. likewise he wrote of repentance unto the brethern of
Laodicea, whose bishop was Thelymidres, and Thelymidres Meruzanes. Cornelius.
Elenus. Firmilianus. Theoctistus. Fabius. Demetrianus. Alexander. Hippolytus.
to the brethren throughout Armenia whose bishop was Meruzanes, Moreover he
wrote unto Cornelius bishop of Rome approuinge his epistle against Nouatus:
where he reports that he was called of Elenus bishop of Tarsus in Cilicia and
other his companions: Firmilianus bishop of Cappadocia and Theoctistus bishop
of Palaestina: to meet them at the synod held at Antioch, where diverse went
about to establish the schism of Nouatus. he adds besides how he signified
Fabius there to have deseased and Demetrianus to have succeeded him bishop of
Antioch. He wrote of the bishop of Jerusalem these words: The renowned
Alexander dyed in prison. There is exta^t an other epistle of Dionysius unto
the Romans delivered by Hippolytus. again he wrote an other of peace and
repentance. an other unto the confessors which cleaued unto the opinion of
Nouatus. Again other two epistles unto such as were converted unto the
church, and to many others he wrote very profitable tractes for the studious
readers to peruse.

The end of the sixth book.
THE SEVENTH BOOK OF THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORYE OF EVSEBIVS PAMPHILVS BISHOP
OF CAESAREA IN PALAESTINA.
CAP. I.
The wickedness of Decius and Gallus the Emperors, the death of Origin.

Now taking in hand the seventh book of the ecclesiastical historye the
great Dionysius bishop of Alexandria, who partly by his commentaries and
partly by his Epistles, described all the several acts of his time, shall
stand us in good steed. Here hence will I begin this present book* Cap. 1.
in the greek. Gallus ^^^a^^d Emperor Anno Domini. 255. Orige^ dies.
Dionysius. b. of Alexandria in his epistle to Hermammo^.
when Decius had not raygned full two years, he was slain together with his
sons, whom Gallus succeeded: at what time Origin of the age of threscore and
nine years departed this life. but of the foresaid Gallus, Dionysius wrote
unto Hermammon in this manner: Neither did Gallus perceive the implety of
Decius neither did he foresee what seduced him, but stumbled at the same stone
which lay right before his eyes, who when the imperial scepter prosperously
befell unto him, and his affayrs went luckely forvvardes, chaced away the holy
men which prayed for peace and his prosperous estate, and so he banished
together with them the prayers continually powered unto God for him. And this
much of him.

The translator unto the reader.
IN so much that Ensebius throughout his sixth book almost in every chapter
has written at large of the famous clarke and great doctor of Alexandria, by
name Origin, and now also in the beginning of his seventh book reports of
his end and that in few words: I thought good for the readers sake, for the
more absolute and perfect deliver a^^^ of the story, and for the further
knowledge of his end: to annexe here unto, a worthy history out of Suydas a
greek writer, who lived about a thousand years ago, toutching the things
which happened unto Origin a little before his death, his words are these.

The life of Origin out of Suydas.
Origin is said to have suffered much afliction for Christ's sake, being famous,
eloquent, and Suydas in the life of Origin.
trained in the Church even from his youth up: but through envy he was brought
before the rulers and magistrates, and through the despitefull subtlely and
crafty ^nu^tion of Satan, he was brought into great sclaunder, and blemish of
infamy. A man (they say) the authors of iniquity devised to The choice was
that either a black moore should play the Sodomite with him, or he himself
should sacrifice unto Idols.
work the feat, as much to say they prepared an Ethiopian or foul black
moore beastly for to abuse his body. but he not able to away neither
vvillinge to here so horrible an Act, brake out into lovvd speech, and
exclaymed at both the things which were given him in choice, rather then the
one that he vvoulde do the other, in the end he consented to sacrifice.
wherefore when they had put fr^kensence in his hand they threw it into the
fire upon the altar. by this means he was by the judges put from martyrdom
and also banished the church. when he had thus done he was so ashamed that he
left Alexandria, and got him to Iudaea: being come to Jerusalem and well
known for his learned expositions and gift of vttera^ce, he was entreated of
the priests to bestow a sermon upon the people in the church and open
assembly, for he was then a minister: after great entreaty and in manner
constrained by the priests, he ^ofe up, took the bible, opened it Psalm. 50.
and happened upon this parcel of Scripture: unto the ungodly, said God, why
do thou preach my laws, and take my covenant in thy mouth? when he had
thus read he clasped the book, fare down, and burst out into tears together
with all the audience which wept with him, he lived unto the time of Gallus and
Volusianus that is until he was threscore and nine year old, he rests at
Tyrus where he is also buried. So far Suydas.

The translator unto the reader.
I Have thought good also, he^r^ to lay down his lamention, the which Origin
himself (...) Greek tongue with his own hand, when as after his faule and
the denial of his Master Christ Jesus he wandered to a^^^^oe with great grief
and torment of conscience, the which Saynct (...) ^r^nlated into latin and is
found extant among the works of Origin* he lamented as follows.

The lamention of Origin. The lamentation of Origin.

In the bitter afliction and grief of mind I go about to speak unto them
which herafter shall read me thus confusely and without order, furiously
disposed to sit upon the tribunal seat of Christ together with the saints in
heaven. and how can I speak when as the tongue is tied and the lips dare
not once move or vvagg? the tongue does not his office, the throat is dammed
v^, all the senses and instruments are polluted with iniquity* but I will
proceed on* and first I v^^l faule to the ground on my bare knees and make mine
humble supplication unto all the saints He calls upon the saynctes in the
same sense as he does in this sorowefull plight upon all other creature under
heaven.
and blessed of God* that they will help me, seely vvretche, which dare not
by reason of the superfluytie of my sin crave ought at the hands of God. O
ye sayncts and blessed of God with vvatrishe eyes and vvet^ cheeks soken in
dolor and pain I beseech you to faule down before the mercy seat of God
for me miserable sinner. VVo is me because of the sorrow of my heart: vvo is me
that my soul is thus aflicted^^ vvo is me that am compassed thus on every side
and shutt up in my sin, and that there is no health in me. vvo is me o Mother
that ever thou broughtest me forth, for a skillful lawyer to be overthrown
in his unrighteous dealinge* for a religious man to faule into extreme
impiety* vvo is me o Mother which broughtest me forth a righteous man to be
co^uersant in unrighteousness* ^n heir of the kingdom of God but now an
inheritor of the kingdom of the deuell: a perfect man yet a priest found
vvallovving in impiety: a man beautified with honor and dignities yet in the
end blemished with shame and ignominy: a man besett with many euells and
choked up with infamous doings. vvo is me o Mother which broughtest me forth
as an high and a lofty turrett, yet suddenly turned down to the ground: as
a fruitful tree yet quickly withered: as a burninge light, yet forthwith
darned: as a runninge fountain yet by and by driyed up. VVo is me that ever I
was bedecked with all gifts and graces and now seem pitifully deprived of
all. But who will minister moisture unto the temples of my head, and who
will give streams of tears unto mine eyes, that I may bevvayle my self in
this my sorrowful plight? A less o priesthood how shall I bevvayle thee? A
less o mynistery how shall I lament thee? O all you my friends tender my
case, pity my person, in that I am daungerously vvounded. pity me o all ye my
friends in that I am now become an abject person. pity me o ye my friends
in that I am now with sorrow come to naught. pity me o ye my friends in
that I have now trodden under foot the seal and cony^ance of my profession,
and joined in league with the deuell. pity me o ye my friends in that I am
rejected and cast away from the face of God, it is for my lewd life that I
am thus polluted and noted with open shame. Bevvayle me whom the Angels
have bevvayled: bevvayle me whom all the saynctes have bevvayled: bewail me
whom every man has bevvayled: bevvayle me o all ye the nations under heaven
in that I am fallen from my glory. the Lord made and ingraffed me a fruitful
vine, but insteede of pleasant clustered grappes I brought forth prickinge
thorns. bevvayle me also for that in steed of grapes I brought forth
brambles* but let the vvellspringes of tears be stirred up, and let my
cheeks be watered, let them flow upon the earth and moysten it, for that I
am soken in sin and borne in my inquities. I see my priesthood lament over
me, I see all joy sorovvinge over me, I see the spider over my seat buyldinge
with cobvveb, I see and behold my self all sorrowful and pensive, every
creature sorovveth at my case, for that I was wont heretofore to pour out
praises unto God for them all. Alas what have I felt, and how am I fallen?
Alas how am I thus come to naught? there is no sorrow comparable to my
sorrow, there is no afliction that exceadeth my afliction, there is no
bitterness that passes my bitterness, there is no lamentation more lamentable
then mine, nether is there sin greater then my sin, and there is no salve
for me. Where is that good shepherd of the souls? Where is he that went
down from Jerusalem to Jericho, which also salued and cured him that was
vvounded of the thieves? seek me out o Lord which am fallen from the higher
Jerusalem, which have broken the vow I made in baptism, which have
profaned my cony^ance in that I dealt injuriously with thy blessed name.
Alas that ever I was doctor, and now occupy not the rovvme of a disciple.
Thou know o Lord that I fell against my will, when as I went about to
lighten others, I darkened my self: when I endeavored to bring others* from
death to life, I brought my self from life to death: when I minded to*
present others before God, I presented my self before the deuell: When I
desired to be found a friend and a fauorer of godlynes, I was found a foe
and a furtherer of iniquity: when that I set my self against the assemblyes
of the wicked and reproved their doings, there found I shame and the most
pestilent wound of the deuell. when that I was ignorant and unskillful in
the diuerous slayghtes of striuers which commonly entrappe men, I allured and
exhorted them to the knowledge of the Son of God. wherefore after much
siftinge* they promised me (unhappy man) crafty conueyances to avoid the
subtletye of Satan. But after that I departed from The policy of Satan was to
have Origin to confirm the christians at the time of sacrifice not to the end
they might be saved (as his prete^se was) but that Origin might be taken with
the manner and presently constrained either to sacrifice or deny his master
which fell out in the end. It seems by this, that some promised Origin they
vvoulde be baptized but when it came to the pinch they made him to sacrifice.
them, the deuell in the same night transformed into an Angel of light,
reasoned with me saying: when thou art up in the morninge go on, and
persuade them and bring them unto God if they demand ought of thee. If in
case they condescende and harken unto thee, do it and cease not, staggeringe
nothing at the matter to the end many may be saved. And again the deuell
goinge before to prepare the way, vvhetted their vvitts to devise mischief
against me seely wretch, he sowed in their minds hypocrisy, dissimulation
and deceate. but I o unhappy creature skippinge out of my bed at the
davveninge of the day, cold not finishe my wonted devotion, neither
accomplish my usual prayer, but vvishinge that all men might be saved and
come unto the knowledge of the truth, folded and vvrapped my self in the
snares of the deuell. I got me unto the wicked I required of them to perform
the couenantes made the night before (I seely soul not knovveing of any
thing) and we came unto the baptism. O blinded heart how did thou not
remember? O foolish mind how did thou not bethink thy self? O
vvittlesse brain how did thou not understand? O thou sense of
understanding where did thou sleep? but it was the deuell which
provoked thee to slumbre and sleep and in the end slevve thy unhappy and
vvretched soul. he bound my mighty men and spoiled me of my knowledge. he
bound my mighty men and vvounded me. I ansvvered but in a word and became
reprochefully defamed. I spoke without malice yet felt I spite. the deuell
raised an assembly about me and pronounced against me that unjust sentence,
Origin (says he) has sacrificed. O thou deuell what have thou done unto me?
O thou deuell how have thou vvounded me? I bevvayled sometime the fall of
Sampson, but now have I felt far worse my self, I bevvayled heretofore
the fall of Solomon, yet now am I fallen far worse my self. I have
bevvayled heretofore the state of all sinners, yet now have I plunged in them
all. Sampson had the hear of his head clypt and cropped of, but the crown of
glory is fallen from of my head. Sampson lost the carnal eyes of his body,
but my spiritual eyes are dug out. it was the vvilyenesse of a woman that
brought him to his confusion, but it was mine own tongue that brought me to
this sinful fall. And even as he vvanted after the loss of his earthly
possession: So my tongue, having bolted out this wicked saying, deprived me
of the spiritual gifts, which sometime have flovved with heavenly riches.
And even as he being severed from the Israelites and cleauinge unto forayners
endured these things: so I goinge about to save notorious sinners, brought my
self captive unto captives, and the bondeslaue of sin. Alas my Church
lives, yet am I a vviddovver. Alas my sons be alive yet am I barren.
Alas every creature rejoices, and I alone forsaken and sorrowful. Alas o
Church wherein I was gladsome. Alas o seat wherein I sat full merry.
Alas o spirit which heretofore came down upon me, why have thou
forsaken me? I am forsaken and become desolate because of the corruption and
filth of mine iniquity. bevvayle me that am deprived of all goodness. bevvayle
me o ye blessed people of God which am banished from God. bevvayle him that is
bereued of the Origin bewayleth his excommunication.
holy Ghost. bevvayle me that am thrust out of the wedding chamber of Christ.
bevvayle me who once was thought worthy the kingdom of God, now
altogether vnvvorthye. bevvayle me that am abhorred of the Angels, and severed
from the saints of God. bevvayle me for that I am condemned to eternal
punishments. bevvayle me for that I am here on earth, and now tormented with
the prick of conscience. I do fear death because it is wicked. I do fear
the dreadful day of judgment for that I am damned for ever. I do fear the
punishment for that it is eternal. I do fear the Angels which ourseethe
punishment because they are void of mercy. I do fear out of measure all the
torments, and what I shall do I vvott not, being thus on every side besett
with misery. If there be any man which can, I beseech him now assiste me
with his earnest prayers and with his sorrowful tears. For now it behoues
me to shed infinite tears for my great sin. who knovveth whether the
Lord will have mercy upon me, whether he will pity my fall, whether he
will tender my person, whether he will be moved with my desolation, whether
he will shevve mercy unto me, whether he will have respect unto mine
humility and incline his tender compassion toward me? but I will prostrate
my self before the thrasholds and porches of the Church, that I may entreat
all people both small and great, and I will say unto them: trample and
tread me underfoot, which am the foolish salt, the unsavory salt, tread
me which have no taste or relishe of God, tread me which am fit for
nothing. Now let the Elders mourn, for that the staff vvhereto they leaned
is broken. Now let the young men mourn, for that their schoolemayster is
fallen. Origin gelded himself to embrace virginity therefore justly may he
be termed an aduancer: in the end he did sacrifice and committed whor dome
with the deuell then was he defiled.
Now let the virgins mourn, for that the aduauncer thereof is defiled.
Now let the Priests mourn, for that their patron and defender is
shamefully fallen. Now let all the Clergy mourn, for that their Priest is
fallen from the faith. Vvo is me that I fell so levvdely. VVo is me that I
fell most daungerously, and can not rise again. Asist me o holy spirit and
give me grace to repent. Let the fountaynes of tears be opened and gushe out
into streams to see if that peradventure I may have the grace vvorthely and
thoroughly to repent, and to vvype out of the book of the conscience the
accusation printed against me. But thou o Lord think not upon polluted lips,
neither weye thou the tongue that has uttered lewd things: but accept thou
repentance, afliction and bitter tears, the dolor of the heart and the
heaviness of the soul, and have mercy upon me, and raise me up from out of
the mire of corruption, for the puddle thereof has even choked me up. VVo is
me that sometime was a pearl glisteringe in the golden garlande of glory, but
now thrown into the dust and trod in the mire of contempt. VVo is me that
the salt of God now lies in the dung hill, but how great streams of
lamentation shall vvype and purify mine humble heart? now I will adresse my
self and turn my talk unto God. why have thou lysted me up and cast Psalm.
102.
me down? For as thou haste exalted me with the divine word of thy
heavenly wisdom, so me thinks I stick in the depth of sin which my
self have wrought. I had not committed this impiety unless thou hadest
vvithdravven thy hand from me. But it is thy pleasure o Lord which art good
to do all things graciously, and I of the other side Psalm. 50.
being a fool have foolishlye fallen. But why o Lord haste thou shutt my
mouth by thy holy Prophet David? have I been the first that sinned? Or am I
the first that fell? why have thou thus foresaken me, being desolate and
rejected, and banished me from among thy saynctes, and astonyed me to preach
thy laws? what man is he borne of a woman that sinned not? What man is he
that ever was conversant here upon earth and did no iniquity? This I say
because thou haste thus forsaken me. David himself first, who Psalm. 51.
shutt up my mouth, sinned toe bad in thy sight, yet after his repentance thou
receauedst Math. 26.
him in mercy. Likewise saint Peter the pillar of truth after his fall
vvyped away that bitter passion with salt tears, sleyinge sin and
purginge away the venoume of the serpent, not continevveinge long in the
puddle of infidelity. But they of favor were thought vvorthie of mercy, and
this I speak to the end these things may take effect. vvo is me that I fell
thus most wickedly. vvo is me that my adventure in these things was so
unfortunate. but now I humbly beseech thee o Lord, in as much as I have felt
far worse, Call me back o Lord for that I tread a most perilous and
ruynous way. Grant me that good guide and teacher the holy Ghost, that I be
not made a prickinge hedgehogge and become an habitation for deuells, but that
I may tread under foot the deuell which trod me, and ouercomminge his
sleyghtes be restored again to the former health and salvation. Remember not o
Lord the iniquity of thine humble suter, who sometime have celebrated unto
thee, the function of priesthood. remember not o Lord the iniquity of me who
made aunsvvere with wicked language. Now o all you which behold my wound
tremble for fear, and take heed that ye slumber not, neither fall into the
like crime: but come jointly which have the same measure of faith, let us
assemble together, and rent our hearts and provoke streams of tears to gushe
out of the temples of our heads. For when these run and flow upon the
face of the earth, there will follow remission of sins, the pains will
be avoided and the torments shall not be felt. I mourn and am sorry from the
heart root (O ye my friends) that ever I fell from aloft. I have fallen, and am
bruised, there is no health in me. let the Angels lament over me because of this
my dangerous fall. let the garlands and crowns of the saints lament over
me, for that I am severed from among their blessed assemblies. let blessed
Aaron lament over me his p^^esthoode. let the holy church lament over me, for
that I am ruynously decayed. Let all people lamente over me, for that I have my
deaths wound. I see the clouds in the sky shadovving the light from me,
and the son hydinge his bright beams. But now you do all see and perceive,
the prophet David has shut the door of my mouth. I was constrained of the
holy bishops to break out into some words of exhortation, and taking the
book of Psalms in my hand I prayed and opened: and I lyghted upon that
sentence the which I am ashamed to repeat, yet compelled to pronounce: Unto
Psalm. 50.
the ungodly said God: why do thou preach my laws, and take my
covenant in thy mouth? But bevvayle me and lament this my bitter sorrow.
bevvayle me which am in like case with the reprobate jews. For that which
was said unto them by the Prophet, now sounds alike in mine ears. What
shall I do that am thus besette with many mischiefs. alas o death why
do thou linger? to vvete: that thou may spite and bear me malice. O
Satan what mischief have thou wrought unto me? how have thou pierced my
breast with thy poisoned darte? think thou that my ruin will avail thee
any thing at all? think thou to procure unto thy self ease and rest,
while that I am grievously tormented? who is able to signify unto me
whether my sins be vvyped and done away? whether that I have escaped the
pains which greatly I feared? Who is able to signify unto me whether
again I shall be coopled and made companion with the saints? O ye the saints
of God for that I am not vvorthie to hear the message of the^ that bring such
tidinges (but presuming far worse practices) have heard the terrible
threats of the Evangelists. alas o the boosome of Abraham the which I Luc.
16.
am deprived of* alas that I became partaker with the ritche man of his
condemnation in the horrible pit, and partner of his thurst, in the bitter
place, full of all sorrow and heaviness. alas o father Abraham entreat for
me that I be not cut of from thy coasts, the which I have greatly longed
after, yet not vvorthely because of my great sin. But o Lord I fall down
before thy mercy seat, have mercy upon me which mourn thus out of measure,
which have greatly offended, which have shed many salt and bitter tears,
whose miserable case every creature has lamented. Why have thou broken
down my hedge and strong holds, the vvilde bore out of the Psalm. 80.
vvood has destroyed me and the vvilde beast of the field has eaten me up.
rydde me o Lord from the roaring Lion, the whole assembly of saints does
make intercession unto thee for me which am an unprofitable servant, the
whole quire of Angels do entreat thee for me which Luc. 15.
have grievously offended: that thou vvilt show mercy unto the vva^dering
sheep, which is subject to the renting teeth of t^ ^uenous Wolf. save me o
Lord out of his mouth. suffer me not to become the sacrifice of sin, but let
down upon me thy holyspirite, that with his fiery countenance he may put to
flight the crooked fiende of the deuell: that I may be brought whom Psalm. 30.
again unto thy vvisdome: that the bill of sin written against me be
blotted out: that my lamentation may cease in the evening and receive loye in
the morning. let my sackcloth be rented asunder, gyrde me with joy and
gladness. let me be received again into the joy of my God. let me be thought
worthy of his kingdom, through the prayers and intercession of the saints,
through the earnest petitions of the church, which sorovveth over me and
humbles her self unto Jesus Christ, to whom with the father and the holy
ghost be all glory and honor for ever and ever. Amen.

CAP. II.
Of the bishops of Rome and of the controversy then raised of Baptism.

WHen Cornelius had ended full three years in the bishops seae of Rome, Lucius
succee Lucius. b. of Rome. Stephan. b. of Rome.
ded, which enjoyed the rowme not fully eight months, and after him was
Stephan chosen bishop. unto this Stephan Dionysius wrote his first epistle of
baptism when as at that time there was no small controversy raised: whether
they which returned from any heresy whatsoever, should be rebaptized, or
after the ancient manner be received with prayer and layinge on of hands.

CAP. III.
Stephan bishop of Rome reprehendeth Cyprian bishop of Carthage for rebaptizing
of heretics.

THen first of all Cyprian bishop of Carthage thought the heretics no other
kind of way The error of Cyprian.
to be admitted and purged from their error, then by Baptism. But Stephan
thought good that nothing should be innouated, prejudicial to the tradition
preuaylinge of old. for which cause he was greatly offended with Cyprian.

CAP. IIII.
Dionysius writes unto Stephan bishop of Rome, of the matter in controversy,
and of the peace which followed after persecution.

Dionysius when he had often written unto him of this matter at length
certifieth him, that persecution being ceased, all the churches enjoyed
peace, embraced unity, and detested the erroneous novelties of Nouatus: he
writes thus: Cap. 5. in the Greek. Dionysius. b. of Alexandria unto Stepha^
b. of Rome.
Understand now o brother that all the churches throughout the east, yea and
beyond, are united together, which before time were divided, and at discord
among them selves. All the governors of the churches, every where are at one,
reioysinge exceedingly at the peace which happened beyond all expectation.
Demetrianus of Antioche, Theoctistus of Caesarea, Mezabanes of Jerusalem,
Marinus of Tyrus, Alexander who is dead, Heliodorus of Laodicea which succeeded
after the death of Thelymidres, Helenus of Tarsus, all the churches of Cilicia,
Firmilianus and all Cappadocia. I have only recited the most famous Bishops,
lest my epistle become over large, and the readinge be ouertedious. All Syria
and Arabia, two wherewith ye are pleased, and to whom presently ye write, and
Mesopotamia, Pontus, and Bithynia, and that I may utter all in one word, every
one, every where rejoices, glorifyinge God in concord and brotherly love.
Xystus. b. of Rome.
So far Dionysius. Stephan when he had been bishop of Rome two years, dyed,
and after him came Xystus in place. And to him wrote Dionysius an other epistle
of Baptism, layinge down the censure of Stephan and the other bishops. Of
Stephan he says thus: He wrote an epistle toutchinge Helenus and Firmilianus,
and all Cilicia, Cappadocia, Galatia and the borderinge Dionysius. b. of
Alexandria unto Xystus b. of Rome.
nations, that he would not communicate with them for that cause, to weete:
for that they rebaptized heretics. Consider that this is a weyghtie matter.
For truly as I hear in the greatest synodes of bishopes it is decreed: that
such as renounce any heresy should first again be instructed, then be
baptized and purged of the dregs, of the old and impure leaven. And hereof I
wrote unto him requestinge him to certify me again: and to our well-beloved
fellow ministers Dionysius and Philemon, who at the first gave their censure
with Stephan, and now they write unto me, to whom at the first I wrote
briefly, but now at large. So far presently of this question then in
controversy.

CAP. V. Cap. 6. in the Greek.

Of the Sabellian heresy.

Making relation of the Sabellian heretics then preuaylinge he writes thus:
For as Dionysius. b. of Alexandria unto Xystus b. of Rome.
much as many brethren of both parts have sent their books and disputations
in writing unto me, toutchinge the impious doctrine lately sown at Pentapolis
in Ptolemais, containing many blasphemies against the almighty God, and the
father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and withal much incredulity toutchinge his
only begotten son, and first begotten of all creatures, and the word
incarnate, and senseless ignorance of the holy ghost: Some of them I have
written as God gave me grace, with greater instruction, and sent the copies
unto you.

CAP. VI.
Dionysius being warned from above, read with great profitt the books of
heretics. Cap. 7. in (...) Greek.
he thinks that such as return from their heresies, should not be
rebaptized.

Dionysius in his third epistle of Baptism writes thus, unto Philemon a
Roman minister: Dionysius. of Alexa^dri epist. 3. of baptism unto Philemo^ a
minister (...) Rome.
I have read over the traditions and commentaries of heretics not infecting
my mind with their impure cogitations, but profiting my self accordingly,
that I reprehe^ded the^ with my self, and detested them utterly. And when I
was brotherly and charitably forbidd by a certain minister, which feared lest
that I wallowed my self in the puddle of their malicious writings, whereby my
soul might perish, who, as it seemed me, told the truth: a certain vision
came unto me from above plainly commaundinge and saying: Read all whatsoever
come into thy hands, thou shall be able to weye, to prove, and try all. for
by this means at the first thou came unto the faith. I thankfully received
the vision, as agreeable unto the voice of the Apostle speakinge unto myghtier
men. Be you tried stewardes or disposers of the mysteries 1. Pet. 4. Heraclas
b. of Alexandria called a pope ergo it was not the peculier title of the bishop
of Rome.
of God. Again after he had spoken somewhat of all the heresies before his
time he proceeds on thus. I have received this canon and rule of blessed
Heraclas our pope: The canon of Heraclas.
Such as returned from heretics, though they fell from the church, or not
fell, but thought to participate with them (yet betrayde for that they
frequented the company of one that published false doctrine) he
excommunicated: neither admitted, no if they had entreated, before they had
openly pronounced all they had heard of the adversaries, then at length he
gathered them together, not requiringe that they should be baptized again.
For a good while before they had obtained by his means the holy ghost. Again
when he had largely entreated hereof he writes thus* And I am sure of this
that not only the bishopes of Africa have practiced the like, but also the
bishops our predecessors of old in the most famous churches, and in the
Synodes of the brethren at Iconium and Synadis, with the advice of many Deuteronomy.
19. Proverb. 22.
have decreed the same. whose sentences to overthrow and raise contention and
bravvling among the brethren I cannot away with. Thou shall not (as it is
written) alter the bounds of thy neighbors which thy fathers have limited.

CAP. VII.
The same Dionysius of the Nouatian heresy.

HIs fourth epistle of Baptism is written unto Dionysius then a Roman
minister, but afterward there placed bishop. whereby we may conjecture how he
was counted wise and famous by the testimony of Dionysius bishope of
Alexandria. he wrote unto him after other things, in this manner of Nouatus.
Cap. 8. in the Greek. Dionysius. b. of Alexandria unto Dionysius a minister of
Rome, but afterward. b. epist. 4. of Baptism.
We are not without just cause offended with Nouatus, which has rent a
sunder the church of God, and drawn diverse of the brethren unto impiety and
blasphemies, and has published of God a most impious and profane kind of
doctrine, charging the most loving and merciful God with the title and
sclaunder of immercifulnesse. And moreover he has renounced baptism: he has
made shipwreck of his former faith and confession: he has chased away the
holy ghost, what hope soever remains either of the tarying or returning of
the holy ghost into them again.

CAP. VIII. Cap. 9. in the Greek.

Dionysius reports of one that sorowed, because he had received baptism of
heretics.

THe fifte epistle of Dionysius is extant unto Xystus bishop of Rome, where
after he had written Dionysius. b. of Alexandria epist. 5. unto Xystus. b. of
Rome.
many things against heretics, he reports this one thing which happened
in his time, writing thus: In good sooth (brother) I stand in need of advise
and counsel, and I crave your opinion for that a certain thing happened unto
me, vvherin I fear lest I be deceived. when the brethren were gathered
together, a certain man to all men's thinkinge of the faith, an ancient
minister of the clergy before my time, and as I suppose before blessed
Heraclas, being present while some lately were baptized, hearing the
interrogatories and aunsvveres, came unto me, weeping and wailing, and falling
prostrate before my feet, confessed and protested that the baptism
vvherevvith he was baptized of the heretics was not the true baptism,
neither had it any agreement with that which is in ure among us, but was
full of impiety and blasphemies. he said he was sore pricked in conscience,
yet durst not presume to lift up his eyes unto God, for that he was christened
with those profane words and caeremonies. wherefore he prayed that he might
obtain this most sincere purification, admission, and grace, the which
thing I durst not do, but told him that the daily communion, many times
ministered, might suffice hin^. When he had heard thanks giving sounded in the
church: and he him self had song thereunto Amen: when he had been present
at the Lords table, and had streatched forth his hand to receive that holy
food, and had communicated, and of a long time had been partaker of the body
and bloude^ of our Lord Jesus Christ: I durst not again baptize him, but
badde him be of good cheer, of a sure faith, and boldly to approach unto the
communion of the saints. But he for all this mourns continually, horror
vvithdravveth him from the Lords table, and being entreated, hardly is
persuaded to be present at the ecclesiastical prayers. There is an other
epistle of his and of the congregation under his charge unto Xystus, and the
church of Rome, where at large he disputes of this question. Again there is
an other under his name toutching Lucianus unto Dionysius bishop of Rome. But
of these things thus much.

CAP. IX. Cap. 10. in the Greek.

How Valerianus raised persecution against the Christians.

THey that ruled the empire with Gallus, enjoyed it not full two years, but
were deprived Valerianus created Emperor together with Galienus his son.
Anno Dom. 256. Under him was raised the eyghth persecution against the church
of God.
of this life: And Valerianus together with his son Galienus succeeds in
the Empire. What Dionysius wrote of him, it may be gathered by his epistle unto
Hermammon, where he says: Dionysius b. of Alexandria. unto Hermammon. Apo^.
13. Satan.
It was revealed unto John, for a mouth was given unto him (says he) to
utter proud speeches and blasphemies, and power was given him and months
forty two. Both things are vvonderfull in Valerianus, and we have to
consider how that above all his predecessors he was disposed at the first,
gentle toward all the men of God, meek and friendly minded. For there was
none of all the emperors before him so courteous and friendly affected toward
them, no not they which openly were counted Christians: he at the first
embraced our men most familiarly, most lovingly, and that openly: so that his
palace was replenished with professors of the faith, and accounted for the
church of God. But the master and ruler of the Egyptian sorcerers synagoge,
persuaded him afterward to slaye and persecute those sincere men and saints
of God, as adversaries and impugners of their most impure, and detestable
sorceries (for the godly then prevailed so much, and prevail at this day,
that being present and with their countenance only blowing the contrary, and
resisting as it vvote with a little speech, scattered the bevvitchings of
those detestable devils) he brought to pass impure ceremonies, execrable
inchauntme^ts, and abominable sacrifices: he made a slaughter of miserable
children: he sacrificed the sons of unfortunate parents: he searched the
bowels of the newly borne babes, spoiling and rentinge asunder the shaped
creatures of God, as if by such heinous offenses he should become fortunate.
Again after a few lines he says: Macrinus offe red up unto them gratulatorie
gifts and presents for good luck of the hoped empire. For before it was
commonly blased he should be created Emperor, he respected not the consonancie
of reason, neither the public or common affairs, but was subject unto the
curse of the prophet saying: VVo be unto them which prophecy after their
own hearts desire, and respect not the public profitte. He understood not
the universal providence and vvisdome of him which is before all, in all,
and above all. VVerefore he is become a deadlye foe unto the catholic and
Christian faith. He outlavved and banyshed him self from the mercy of
Macrinus signifies one standinge a far of. Esaias. 66.
God: and as he fled farthest from the church, so has he answered the
etymology of his name. Again he says: Valerianus was by his means driven
and given over unto such reprochefulnesse and abominations, that the saying
of Esaye was verified in him. And they (says he) chose their own vvayes
and abominations which their souls lusted after, and I will selecte them
their own illusions, and recompense them their own sins. This Emperor
was madd, and dotynge over the empire otherwise then became his majesty, not
able by reason of his maimed body to wear the imperial robes, brought forth
two sons followers of the fathers impiety. In them was that prophecye
manifest, where God promised to punish the sins of the fathers upon the
children unto the third and Exodus 20.
fourth generation of such as hate him. he povvred his impious desires whereof
he could not be satisfied, upon the pates of his sons, and posted over unto
them his malice and spite against God. So far Dionysius writes of Valerianus.

CAP. X.
Of the dangers that Dionysius him self stood in.

BUt of the persecution wherewith himself was sore afflicted, and what things
together with others he suffered, for his conscience God wards, his words do
testify where he inueyeth against Germanus one of the Bishops which at that
time backbited him, his words are these: I fear me lest that of necessity I
fall into great foolishnes, and te^^erity, declaring the vvonderfull pleasure
of God in our behalf. Cap. 11. in the Greek. Tob. 12. Dionysius b. of
Alexandria against Germanus, epist. ad Hermamon.
In so much it is commendable to conceal the secretye of the King, it is
glorious to publishe abroad the works of God. Forthwith then will I set
on the vvilfulnes^e of Germanus. I came unto Aemilianus not alone, for there
accompanied me my fellow minister Maximus, and the Deacons Faustus, Eusebius,
Chaeremon. Also there came with us one of the bethren of Rome which the^
were present. Aemilianus said not unto me specially, raise no conuenticle:
This vvoulde have been superfluous, and the last of all, he having recourse
unto that which was first. His speech was not of making no cor^uenticles,
but of that we should be no Christians at all, and commanded me to cease
henceforth from Christianity. For he thought that if I altered my opinion
diverse other vvoulde follow me. I made him aunsvvere neither irreverently,
neither tediously. We ought to obey rather God then Act. 5.
men. Yea I spoke with open protestation: I vvorshippe God which is only to
be worshipped and none other, neither will I be changed, neither cease
henceforth from being a Christian. This being said, he commanded us to depart
unto a certain village adjoining upon the deserte called Cephro. Now hear
what is recorded to have been said of either parts: when Dionysius, and
Faustus, and Maximus, and Marcellus, and Chaeremon were brought forth,
Aemilianus sat in the Presidents rovvme. I have signified (says he) by word
here unto you, the clemency of our leages, and Lords the Emperors toward
you. They have granted you pardon so that you return unto that which nature
it self binds you unto, so that you adore the Gods which guard this empire,
and forgett the things which repugne nature. What aunsvvere make you unto
these? I hope ye will not ungratefully refuse their clemency in so much they
counsel you to the better. Dionysius answered: All men do not vvorshippe
all Gods, but several men several Gods, whom they think good to be
worshipped. But we vvorshippe and adore the one God the worker of all
things, who committed this empire unto the most clement Emperors Valerianus,
and Galienus, unto whom also we power incessant prayers for their raygne,
that it may prosperously continevve. Then Aemilianus the President said: What
let is there I beseech you, but that naturally you adore that your God
(insomuch he is a God) together with these our Gods. Dionysius answered: We
vvorshippe no other God. To whom Aemilianus the President said, I see you are
altogether unthankful, you perceive not the clemencye of the Emperors,
wherefore ye shall not remain in this Dionysius with his company is banished
into a certain deserte called Cephro.
city, but shall be sent into the parts of Libya, unto a place called Cephro.
This place by the commandment of our Emperoures, I have picked out for you.
It shall not be lavvefull for you and others to frequente Conuenticles, neither
to have recourse (as they call them) unto Churcheyardes. If any of you be not
found in that place which I have appointed for you, or in any Conuenticle
let him under his peril. There shall not want sufficient provision. depart
therefore vvhither ye are commanded. But he constrained me, although sickely
to depart with speed, differring no not one day, how then could I raise
or not raise a Conuenticle? Again after a few lines he says: Truly we are
not absent, no not from the corporal congregation of the Lord: for I gather
such as are in the city, as if I were present, being in deed absent in the
body, but present in the spirit. And there continevved with us in Cephro a
great congregation, partly of the brethren which follovved us from out of
the city, and partly of them which came from Egypt. And there God opened
unto me a door unto his word: yet at the beginning we suffered persecution,
and stoning, but at the length not a fevve of the Panymes forsaking their
carved Images, were converted. For unto such as before had not received, the^
first of al we preached the word of god. And in so much that therefore God had
brought us among the^, after that the ministry was there completed, he removed
us unto an other place, for Aemilianus would transporte us unto more rough
places of Libya, as he thought, and gave commandment that al from every where
should repair unto Mareota, where he allotted unto several men, the several
villages of that place, and commanded that we in our journey, and first among
all the rest should be prevented. for by taking us up by the way, the rest
would easily follovv after. But I hearing we must depart from Cephro, and
knowing not the place whither we were commanded to go, neither remembered I,
that ever before, I heard it named, for all that took my journey willingly, and
cheerfully. But when I understood we must remove unto Colluthio, then how I
was affected my companions know very well. And here I will accuse my self.
For at the first I fretted, and took it very grievously. If places better
known and more frequented had fallen unto our lo^^e it should never have
grieved me. But that place whither I should repair was reported to be
destitute of all brotherly and friendely consolation, subject to the
troublesome tumulte of trauaylers, and violent invasion of thieves. Yet I took
no small comfort in that the brethren toulde me it was nigh a city. For
Cephro brought me great familiaritye with the brethren of Egypt, so that our
congregation increased* but there I supposed it might fall out, for that the
city was nighe, we should enjoy the presence of familiar, friendely, and
beloved brethren, which would frequent unto us and refreshe us, and that
particular Conuenticles in the farther suburbs might be raised, which in
deed came to pass. Again of other things which happened unto him, thus he
writes: Germanus peradventure glories of many confessions, and can tell a
long tale of the afflictions which he endured. but what can be repeated on our
behalf? sentences of condemnation, What Dionysius suffered for the faith.
confiscations, proscriptions, spoiling of substance, deposition of dignities,
no regard of worldly glory, contempt of the praises due unto Presidents and
consuls, threatenings of the adversaries, the suffering of reclamations, perils,
persecutions, errors, griefs, anguishes, and sundry tribulatio^s which
happened unto me under Decius, and Sabinus, and hitherto under Aemilianus. now
I pray you where appeared Germanus? what rumor is blased of him? But
peradventure I bring my self into great folly for Germanus sake. The same
Dionysius in his epistle unto Domitius and Didymus made mention again of them
who then were persecuted, saying: It shall seem superfluous Dionysius b. of
Alexandria unto Domitius and Didymus.
to recite the names of our men in that they were many, and to you unknown.
For all that, take this for suertie. There were men, women, young men, old men,
virgins and old women, soldiers and simple men, of all sorts and sects of
people: whereof some after stripes and fire were crowned victorers, some after*
sword, some other in small time sufficiently tried, seemed acceptable
sacrifices unto the Lord. Even as hitherto it has appeared to suffice me,
because he has reserved me unto an other fit time known unto him self, who
says: in time accepted have I heard thee, and in the Esaias. 49. 2. Corinthians. 6.
day of salvation have I helped thee. And because you are desitous to
understand of our affairs, I will certify you in what state we stand. You
all heard how I, and Caius, and Faustus, Peter and Paul, when we were ledd
bound by the Centurion, captains, soldiers and servants, certain of the
brethren inhabiting Mareota, rushed out and set upon us, pulled us which were
violently drawn, and followed agaynstour will. But I truly and Caius, and
Peter, alone among all the rest, deprived of the other brethren, were shutt up
in a close dungeon, distant three days journey from Paraetonium, in the waste
deserte and noisome country. Afterward he says: In the city there hidd them
selves certain of the brethren which visited us secretly, of the ministers
Maximus, Dioscorus, Demetrius, Lucius, and they that were more famous in the
world, as Faustinus and Aquila, these now wander I wott not where in Egypt.
And of the Deacons there remained alive after the^ which died of diseases,
Faustus, Eusebius, and Charemon. God strengthened and instructed this Eusebius
from the beginning to minister diligently unto the confessors in prison, and to
burye the bodies of the blessed Martyrs not without great danger. And yet
unto this day the President cease not cruelly to slay some that are brought
forth: to tear in pecces other some with torments: to consume other with
emprisonment and fetters, commanding that none come nigh them, and enquiring
daily if any such men be attainted. For all that, God refreshes Of Eusebius b.
of Laodicea. ^eade the last cap. of this 7. book Maximus. Faustus.
the afflicted with cheerefulnes and frequenting of brethren. These things
has Dionysius written in y^ aforesaid epistle. yet have we to understand y^
this Eusebius whom he calls a deacon, was in a while after, chosen bishop of
Laodicea in Syria, and Maximus whom he calls a minister: succeeded Dionysius
in y^ bishops sea of Alexandria. and Faustus who the^ endured co^fess^o^ with
him, was reserved unto the persecution of our time* a very (...) having lived
many days, at length among us was beheaded, and ^cowned a martyrsi^^^ were the
things which happened unto Dionysius in those days.

CAP. XI. Cap. 12. a^t^ the greek.

Of the Martyrs in Caesarea.

AT Caesarea in Palaestina, in the persecution under Valerianus there were
three famous men, for their says in Christ Jesus, delivered to be devoured of
wild beasts, and bewtified with divine martyrdom. whereof the first was
called Prison^ the second* Malchus, the Priscus, Malchus and Alexander tome in
pieces of wild beasts. A woman torn in pieces of wild beasts. Cap. 13. in
the Greek.
third Alexander* the report goes, first of all that these men leading an
obscure and country life, bla^^d them selves for negligence and ^touthfulnes,
because they strove not for the crown of martyrdom but despised those
maisteries, which that present time distributed to such as covered after
celestial things, and taking further advisement therein, they came to
Caesarea, they went unto y^ judge, ^ ^nigyed the i^ (...). Moreover they write
a certain woman of y^ same city in the same persecution, with like trial to
have ended her life, and as they report one that enclyned to the heresy of
Marcion.

CAP. XII.
How that peace in the stead of persecution, was restored by the benefit^ of
Galienus the Emperor.

NOt long after, Valerianus having subdued the Barbarians, his son got the
supremacy^^ A^^^ Dom^ 262.
and ruled the empire with better aduisement. and forthwith released and
sti^^ed the ^er^^cution raised against us, with public edices, and commanded
that the Pris^de^^s and chief of our doctrine should freely after their
wonted manner execute their office and function. The copy whereof faithfully
translated out of Roman letters and interlaced in this our history is read as
follows: The Emperor C^sar Publi^^, (...), Galienus, virtuous, fortunate*
Augustus: Galienus the Emperor in the behalf of the Christians.
unto Dionysius, Pinna, Demetrius together with the rest of the Bishops
sends greeting. The benefit of our gracious pardon we command to be
published, throughout the whole world, that they which are detayned in
banishment, depart the places inhabited of Pagans. for the execution whereof
the copy of this our edict shall be your discharge, lest any go about to molest
you, and this which you now may lavvfully put in ure, was granted by us
long ago. Wherefore A^^relius Cyrenius our high Constable, has in his
keeping the copy which we delivered unto him. There is extant also an other
constitution of his unto other Bishops, wherein he permits them to enjoy
and frequent they places called Churchyardes.

CAP. XIII. Cap. 14* in the Greek.

The famous Bishops of that time.

ABout this time was Xystus, Bishop of Rome* Demetrianus, after Fabius Bishop
of Antioch: Xystus. Demetrianus Firmilianus. Gregorius Nazianzenus*
Athenodorus. Domnus. Theo^ecnu^. Hymenaeus. Cap. 15. in the greek
Firmilianus of Caesarea in Cappadocia: Gregorius over the Churches throughout
Pontus, and his brother Athenodorus familiars of Origin. At Caesarea in
Palaestina after the death of Theoctistus, Domnus was chosen Bishop, whom in a
short time after, Theotecnus succeeded, who also was of the school of Origin.
and at Jerusalem ( Mazabanus being departed this life) Hymen^ns enjoyed the
Bishopric, who lived with us many years.

CAP. XIIII.
How that Marinus a soldier, through the persuasion of Theotecnus
sufferedmartyrdome at Caesarea.

ABout that time when as the Church enjoyed peace throughout the world, at
Caesarea in Palaestina, there was one Marinus, a famous soldier for seats of
arms, of noble ^ynage, Marinus was beheaded.
and great substance, beheaded for the testimony of Christ. The cause was this:
There is a certain dignity among the Romans called the Centurions vine, the
which whosoever does obtain, is called a Cen^ution. When the rowme was void
the company called Marinus to this degree: Marinus being preferred, an other
came before the tribunal seat and accused him, affirming it was not lawefull
by the ancient laws for him to enjoy that Romayne dignity because he was a
Christian, and sacrificed not unto the Emperors, and that it was his turn
next to come in place. the judge being very much moved with this (his name was
Achain^) firsto he demands what opinion Marinus was of. when he saw him
constantly confessing him self to be a Christian, he granted him three hours
space to deliberate. This being done Theotecnus Bishop of A notable persuasion
unto martyrdom.
Caesarea calls unto him Marinus, from the tribunal seat, takes him in
hand with exhortations, leads him by the hand into the Church, sets him
down in the Chauncell, lays his cloak aside, shows him the sword that
honge by his side, afterward pulls out of his pocket the new testament,
sets it over against the sword, and bad him choose whether of those two, he
preferred or liked best, for the health of his soul. When he immediately
stretching forth his right hand, had taken up the book of holy scripture,
hold fast then says Theotecnus unto him, cleave unto God, and thou shall
enjoy the things thou have chosen, being strengthened by him and go in peace.
After he had returned thence, the crier lifted his voice and called him to
appear at the bar, the time granted for deliberation was now ended.
standing therefore at the bar he gave tokens of the noble courage of his
says, wherefore in a while after as he was ledd, heard the sentence of
condenmation and was beheaded.

CAP. XV. Cap. 16. after the greek.

Of the favor which Astyrius a noble man bare toward the Martyrs.

HEre is mention made of Astyrius, because of his most friendly readiness and
singular good Astyrius a senator of Ro^e and a fauorer of the Christians.
will he bare unto the persecuted Christians. This man was one of the Senators
of Rome, well accepted of the Emperors, in good estimation with all men, for
his noble stock, well known for his great substance: who being present at the
execution of the Martyr, took up his body, laid it on his shoulders being
arrayed in gorgeous and costly attire, and provided for him a most noble
funeral. infinite other things are reported by his familiers to have been
done of him, whereof diverse lived unto this our time.

CAP. XVI. Cap. 17. after the Greek.

Astyrius by his prayers repressed and bewrayed the iuggling and deceate of
Satan.

ANother straung fact is reported to have been practiced, at Caesarea Philippi
which the Phaenicians call Paneas, at those fountaynes which spring out of the
foot of the mount Paneius, whence the river Jordan has his original, they
report that the inhabitants of that place have acustomed upon a festiual day
to offer some sacrifice or other, which through the power of the devil never
afterward appeared, which also seemed in the sight of the beholders a notable
miracle. Astyrius on a time being present at the miracle, perceauing that many
at the sight thereof were amazed, pitied their erroneous estate, lifted his
eyes up unto heaven and prayed Almighty God in Christ Jesus his name that Satan
the seducer of that people might be bewrayed, The devil is put to flight by
fasting and prayer.
and refrayned from the seducing any longer of mortal men. which when he had
prayed (as the report goes) forth with the sacrifice swomme on the top of the
water, and the beholders ceased to wonder, so that from that time forth there
was no such miracle seen in that place.

CAP. XVII. Cap. 18. in the Greek.

Of the image of the woman cured of the bloody flixe, the image of Christ and
of some of the Apostles.

IN so much we made mention of this city Paneas in Caesarea Philippi, I think
I shall offend if I pass over with silence a certain historye worthy of
memory among the posterity in time Luke 8. Matthew. 9.
to come. The report goes that the woman whose bloody flixe we learn to have
been cured by our Savior in the Gospel, was of the aforesaid city, and that
her house is there to be seen, and a worthy monument yet there to continewe of
the benefitt conferred by our Savior upon her. Monuments of memory and not for
superstition.
that there stands over an high stone, right over against the door of her
house an image of brass resembling the form of a woman, kneeling upon her
knees, holding her hands before her, after the manner of supplication. Again,
that there stands over against this an other image of a man, molten of the
same metal, comely araied in a short vesture, and stretching forth his hand
unto the woman, at whose feet in the same pillar there grows up from the
ground a certain unknown kind of herb in height unto the hemme of the
brazen images vesture, curing all kind of maladies. This picture of the man,
they report to be the image of Jesus. it has continewed unto our time and is
to be seen of travelers that frequent the same city. neither is it any
marvel at all, that they which of the Gentiles were cured by our Savior, made
and set up such things. for that we have seen the pictures of his Apostles,
to wete, of Paul, of Peter, and of Christ him To erect an image is a heathenish
custom.
self, being graven in their colors, to have been kept and reserved. for the
men of old of a heathenish custom, were wont to honor after this manner
such as they counted Saviors.

The censure of the Translator toutching the before said images.
TOutching the truth of this historye we may not doubt but that there was such
a town, such a woman, and of such a disease cured by our Savior, the holy
Evangelists do report it. and that there were such images resembling Christ
and the woman (monuments of memory, and not of superstition) and that there
was such an herb of so wonderful an operation, we cannot deny, insomuch that
many do testify of the same, some by hear say, and some other that they
saw it. yet thus much we may note with Eusebius in the same chapter, that the
original erection of these and such like images was derived from the Gentiles,
who of a heathenishe custom were wont to adore such as of old time had
benefitted them with the setting up of their pictures for monuments in
remembrance of them. Toutching the miraculous operation of the herb, we may
assure our selves that it proceadeth neither by virtue of the picture, neither
by the prayer of the other, being both dumb pictures, but by some secret
permission of the wisdom of God. either to reduce the infidels at that time
to the belief of the storye, or to admonish the Christians that health was to
be looked for, only of Christ and no other Advocate. after the death of
Eusebius, Sozomenus (lib. 5. ecclesiast. hist. cap. 20.) reports that Julian
the Apostata took down the image of Christ, and set up his own in the same
place, which with violent fire that fell from heaven, was clefte a sunder in
the breast, the head broken of with the ^e^ke, and stickt in the ground. for
Julian had taken down the image of Christ, not to withdraw the people from
idolatrye, but in malice and despite of that new religion, and erected up his
own image to the intent the people should worship it, purposely to deface
Christ (even as they do now that willingly break Gods commandment to
uphold and maintain their own traditions.) Therefore God struck Iulianus
image from heaven with lightening and rent it in pieces, so that there remained
of it (as Sozomenus writes) relics long after. This God did not that he was
pleased with the setting up of pictures, but in token of his wrath and
displeasure against Julian for comittinge so dispitefull a deed.

CAP. XVIII. Cap. 19. after the Greek.

Of the Bishops seae of Jerusalem.

THe Bishops seae of James who first by our Savior and his Apostles was placed
Bishop The seae of Jerusalem long preserved and continewed.
of Jerusalem, (whom the holy Scriptures do honor with the title of Christ's
brother) was unto this time preserved, which thing the brethren there
ordinarily succeeding have manifestly showed unto all men. In so much that the
Elders of old and the men also of these our days have honored the holy men
and do still honor them for pietyes sake with convenient reverence. and these
things go after this sort.

CAP. XIX. Cap. 20. in the Greek.

Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria wrote of Holidays and Easter.

Dionysius besides the before said Epistles wrote at that time also, such
epistles as are extant of Holidays, where he entreats of the feast of
Easter, with solemn Sermons in praise thereof. The one of them he entitled to
Flauius, the other to Domitius and Didymus, where he expounded the Canon,
continewing the space of eight years, allowing the feast of Easter to be
celebrated at no time but after the solsti^iall spring. Moreover he wrote an
other Epistle unto his fellow ministers throughout Alexandria. again unto
others severally when the time of persecution was now at hand.

CAP. XX. Cap. 21. in. the Greek.

Dionysius writes of the sedition in Alexandria.

WHen as now peace in manner prevailed, he returned to Alexandria, where again
that city was so troubled with sedition and civil wars, that it was
impossible for him, to visit all the brethren throughout the city, which were
divided into both the sedicious parts. and again upon the feast of Easter as
if he had been in exile, he sent unto them his Epistles, even out of
Alexandria. Afterward he wrote an other Epistle of Holidays unto Hierax
Bishop of Egypt, where he makes mention of the sedition raised at Alexandria
Dionysius b. of Alexandria unto Hierax b. of Egypt.
in this sort: It is no marvel at all, if it be grievous for me to confer
by Epistles with them which are far distant, when as it is become impossible
for me to consult within my self, to conferte with my self, and mine own
proper soul. For I am constrained to write unto mine own bowels, my
companions and consenting brethren, citizens of the same Church, and how my
writings may be conveyed unto them, seems very difficult. a man may easier
take his journey, I say not, without the compass of these coasts, but from
East unto west, then travel from Alexandria it self, to Alexandria. The
middway of this city is so crooked and unmeasurable, as is that waste and
cross wilderness, which the Israelites wandered in, the continewance of two
generations, and as is the seae, which divided it self, and walled them in
compass, deep and penetrable, in whose high way, the Egyptians were drowned.
The calm and quiet shores resembled often times the redd seae, for the
slaughters committed upon them. The floode that relieved the city, seemed
sometime drier, and noysomer then the dry and stony wilderness where Israel
passing, thursted so much that he murmured against Moses, and the drink by the
power of God (which only works marvelous things) gushed out of the high
rock: sometime again it so ouerflowed, that the whole region in compass,
both way and field, were aflote, and threatened the violence of mighty waters,
even such as were in the time of Noe. This floode continewally slideth, being
polluted with blood, and slaughter, and drowned carcasses, much like that which
in the time of Moses, was changed for Pharaos sake, into blood and
putrefaction* and what other floodes can purify this wave, when all things are
to be cleansed with water? and how can the Ocean seae, being wide and waste,
compassing the whole world, season the bitterness of this seae? how can the
floode running out of paradise, whose fountain is fourefold, into the which it
is divided, flow into one heap and wash away this shedd blood? and when can
the air be purged of these noisome and contagious vapors? such fumigations are
lifted from of the earth, such winds from out of the seae, such aer from out
of floodes, such exhalations from out of havens, as if certain putrified ishue
distilled out of rotten carcasses, and mingled it self with all the four
elements. and as yet they wonder and enquire whence proceade these continewal
plagues, and grievous diseases? whence proceade these infections which prevail
among us? whence come these sundry and manifold destructions of mortal men?
and wherefore can not this great city contain henceforth as many citizens, if
they were numbered, from the cradel to dotage, as heretofore it has bredd as
they call them graybeardes? there were in times past so many from forty to
seventy as now the number of all sorts can not aunsvvere. and of them also
who heretofore from fourteen to fourscore years were assigned, and
allotted for distribution of bublique relief. Again they which were young in
sight behaved them selves like elderly men, and for all that they see mankind
without intermission to diminish and consume from of this earth, they tremble
not, though their general rooting out and destruction increase and prevail
daily.

CAP. XXI. Cap. 22. in the Greek.

Of the plague at Alexandria and the humanity which the Christians showed unto
the heathen.

WHen the noisome infection had overtaken these civil wars, and the feast of
Easter now drew nigh, he wrote letters unto the brethren and mentioned those
lamentable afflictions in these words: Other men think these times not fit
for any feast, no more Dionysius b. of Alexandria epist. unto the brethren in
Egypt.
they are not in deed, and yet not these only but others also whatsoever,
not only of the rest but also if any seem most pleasant unto them. now all
is replenished with lamentations, every man does nothing but mourn, howling
soundes throughout the city, by reason of the multitude of dead carcasses and
the daily dying* as it is written of the first begotten of the Egyptians, so
now a great clamor is heard. there is no house where a dead carkase is not
found, and truly not without cause. For the calamities which happened before
were grievous and intolerable, and first Exodus 12.
provoked us* and we alone though banished from the company of all men, and
being delivered ^^e^ ^o death, yet nevertheless at that time celebrated the
feast* for several places of several afflictions, seemed unto us solemn
and commendable, the field, the wilderness, the ship, the Inn, the prison*
but the most joyful feast the blessed martyrs did celebrate, triumphing in
heaven* afterward there ensued wars, and famine, which together with the
heathen we endured, suffering alone their injuries toward us, and partakers
with them accordingly of their private Plague. Wars. Famine.
malice and miseries which they suffered. Again we were cherished with the
peace which Christ sent for our sakes. but after that they and we had breathed
a little, this pestilent calamity fell, a thing more terrible unto them then any
terror, and more lamentable then any calamity, and as a certain
Historiographer of their own reported: which alone exceeded the hope and
expectation of all. yet of us not so counted, but an exercise and trial,
inferior to none of the rest, yet for all that, it spared us not, but it
lighted far heavier in the neck of the heathens. Again after a few lines
Misery makes the wicked to despair, but tries the godly as the gold in the
furnace. The Christians in the plague time loved not only their brethren, but
also their enemies.
he writes: many of our brethren by reason of their great love and brotherly
charity, spared not them selves, cleaued one to another, visited the sick
without warines or heed taking, attended upon them diligently, cured them in
Christ which cost them their lives, and being full of other men's maladies,
took the infection of their neighbors, translated of their own accord the
sorrows of others upon them selves, cured and confirmed other sick persons,
and died most willingly them selves, fulfilling in deed the common saying:
that only friendship is always to be retained, and departing this life they
seemed the ofscouring of others* In this sort the best of our brethren
departed this life, whereof some* were ministers, some Deacons, in great
reverence among the common people, so that this kind of death for the great
piety and strength of faith, may seem to differe nothing from martyrdom* for
they took the dead bodies of the Saints, whose breasts and hands and faces
lay vpward^ and closed their eyes, sh^^t their mouths, and jointly with one
accord being like affectioned, embraced them, washed them, and prepared their
funerals, in a little while after they enjoyed the like them selves. for that
the living continually traced the steps of the dead, but among the heathen
all fell out of the contrary, for scarce had the pestilence taken place among
them, but they contraried them selves, and fled from the most friendly and
dearest friends, they threw them half dead into the strectes, the dead
they The heathenish inhumanitie.
left unburied to be devoured of dogs, to the end they might avoid the
partaking and fellowship of death, which for all, that they devised, they
could not escape. after this epistle when the city enjoyed peace, he wrote
unto the brethren in Egypt toutching Holidays. and afterward other epistles
again. there is extant an epistle of his of the Sabbath, an other of exercise.
again writing unto Hermammon and the brethren in Egypt, he makes mention at
large of the malice of Decius and his successors, and of the peace granted
under Galienus. there is no cause to the contrary, but that the Reader may be
made partaker thereof.

CAP. XXII.
Dionysius censure of Macrinus and Galienus the Emperous, and of the heresy of
the Chiliasts.

MAcrinus after that he had forerunne on of the Emperors and followed after
the other, Cap. 23. in the greek Dionysius Alex. unto Hermammo^. Galienus was
Emperor together with his father Valerianus, but after his father was taken
captive of the Persians, he ruled alone.
immediately he is rooted out with all his kindred, and Galienus is proclaimed
and crowned Emperor, by the consent of all men, both an ancient, and a new
Emperor, being before them, but appearing after them. according unto the
saying of the Prophet Esaias: the things of old are past and behold new things,
now come in place. for even as a cloud darkneth a little the sun beams and
shadoweth the sun it self, shining in his sphere, again after the cloud
is resolved and vanished away, the sun which rose before the cloud shines
and takes his course: so Macrinus who intruded him self before the present
raygne of Galienus is now no Emperor, no more he was not then. but this man
like him self, as he was then, so is he now. and the empire it self,
laying aside heavy and vvrinckled old age, and purged of the former malice,
now florisheth a fresh, is heard and seen further, pear^eth and preuayleth
over all. Then he shows the time of his writing saying thus: It comes in my
mind to consider the years of these Emperors raygne. I see how the most
impious were Esaias 43. Apocal. 21.
famous in deed, but in a short while after they became obscure. yet this
holy and blessed Emperor having past the seventh, now ends the Anno Domini
266.
nynth year of his raygne, the which we will celebrate for holy day.
Besides all these he wrote two books of the promises of God* the occasion
whereof was such. One Nepos a Bishop of Egypt taught y^ the promises of God
made Nepos a Chi liast. Chiliastae of the Grecians and millenarij of the
latins were so called because that like here tikes they dreamed that Christ
should personally raygne as king here onearth a thousand years.
unto holy men in the Scriptures, were to be understood after the Jewish
manner, savoring (...) much of Iudeisme. he laid down for good doctrine that
after the resurrection we should lead^ a life here on earth in corporal
pleasures the space of a thousand years. and because be supposed that he was
able to justify this his opinion, out of the revelation of Saint John, he
wrote a book thereof, and entitled it the reprehensions of Allegorizers. This
book does Dionysius, in his works (entitled of the promises of God) confute.
In the first helayeth down his censure of that doctrine, in the second he
entreats of the revelation of Saint John, in the beginning of which book he
writes thus of Nepos.

Cap. 24. in the greek Dionysius b. of Alexandria lib. 2. of the promises of
God.
CAP. XXIII.
Of the book of Nepos the Chiliast, the quiet conference and disputation
between Dionysius and Coracion the Chiliast with the fruit thereof.

THey allege (says Dionysius) a certain book of Nepos, vvhereupon they
ground that without all peradventure the kingdom of Christ to become here on
earth, may be proved. Here busye bodies and sti^ging waspes may learn a lesson
which reprehende every thing and like of nothing.
for sundry other his gifts I commend and embrace Nepos, partly for his faith,
his diligence and exercise in holy Scriptures, partly also for his pleasant
psalmodie, vvhervvith at this day many of the brethren are delighted. I highly
esteem and reverence the man, specially for such a one as now is departed to
rest: yet the truth is our friend and before all to be reverenced* and if any
thing be well spoken, it deserves commendation, and is charitably to be
accepted, if ought seem not soundly to be written, it is to be searched out
and refuted. If he were present and auoutched his doctrine by word of mouth,
it should suffice without vvriting to confer by objections and resolutions,
to refell and reconcile the adversaries. but in so much there is extant a book
thereof, as some suppose very probable, and many doctors set naught by the
law and Prophets, they take scorn to be tried by the Evangelists, they
contemn the works of the Apostles, alleging the doctrine of this writer,
as a thing most notable, and an hidd secret, they suffer not the simpler sort
of the brethren, to conceive any high or magnifical thing, neither of the
glorious and right godly coming of our Lord, neither of our resurrection from
the dead, our gathering together and uniting with him, but trifling toys and
mortal affairs persuading these present things to be hoped for in the
kingdom of God* it is necessary we deal by way of reasoning with our
brother Nepos as if he were present. unto these he adds: When I was at
Arsenoita, where as thou know this doctrine first sprang, so that schisms
Where the error of the Chiliasts first sprang. Dionysius disputed with the
Chiliasts.
and manifest fauling away from the Church, fell out in those congregations: I
called together the Elders and doctors inhabiting those villages, in presence
of as many of the brethren as willingly came, and exhorted them openly to fifth
out this doctrine* and when as they brought me forth this book, as an armed
fence and invincible fortress, I sat with them from morning to night, whole
three days, discussing those things which therein were written, where I
wondered at the constancy, desire of the truth, intelligence or capacity, and
the tractablnes of the brethren, how orderly and with what moderation they
objected, they answered, they yielded, neither endeavored they by any kind of
way contentiously to retain their positions, if they were proved false:
neither bolted they contradictions, but as much as in them lay, stuck fast and
confirmed their purpose* and yet again where reason required they changed
their opinion, and were not ashamed to confess the truth together with us,
but with good conscience all hypocrisy laid aside, their hearts made manifest
unto God, they embraced such things as were proved by demonstrations and
doctrine of holy Scripture. and at length the graundecaptayne and ringleader of
this doctrine called Coracion, in presence of all the auditors then in place,
confessed Coracio^ the Chiliast was consuted and converted by Dionysius.
and promised unto us that thenceforth he vvoulde never consent unto this
opinion, neither reason of it, neither mention, neither teach it, for that he
was sufficiently convinced with contrary arguments. the rest of the brethren
then present rejoiced at this conserence, at this his submission and consent in
all things.

CAP. XXIIII.
The censure of Dionysius toutchinge the revelation of Saint John. Cap. 25.
after the greek.
The heresy of Cerinthus.

COnsequently in discourse be writes thus of the revelation of Saint John:
Diverse of our Dionysius. b. of Alexandria in his. 2. book of the promises of
God. Some of old thought the revelation to have been written by Cerinthus. The
heresy of Cerinthus. The reverent judgment of Dionysius toutchinge the
revelation of Saint John.
predecessors have wholy refused and rejected this book, and by discussing
the several chapiters thereof have found it obscure and void of reasons, and
the title forged* they said it was not John's, nay it was no revelation which
was so covered with so gross a veil of ignorance, and that there was none
either of the Apostles or of the Saints, or of them which belonged to the
church, the author of this book, but Gerinthus the author of the Cerinthian
heresy, intitling this as a sigment under the name of John for further credit
and authority. The opinion of Cerinthus was this* that the kingdom of Christ
should be here on earth, and look what he him self being very carnal lusted
after, for the pampering of his pa^ch, the same he dreamed should come to
pass, to wete: the satisfiyng of the bellye and the things under the belly
with meats drinks, marriages, festival days, sacrifices and slaughters for
oblatio^s, whereby he imagined he should conceive greater joy and pleasure. but
I truly durst not presume to reject this book, because that many of the
brethren read it diligently, and conceived a greater opinion thereof, then the
understanding my capacity atayned unto. I surmise there is a certain hidd and
wonderful expectation of things to come contained in the several chapiters
thereof* for where I understand him not, I bethink my self the words contain
a deeper sense, or more profound understanding: neither do I sift or pronounce
sentence of these, after my gross understanding, but resting rather with
faith, do forthwith think they are higher then may be understood of me*
neither do I unadvisedly refute the things I perceived not, but rather
marvel that I my self have not manifestly seen them* after these things
Dionysius allows of all y^ doctrine contained in the reuelacion, and
declares that it is impossible to understand the meaning thereof, by light
reading over of the letter, writing thus: when he had finished (as I may so
term it) all the prophecy, the prophet pronounces them happy which keep it,
yea himself to* happy (says he) Apocalip. 22.
is he which keeps the words of the prophecy of this book, and I John savv
these things and heard. wherefore I denyonot but that his name was John, and
that this work is John's. I think verily the book is of some holy man, endued
with the holy Ghost* but that it is the Apostles, the son of Zebedie, the
brother of James, whose is the gospel entitled after John, and the Catholic
epistle, I can hardely be brought to grant, for I conjecture by the behavior
of both, by their frase of writing, and drift of the book, that he was not
the same John. The evangelist laid down no where his name, neither preached he
himself, either by gospel or epistle. Again after a few lines he says:
John no where made mention as of himself, or of any other, but the author of
the revelation forthwith in the begininge of the book prefixed his name,
saying: The Apocalip. 1.
revelation of Jesus Christ which he gave him that he should shevve unto his
servants things which shortly must be done, which he sent and shevved by
his Angel unto his servant John, who bare record of the word of God, and of
the testimony of Jesus Christ, and of all things that he savve. Again John,
vvryteth an epistle unto the seven Churches in Asia. Grace be with you and
peace. The Evangelist prefixed not his name, no not to his Catholic epistle,
but orderly 1. John. 1.
begins of the mystery of Gods seerets after this manner: that which we
heard, that which we savve with our eyes* for the like revelation the Lord
pronounced Peter blessed, saying: happy Math. 16.
art thou Simon bar Iona, for flesh and blood have not revealed that unto
thee, but my father which is in heaven* and yet neither in the second,
neither in the third epistles commonly under his name, for all the shortness
thereof, is his name prefixed, but without name, vvrote himself an elder. The
author hereof not content after once naming himself, to prosecute the
Apocalip. 1.
matter he had in hand, but again repeateth and says: I John your brother and
partener in tribulation, and in the kingdom and patience of Jesus, was in the
I Will patmos for the word of God, Apocalip. 22
and the testimony of Jesus. and about the end he vvriteth thus: happy is he
that keeps the words of the prophecy of this book, and I John heard and
savve these things. wherefore we have to believe that one John wrote these
things according unto this his saying, but what John he was it is uncertain*
he named not himself as in sundry places of the gospel, the disciple beloved
of the Lord, neither him which leaned on his breast, neither the brother of
James, neither himself which savve and heard the Lord, no doubt he vvoulde
have uttered one or other of these had he been disposed to reveal himself* he
laid down not one of these but called him self our brother and partener, the
witness of Jesus, and happy because of the vision and hearing of the
revelations. I suppose there were many of the same name, with the Apostle
John, who for the love they bare unto him, and for that they had him in
admiration and imitated his stepps, vvoulde be loved alike of the Lord, and
therefore usurped this name, even as Paul and Peter are often repeated of
faithful vvryters. There is an other John in the Acts of the Apostles Act. 13.
whose surname was Mark, whom Barnabas and Paul took together with them,
of whom he says afterward: they had John to their minister* and whether
this was he that vvrote the revelation I dare not affirm. it is not recorded
that he came with them into Asia* for when they loosed (says he) from
Paphos, they which accompanied Paul came to Perga in Pamphilia. but John
departed from them and returned to Jerusalem. and I take him to be some other
of them which were in Asia. the report goes that there are two momuments at
Ephesus and either The difference gathered first by the sense.
of them bears the name of John. again if thou consider and vveye the sense,
the words, and the frase of them, not without just cause shall he be found
an other and not the Evangelist* the gospel and the epistle do answer one an
other, their beginings are a like. The Gospel: In the beginning (says he) was
the word. The epistle: that which was (says he) from the beginning The
Gospel: and the word (says he) became flesh and dvvelled among us, and we
savve the glory thereof, as the glory of the only begotten of the father.
The epistle has the like but otherwise placed: that which we heard (says
he) that which we savv with our eyes, that which we beheld and our hands
have handled of the word of life, and the life was made manifest. for to this
end he used this p^eface, as in process more plainly appears to impugn
the heretics which affirmed that Christ was not come in the flesh.
wherefore diligently he joined these together: and we testify unto you that
we savve, and shevve unto you the everlasting life which was with the
father, and appeared unto us, which we savve and heard that declare we unto
you here he stays and svvarueth not from the purpose, but throughout all the
several chapiters, 2. By the words often repeated in both.
inculcateth all the names, where of some breefly I will repeat. he which
diligently reads shall often find in both, life, often light, dehortinge
from darkness, very often truth, grace, joy, the flesh and blood of our Lord,
judgment, remission of sins, the love of God toward us, a commandment to
love one an other, that all the commandments are to be kept, reprehension of
the world, the deuell, and Antichrist, promise of the holy ghost, adoption of
God, faith every where required of us, every where the father and the son:
and if throughout all the character of both were noted, the frase of the
gospel and epistle shall be found altogether on. but the revelation far
differs from both, resembles not the same, no not in one word, neither has
it any one syllable corresponde^t to the other vvrytings of John. for the
epistle (I will say nothing of 3. No me^tio^ in either of each other.
the Gospel) never thought upon, neither made any mention of the revelation,
neither the revelation on the other side, of the epistle, when as Paul gave us
an inklinge, or somvvhat to under stand in his epistles of his revelations, yet
not intitling them so, that he would call them revelations moreover by the
frase thereof we may perceive the difference between the Gospel, the 4. By
the ^rase.
epistle and the revelation* for they are vvrytten so artificially according
unto the greek frase, with most exquisit words, syllogismes and settled
expositions, that they seem far from offending, in any barbarous term,
soloecisme, or ignorant error at all. for the Evangelist had (as it appears)
John was both learned and eloque^t.
both the gift of utterance and the gift of knowledge, for as much as the Lord
had granted him both the grace of wisdom and science. as for the other I vvll
not gaynsay but that he savv a revelation, but that also he received science
and prophecy, yet for all that I see his greek not exactly uttered, the
dialect and proper frase, not observed, I find him using barbarous frases, and
in some places soloecismes, which presentlye to repeat I think it not
necessary, neither write I these things findinge fault with ought, let no
man accuse me thereof, but only I do vvey the diversity of both works.

CAP. XXV. Cap. 26. after the greek.

The epistles and works of Dionysius. b. of Alexandria.

BEsides these there are extante other epistles of Dionysius whereof some he
wrote against Sabellius unto Ammon bishop of Bernice* afterward on to
Telesphorus, one to Euphranor, an other to Ammon and Euporus. of the same
argument he wrote four books and dedicated them to Dionysius (of the same
name with him) bishop of Rome. again sundry other epistles and volumes in
form of epistles as his Physics dedicated unto his son Timotheus. An other
tracte of temptations the which also he dedicated to Euphranor. And wrytinge to
Basilides bishop of Pentapolis diocese, he reports him self in the
beginning to have published commentaries upon Ecclesiastes: he left behind
him sundry epistles for the posterity. But so far of Dionysius works. Now
it remains that we deliver unto the posterity the history of this our age.

CAP. XXVI. Cap. 27. after the greek.

Of Dionysius bishop of Rome. of Paulus Sam^satenus the H^reticke, denyinge the
diuiniti^ of Christ, and the Synod held^ at Antioch, condemninge his heresy.

WHen Xystus had governed the Church of Rome, eleven years, Dionysius (of the
same Dionysius b. of Rome. Paulus Samosatenus. b. of Antioch and an heretic.
name with him of Alexand^ia) succeeded him. About that time also when
Demetrianus bishop of Antioch had departed this life, Paulus Samosatenus came
in his place. And because he thought of Christ basely, abiectly, and contrary
to the doctrine of the Church, to wete: that he was by nature a common man as
we are: Dionysius bishop of Alexandria was sent for to the Synod, who by
reason of his great age and the imbecilitie of his body, differred his
coming, and in the mean while wrote his censure of the said question in an
epistle* the other bishops, one from one place, an other from an other place
hastened to Antioch and met with the rotten sheep which corrupted the flock
of Christ.

CAP. XXVII. Cap. 28. after the Greek.

Of the famous bishops which were present at the Synod held at Antioch.

Among these as chief flourished Firmilianus bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia:
Gregorius Firmilianus. Greg. Nazianz. Athenodorus. Elenus. Nicomas. Hymenaeus.
Theotecnus. Maximus. Dionysius. b* of Alex. dies Anno Domini. 267.
and Athenodorus who were brethren and bishops of the Churches in Pontus.
besides these Elenus bishop of Tarsus and Nieomas bishop of Iconium. Moreover
Hymenaus bishop of Jerusalem, Theotecnus bishop of C^sarea in Palaestina, and
Maximus bishop of Bostra. I might have repeated an infinite mo, both ministers
and deacons who met for the same cause at Antioch, but these aforenamed were
the most famous among them* When all came together at several times and
sundry sessions they did argue and reason hereof. Samosatenus together with his
accomplices endeavored to cover and conceal the variablenes of his opinion: but
the rest practiced with all might possible, ^o say bare and ^ett wide open his
blasphemy against Christ. In the mean while Dionysius bishop of Alexandria
departed this life, the twelfe year of Galienus his raygne, after he had
governed the Church of Alexandria seventeen years, and him succeeded Maximus.

CAP. XXVIII. Cap. 29. in the greek.

Of Claudius the Emperor, and the second Synod held at Antioch, where
Malchion confuted Samosatenus.

WHen Galienus had raygned under the regal scepter the space of fifteen
years: Claudius Claudius was created emperor anno Dom. 271. Autelianus was
crowned emperor Anno Dom. 273. under whom was raised the ninth persecution.
his successor was created Empetour. This Claudius having continewed two
years, committed the empire to Aurelianus, under whom was summoned the last
and the greatest synod of all, celebrated of many bishops, where the author of
that heresy and strau^g doctrine was taken short, publicly condemned of
all, severed, banished and excommunicated the Catholic and universal Church
under heaven. and among all the rest Malchion a man besides sundry other his
gifts, very eloquent and skillful in sophistry, moderator in moral discipline
of the schole at Antioch and for his sincere faith in Christ, made minister
there of the same congregation: reproved him in reasoning for a slippery
waueringe, and obscure merchant* he so urged with reasons this Samosatenus, and
the notaries penned them (which unto our time were extant) that alone of all
the rest he was able to ^osse and wringe this dissemblinge and wily heretic.

CAP. XXIX.
The Epistle of certain bishops contayninge the Acts of the Synod held at
Antioch Cap. 30. after the greek.
against paulus Samosatenus and of the heretics life and trade of living.

WIth uniform consent of all the bishops then gathered together they wrote an
epistle unto Dionysius bishop of Rome and Maximus bishop of Alexandria, and
sen^ it abroad into all provinces, in the which they revealed unto the world
their great labor and industry, the perverse variablenes of Paulus, the
reprehensions and objections proposed against him, his conversation and trade
of living. whereof for memories sake I think it not amiss to allege some
part for the posterity which is thus written: Unto Dionysius and Maximus, and
all our fellow bishops, The bishops assembled at Antioch unto Dionysius b. of
Rome, and maximus b. of Alexandria.
elders and deacons throughout the world, and to the whole, universal and
catholic church under heaven: Helenus, Hymenaeus, Theophilus, Theotecnus,
Maximus, Proclus, Nicomas, Aemilianus, Paulus, Bolanus, Protegenes, Hierax,
Entychius, Theodorus, Malchion, Lucius, with all the other bishops who with us
inhabit the borderinge cities and ouersee the nations, togetherwith the elders
and deacons, and holy Churches of God: to the beloved brethren in the Lord
send greeting. Unto this salutation after a few lines they added as
follows: We have cited hither many bishops from far, to salve and cure
this deadely and poisoned doctrine, as Dionysius bishop of Alexandria, and
Firmilianus bishop of Caesarea in cappadocia, men blessed in the Lord, whereof
the one writing hither to Antioch, voutchsafed not once to salute the author
of error, for he wrote not to his person but to the whole congregation, the
copy whereof we have here annexed. but Firmilianus came twice, and condemned
his strange doctrine as we know very well and testify which were present,
together with many other besides us, for when Paulus The subtle^y of the
heretic.
promised to recante, and this man believed and hopped he would redress and
prevent this occasion without all contumely and reproach which might redound
unto the true doctrine, he differred and posted over his opinion from time to
time, being seduced no doubt by him which denied God and his Lord and swarued
from the faith he held at the beginning. This Firmilianus in his journey to
Antioch came as farte as Tarsus, having experime^t in Christ of his malicious
spite, wherewith he denied God, but whilst that we assemble together, whilst
we summone him, and wait for his coming he departed this life. again of the
life of Samosatenus, and his conversation they Samosetenus the heretic is
here painted in his colors.
write thus in the same epistle: After that he forsook the ecclesiastical
canon he fell unto unlawful and forged doctrine. neither is it behoueable for
us now to judge of an aliene, either to descant how at the first he was poor
and nothing bequeathed him of his parents, and that neither by art, trade or
exercise he attained unto the abounda^ce of wealth, which he enjoined, but with
lewdacts and sacrilege, by injurious and tyrannical oppression of the
brethren, whom he made to tremble for fear, with his guyleful gain and wily
promise of hired patronship, by which subtlety and deceate he gained so much
that he procured the geuers to be liberal, to thend they might 1. Timoth. 6.
be delivered from their adversaries, and so he turned godliness into gain.
neither need we to speak here of how that he being puffed with pride
usurped seculer dignities, and would rather be called a vvarlicke captain
then a byshope of the Church, vvalkinge stately throughout the streets, and
market place, reading letters and vvithall openly enditing, maintaining about
him a great troop to guard his person, some going before and some coming after,
so that our faith and religion run to great spite, sclaunder and hatred by
reason of his svvellinge pride and hautye disdain. neither will we rehearse
the monstrous figmentes which he feigned, his glorious braggs, the vglesome
spectacles he devised to amaze the minds of the simpler sort. he made for him
self Such a proud preacher was Herod in the acts. 12.
a lofty seat and high throne, not like the disciple of Christ but severed in
shevve and title, after the manner of the princes of this world smyting, the
thighe with the hand, pouncinge the footestole with his feet. If any
extolled him not as the use is upon theaters, with clappinge of their hands,
with shoutinge and hurlinge of their cappes: if any also both of men and
women had not skipped to and fro with busy bodies, and indecent obeisance:
if any as in the house of God had behaved themselves honestly and decently the
same he checked and all to be reviled. He inueyed without all reason in the
open assemblyes against the expositors of holy scripture, which then were
depart to rest: he auaunted him self more like a sophister and sorcerer then
a bishop: the psalms song in the Church to the laud of our Lord Jesus Christ,
lie removed cou^ting them nevve found figments of late vvriters, instead
vvvherof, in the midst of the church upon the high feast of Easter he
suborned certain women which sounded out sonnets to his praise, the which if
any now heard, his hear would stand staringe on his head. he licenced the
bishops and ministers of the adjoining villages and cities which honored him,
to preach unto the people. he staggereth at confessing with us that the son
of God descended from heaven. And that we may borowe somewhat of that which
hereafter is to be spoken of us, it shall not be barely ^ch^d, ^^t (...) out of
the co^me^ari^^ published by us unto the whole world specially where he says
that Christ Jesus is of the earth. They which sound out his commendation and
extol him among the people, affirm^ this wicked and most detestable var^ett to
be an angel that came ^ue^. neither forbids he these things, but stands
arroga^tly to the things spoken of him* what shall I speak of his
entertainme^t of associated and closly kept women as they of An^^oth term
(...) and of the (...) and deaco^ which accompany him, wherewith w^^tingly he
clo^^th this and sundry other heinous, incurable, and well known offenses, to
the end he may withhold them also ^^^lty together with him in those things the
which both in word and deed he of^^ideth in, daring not to accuse him insomuch
they the^ selves are gilty in their consciences of the same crime. for he
enritcheth the^, wherefore he is both beloved and honored of the^ that gape
after the like gudgins. we know beloved brethren that a bishop and the whole
order of priesthood ought to be a pattern of good works unto the common
people, neither are we ignorant of this, that many are fallen because of the
closly kept women, and many again are subject to suspicio^ and slander.
wherefore admit that he committed no lewd wantones with the^, yet should he
have feared the suspicio^ and surmise which rises thereof, lest that either he
should offend any, or bolden any to the ^^itatio^ off^levvde an example for how
ca^ hereprehend and admon^she an other, that (as it is vv^^^^en) he (...)
longer the company of an other woman, and that he take heed he fall not.
which now abstaineth from one, and instead thereof, retains two lustier
and liuelyer pieces at home, and if he travel anyvvhither, he leads the^
with him being al set upon the full and delicate pleasure. For which (...)
cu^stance, all do sobbe and sighe secretly, tre^^ling at his power and
tyranny, and dare nor accuse him, but these things as we have said before are
of such importance that they would cause a catholic person were he never so
dear a friend unto us, to be sharply rebuked. As for him which fell from the
mystery of our faith, and discried the det^stable heresy of Artemas (nothing
amiss if now at length we name the father of the child) we think him never
able to render acco^pta of his mischeuous acts. Again about the end of the
epistle they write thus: Paulus Samosatenus was excommunicated by the council
and Domuns placed in his rowme.
wherefore necessity co^s^taining v^ so to do we excommunicated the sworn
adversary of God which yielded not a lote, and placed in his rovvme Do^n^s a
man bedecked with allgifts required in a bishop, son to Dem^^ri^^us of
worthy memory the predecessor of Paulus, and him as we are pesvvaded, by the
providence of God, we ordained bishop, and certified you to write unto him,
to the end ye like wise might receive from him again letters of friendly
consent, and amity. now let Paulus write to Artemas, and let the co^plices
of Artemas communicate with him. But of these things thus far. Paulus
together with his right faith was deprived also of his bishoprike, and Domnus
(as it is written before) succeeded him, being chosen by the synod bishop of
Antioch. and when Paulus would not depart the church, neither void the house,
the emperor Aurelianus being besought, decreed very well, and commanded by
edi^^* the house should be allotted for such as y^ bishops of Italic and Rome
with uniform co^seut in doctrine* appointed for the place. After this sort was
Paulus with great shame, vanished y^ church by secular power. and thus was
Aurelianus the^ affected toward us, but in process of time he so e^^raunged
him self, that welnygh through the lewd motion of some men he moved
persecution against us, and much talk was blased far and nygh toutching him.
Aurelianus was not able to subscribe to an edict against the Christians.
Tacitus was emperor 6. months, and Florianus 80* days although there is here
no mention made of the^.
but when he had raised persecution against us, and now welnygh subscribed to a
public edict prejudicial to our affairs, the just judgment of God ouertooke
him and hindered his purpose, cra^ping as it were his knuckles, making manifest
unto all men, that the princes of this world, have never any power to practice
ought against the church of God, unless the invincible might of God, for
discipline and conversion of his people according unto his divine and
celestial wisdom grant pardon or license to bring any thing about, in what
time it shall please him best. When Aurelianus had held the imperial scepter
the space of six years, Probus was crowned emperor Ann. Dom. 279. Carus
began to reign an. Dom. 285. Diocletian was chosen emperor ann. Do. 287.
under whom the tenth persecution of the primitive church^ was raised against
the church of God. Cap. 31. in the Greek.
Probus succeeded him. And again after six years Carus came in his place,
together with Carinus and N^^erianus his sons. Again when these had
continewed scarce three years Diocletianus was chosen emperor. and by his
means they were promoted, under whom persecution and the overthrow of the
churches prevailed. a little before the raygne of this Dioclet^^^, Di^^y^^^s
bishop of Rome dyed, when he had governed the church nine years, whom Feli^
succeeded.

CAP. XXX.
Of Manes whereof the Maniches are called, whence he was, his conversation and
heresy.

ABout that time Manes (after the etymology of his name) in no better taking
than a (...) man, was in armor and instructed in a deuelishe opinion through
the peruersitie of his About the year 281. (Eusebius. in chronic.) the heretic
Maneslyued. Manes the heretic chose 12. Apostles.
mind, the deuell and satan the aduersari^ of God, leading and procuring him
to the perdition of many souls. He was in tongue and trade of life very
barbarous, by nature possessed and frenticke, he practiced things correspo^dent
unto his wit and manners, he pres^^^ed to represent the person of Christ, he
proclaimed him self to be the comforter and the holy ghost, and being puffed
up with this frenticke pride, chose as if he were Christ, twelve partners of
his new found doctrine, patching into one heap false and detestable doctrine,
of old, rotten, and ro^ted out heresies, the which he brought out of Persia,
for no other then deadly poison into the world, wh^^^ that abominable name of
the Maniches has had his original.

CAP. XXXI. Cap. 32. in the Greek.

Of the bishops, ministers, and other famous men flourishing at that time in the
churches of Rome, Antioch, and Laodicea.

SVch a fained name of false science sprung up in those times in the which
after Felix had governed Eutychianus b. of Rome. Gaius. b. of Rome. Marcellinus
b. of Rome. Timaeus. Cyrillus. Dorotheus, minister of Antioch, afterward. b.
of Tyrus. Tyrannus. Socrates. Eusebius.
the church of Rome five years, Eutychianus succeeded. who continewinge
seares ten months committed his clergy unto Gaius, in this our time, and
fyfteene years after Marcellinus followed, whom also the persecution
ouertooke. In the church of Antioch after Domnus succeeded Timaeus, after him
in our time Cyrillus was chosen bishop, under whom we remember one Dorotheus,
then minister of the church of Antioch to have been a very eloquent and
singular man. he applied holy scripture diligently, he studied the Hebrewe
tongue so that he read with great skill the holy scriptures in Hebrewe. This
man came of a noble race, he was expert in the chief discipline of the
Grecians, by nature an eunuch so disposed from his nativity. for which cause
the emperor for rareness thereof, appropriated him, placing and preferringe
him to the purple robe in the city of Tyrus. we heard him our selves
expounding holy scripture with great commendation in the church of God.
Tyrannus succeeded Cyrillus in the church of Antloch, in whose time the spoil
of churches was very ryfe. Eusebius which came from Alexandria, governed the
church of Laodicea after Socrates. The stir about Paulus Samosatenus was the
cause of his removing, for whose sake he went into Syria, where of the godly he
was hindered that he could not return home again, because he was the desired
Jewel and hoped stay of our religion, Anatolius b. of Laodicea.
as by the testimony of Dionysius hereafter alleged shall manifestly appear.
Anatolius succeeded him, the good (as they say) after the good, who also was of
Alexandria. for his eloquence and skill in the Grecians discipline and
philosophical literature, he bare the bell among all the famous of our time,
he excelled in Arithmeticke, Geometric, Astronomy, Logic, physical
co^templatio^, and rhetorical exercises: for which his excellency he was
chosen moderator of Aristotels school, by the cytizens of Alexandria. They
report at Alexandria many other famous acts of his, specially his behavior at
the slege of Pyruchium* where he ob^^yne^ a singular prerogative of
principality, of whose doings one thing for example sake I will rehearse. When
vittaile (as they say) failed such as were vesieged, and famine pressed them
sorer then foraine enemies, this same Anatolius brought this devise to pass.
whereas the one part of the city held with the Roman The policy devised
by Anatolius.
host, and therefore out of the danger of the slege, he gave information to
Eusebius, who then was at Alexandria (it was before his departure into Syria)
and conversant among them which were not besieged, in great estimation and
credit with the Roman captain, how that such as were besieged almost
perished for famine. he being made privy to their misery by the messengers
of Anatolius, craved pardon of the Roman captain for such as left and
forsook the enemy* which suit when he had obtained, he communicated with
Anatolius. he forthwith accepting of his promise, assembleth together y^ senate
of Alexandria, and first requesteth of the^ all, that they will join in league
with the Romans. when he saw them all set in a rage at this his request be
said: but yet in this I suppose you will not resist, if I council you to
permit such as stand you in no stead, as old men, and old women, and
children, to depart the city, and to repair whither please them. for to what
purpose do we retain these among us now ready to yield up the ghost? to what
purpose do we press with famine such as are maimed and wounded in body? when
as men only, and young men, are to be releaued, and retained, and provision of
necessary food, is to be found for them which keep the city, with contine
wall watch and ward. when he had persuaded the senate with these and the like
reasons, first of all he rose and pronounced that all such, of what age
soever, as were not fit for feats of arms, were they men or women, might
boldly pass and depart the city, affirminge that if they would remain and
linger in the city like unprofitable members, there was no hope of life, they
must needs perish with famine. to which saying the whole seuate condescended,
so that he delivered from danger of death, in manner as many as were besieged,
but specially those that were of the church. Again he persuaded to flight all
the christians throughout the city, not only such as were within the compass
of the decree, but infinite mo, under color of these, privily arrayed in
women's attire, and carefully he provided that in the night season they should
convey them selves out at the gates, and fly unto the Romans camp, where
Eusebius entertained all them that were afflicted with long siege, after the
manner of a father and physician, and resteshed them with all care and
industry. Such a coople of pastors orderly succeeding one an other, did the
church of Laodicea, by the divine providence of God enjoy, who after the
wars were ended came thither from Alexandria. we have seen many pieces of
Anatolius works, whereby we gather how eloquent he was, how learned in all
kind of knowledge, specially in those his books of Easter, whereof at this
present, it may seem necessary that we allege some portion of the canons
toutching Easter: The nevy moon of the first month and Anatolius. b. of
Laodicea in his books of Easter.
first year (says he) co^priseth the original compass of nineteen years,
after the Egyptians the six and twentieth day of the month Phamenoth: after
the Macedocians the xxij. day of the month Dystros: after the Romans before
the eleventh of the calends of April. the son is found the xxvj. of
Phamenoth to have ascended not only the first line, but also to have passed
therein the iiij. day. this section, the first tvvelfe part, they term the
aequinoctiall spring, the entrance of months, the head of the circle, the
seuering of the planets course. but that sectio^ which foregoeth this, they
term the last of the months, the tvvelfe part, the last tvvelfe part, the
end of the planets course. wherefore they which appointed the first month
for the same purpose and celebrated the feast of Easter the fourteenth day
after the same calculation, have erred in our opinion not a little. and this
have we not alleged of our own brain, yea it was known of the Jews of
old, and that before the coming of Christ, and chiefly by them observed. The
same may be gathered by the testimonies of Philo, Josephus, Musaeus, and yet
not only of them but of others far more ancient, to vvete: of both the
surnamed Agathobulus, schoolemaisters unto the famous Aristobulus, one of the
seventy that were sent to translate the sacred and holy scripture of the
Hebrews, unto the gracious princes Ptolemaeus Philadelphus, and his father,
unto whom he dedicated his expositions upon the law of Moses. All these in
their resolutions upon Exodus have given us to understand that we ought to
celebrate the feast of the Paschall Lamb proportionally Between the 10. and
20. day
after the aequinoctiall spring, the first month coming between, and this
to be found when the son has passed the first solare section, and as one of
them has termed it the signifer circle. Aristobulus has added, that it is
necessary for the celebration of the feast of In spring about the eight
kalends of April: In Autumn about the eight kalendes of October.
Easter, that not only the Sun but the Moon also have passed the
aequinoctiall section. In so much there are two aequinoctiall sections, the
one in spring time, the other in Autumn, distant diameter wise one from the
other, and the day of Easter allotted the fourtenth of the month after the
tvvilight: without al fail the moon shall be diameter wise opposite to the
son as ye may easily perceive in the full moons, so the son shall be in the
sectio^ of the aequinoctial spring, and the moon necessarily in the
aequinoctiall autumn. I remember many other profes, partly probable, and
partly laid down with ancient assertions, vvherby they endeavor to
persuade that the feast of Easter and of svveete bread ought ever to be
celebrated after the aequinoctiall space. I pass over sundry their proofs and
arguments, vvherby they confirm the veil of Moses law to be removed and done
away, and the face now revealed, Christ him self, the preaching and passions
of Christ are to be beheld. Anatolius left behind him unto the posterity,
toutching, that the first month after the Hebrews fell ever about the
Aequinoctial space, sundry expositions and precepts of Enoch. Again
Arithmeticall introductions comprised in ten books, with diverse other
momuments of his diligence and deep judgment in holy scripture. Theotecnus
bishop of Caesarea in Palaestina was y^ first y^ created him bishop, and
promised y^ he should succeed him, in y^ seae after his death, (...) selves,
and whilst they heaped these things, that is: contention, threatenings, mutual
hatred, and enmity, and every one proceeded in ambition much like tyranny it
self, then, I say then the lord La^^eus. 2.
according to the saying of Jeremy: Made the daughter Sion obscure, and
ouerthrewe from above the glory of Israel, and remembered not his footestole
in the day of his wrath. The Lord has drowned all the bevvtie of Israel,
and overthrown all his strong holds. And according unto the prophecies in
the Psalms: He has overthrown and broken the covenant Psalm. 89.
of his servant, and profaned his sanctuary casting it on the ground by the
overthrow of his churches. he has broken down all his vvalls, he has laid
all his fortresses in ruin. All they that passed by spoiled him, and therefore
he is become a rebuke unto his neighbors, he lyfted up the right hand of his
enemies, he turned the edge of his svvorde, and aided him not in the time of
battle, he caused his dignity to decay, and cast his throne down to the
ground, the days of his youth he shortened and above all this he covered him
with shame.

CAP. II.
How that the temples were destroyed, holy scripture burned, and the bishops
ill entreated.

ALl these aforesaid were in us fulfilled, when we saw with our eyes the
oratories overthrown Churches overthrown. Scriptures burned. Bishops
persecuted. Psalm. 107.
down to the ground, yea and the very fundations them selves dug up, the
holy and sacred scriptures burned to ashes, in the open market place, the
pastors of the churches, whereof some shamefully hid them selves here and there,
some other contumeliously taken and derided of the enemies, and according unto
an other prophecy: Shame is powered upon the pates of their princes, he made
them wander in the crooked and unknown way. Yet is it not our drift to
describe the bitter calamities of these me^ which at length they suffered,
neither is it our part to record their dissension and unwonted guise, practiced
among them before the persecution: but only to write so much of them, whereby we
may justify the divine judgment of God. neither have we purposed to mention
the^ which were tempted sore with persecution, or altogether suffered shipwreck
of their salvation, and willingly were swallowed up in the deep goulfes of the
seaes, but only to graffe in our history such things as first of all may
profitt our selves, next the posterity in time to come. We will proceed then
and paynt forth the happy combats of the blessed Martyrs.

CAP. III.
A recital of certain imperial edicts against the Christians. the constancy
of certain faithful persons. the beginnings of the butcherly slaughter.

IT was the nynteenth year of Diocletians reign and the month Dystros, after
the Romans An. Do. 306. the persecution under Diocletian waxed hot, when as
these cruel edicts were every where proclaimed.
March, the feast of Easter then being at hand, when the Emperors
proclamations were every where published, in the which it was commanded: that
the churches should be made even with the ground, the holy scriptures by
burninge of them should be abolished, such as were in honor and estimation
should be contemned, and such as were of families if they retained the
christian faith should be deprived of their freedom. and such were the
contents of the first edict. But in the proclamations which immediately
followed after, it was added: that y^ pastors throughout all parishes first
should be imprisoned, next with all means possible constrained to sacrifice.
then, I say, then, many of y^ chief gouerners of the churches endured and that
cherefully most bitter torments, and gave y^ adventure of most valiant and
noble enterprises: many others fainting for fear, at y^ first onset were quite
discouraged: all y^ rest tried the experience of sundry torments: one scorged
from topp to toe: an other wrested and maimed with more intolerable pain:
some failed of y^ purposed end: some other were found constant and perfect:
one was drawn to the foul and filthy sacrifices, and dimissed as if he had
done sacrifice, when as in very deed he had not: an other, when he had neither
approached neither toutched ought of their detestable offringes, and such as
were present affirmed that he had sacrificed, departed with silence, patiently
suffering this thanklesse pickthanke: an other half dead was borne away being
thrown of them for dead: again there were some prostrat upon the pauement
trayled and lugged all a long by the feet, and recounted for sacrificers: one
reclaymed and with a loud voice denied y^ ever he sacrificed: an other lifted
his voice and confessed him self to be a Christian, and gloryed in the faith
of that gladsome title: an other again protested that he had neither
sacrificed, neither ever would do sacrifice. These were beaten on the face and
buffeted on the chekes, their mouths were stopped by the soldiers hands, an
whole band was appointed for the purpose, which violently thrust them out at
the doors. so the enemies of the truth triumphed if at lest wise they might
seem to bring their purpose to effect, but their purpose prevailed not against
the blessed martyrs of God, whose conflicts no tongue can sufficiently declare.

CAP. IIII. Cap. 3. in the Greek.

Of the persecution first raised by Veturius the captain against the Christian
soldiers, at the beginning privily, afterward openly.

THere were many to be seen which bare singular good will and affection to
the service of almighty God, not only in the time of persecution, but long
before when peace prevailed. yet of late, I say of late at the first, the
chief governor starting up as it were out of soking drunkemesse leaueled at
the church privily and obscurely (since the time which run after the The
policy of Satan's messengers.
reign of Decius and Valerianus) and waged battle with us not suddenly, but
first assayed only the christians which were in camp. By this means he
thought he could eassly snare the rest, if that first he conquered these. and
here might you see many of the soldiers desirous to lead a private and
solitary life, fearinge they should faint in the service of almyghtie God.
for when the captain (who so ever he was) first went about to persecute his
host, and to try and syfte as many as were brought unto him throughout every
ward, and to give them in choice either to obey and enjoy their dignity, or to
resist and of the contrary to be deprived: many of the soldiers which were of
the kingdom of Christ, without any delay or doubt, preferred the faith of
Christ before the favor and felicity they seemed enjoy. and now one or two
of them very heauely not only contemned their dignities, but also endured
bitter death for their constancy in the service of God. because that the
captain as yet powered his malice by a little, and though he durst shede the
blood of a few innocents, yet staggered he at the multitude of believers,
fearing as it is most like, suddenly to give bettell unto all, and that
universally. Cap. 4. in the Greek.
but after that he took in hand more manifestly to persecute the church of
God, it can not be told or expressed with tongue, how many, and what manner or
sort of Martyrs were to be seen throughout cities and villages.

CAP. V.
A noble man of Nicomedia rent in pieces in the prefence of many, the wicked
Edict of the Emperor published against the Christians.

ON of Nicomedia, no obscure person, but according unto the account of the
world, of great nobility, who as soon as the edict against the churches of
God was published in Nicomedia, being moved with zeal god wards and feruencie
of faith, took into his hands and tare in pieces the profane and most impious
proclamation, pasted to an open and public post, in y^ presence of both the
Diocletia^ and Maximian.
emperors, Galerius and Constantius.
and of him which among the rest was most honorable, and of him also which was
the fourth person in the empire. and he which first practiced this noble act,
endured (as it is most like) the penalty of so bold an enterprise, retayning
a valiant and invincible mind unto the last gasp.

CAP. VI.
The Martyrdom of certain courtiers in Nicomedia with others both there and
in other places.

ALl the renowned men that ever were either of the Grecians or Barbarians
commended for noble prowess and fortitude, are not to be compared to the
divine and famous martyrs of this our age, of the^ I speak who (together with
Dorotheus) being the emperors pages, in chiefest credit with their Lords, and
were no less unto them then dear and natural sons: yet counted they those
comumelies, drudgeries, and new found torments for the truth in Christ,
greater riches then the glory and pleasure of this present life. One of these
for example sake, and the end he made I will declare, that the reader may
conjecture by his hap, what besell unto the rest. One of the aforesaid Noble
men was brought forth at Nicomedia into the open assembly, and enjoined to do
sacrifice, who stoutly refusing, by commandment is hoysed up on high; and his
naked body all to be scourged, and the flesh rent in pieces with the lashe of
the whyppe, until he were overcome and yielded to their sacrifice. When that
he had endured these torments, and persisted constant, and the bones lay all
bare, the flesh banished away: they power Vinegar myxt with salt, into the
festred wounds, and bruised parts of the body. When he had overcome also
these torments, and rejoiced greatly thereat, a greediron with hot burninge
coals is prepared, and that which remained of his body was laid thereon to
be bruyled, a slow fire being made under to consume it by little and a
little, lest that death quickly delivered him of his pain. So that they which
had the charge of the fire would release him of no part of his pain, unless
he promised to yield in the end to the Emperors decree. But he holding fast
his former opinion over came them, and yielded up the ghost in the midst of
his torments. Peter the emperors page after sundry torments bruiled to death.
Dorotheus hanged. Gorgonius was hanged. Anthimus. b. of Nicomedia beheaded A
certain number beheaded. A certain company burned. A number drowned. The
dead dygged up.
So valiant as you hear was the martyrdom of one of the Emperors pages,
correspondent unto his name for he was called Peter. The things which happened
to the rest were nothing inferior to these, the which according unto our former
promise, we will leave vntoutched. addinge only this to that which went
before, how that Dorotheus and Gorgonius with many others of the Emperors
family after sundry torments ended their lives on the gallows, and bare away
the garlande of victory. At this time also was Anthimus bishop of Nicomedia
beheaded for the christian faith, and with him a great multitude of martyrs.
For I wot not how in the emperors palace at Nicomedia some part of the house
was all a fire, and when the Christians were taken in suspicion to be the
authors thereof, by the emperors commandment the whole troop generally of
all the godly there at that time was executed, whereof some with sword were
beheaded, some other with fire burned, where also by the secret and divine
providence of God (as the report goes) both men and women skipped and leaped
into the flaminge fire. An other company the sergiants set in a boat and
threw into the deapth of the sea. The Emperors pages, after their death
decently buried, and resting in their graves were dug up, and by the
commandment of their lords cast into the sea, lest any adored them in their
sepulchers and took them for gods as they dreamed of us. and such were the
practices in the beginning of the persecution at Nicomedia. but in a while
after when that some in the region called Melitis, and again some other in
Syria were found ready to rebel, the Emperor commanded all the pastors
throughout every church to be imprisoned and kept in hold. The spectacle of
the practices was so cruel to behold that it exceeded all that thereof may be
spoken. Infinite multitudes were every where enclosed and the prisons All
prisons were filled with Christians.
of old appointed and ordained for murderers, diggers up of sepulchers, and
riflers of graves were then replenished with bishops, ministers, deacons,
readers, and exorcists, so that there was no rowme in the prison for such as
were condemned for heinous offenses. Again when the former edicts had taken
place, there followed others, by virtue of the which: such as sacrificed were
set at liberty, and such as resisted were commanded to be tormented with a
thousand kind of torments. Who is able here to number the multitude of all the
Martyrs throughout all the world? specially in that they suffered martyrdom
throughout Aphrick and among the Moors, throughout Thebais and Egypt,
throughout other cities and provinces.

CAP. VII.
The constancy of certain Martyrs, devoured of wyld beasts in Palaestina and
Phaenicia.

WE have known diverse of these to have flourished in Palaestina, again others
in Tyrus of Phaenicia, whose infinite stripes, and in their stripes a marvelous
constancy, and after their stripes their sudden bickeringe with ravening
beasts, in their bickering their valiant courage in withstanding the force of
fierce Libards, the rage of roaring Bears, the tuskes of wild Boares, the
woodnes of Bulls burned with fire and seared with hot glowinge iron, who will
not be amazed to behold? at the doing of all which we were present our selves
and saw with our eyes the divine power of our savior Jesus Christ (for whose
sake they Brute beasts spared such as me^ would not spare.
suffered these things) present and manifestly aydinge these Martyrs, neither
durst these ravening beasts of a long time draw nygh and approach unto the
bodies of the blessed saints, but raunged about and devoured such as set
them on without the ringe, toutchinge by no means among all the rest the
blessed champions, though their bodies were bare, though they provoked them
with the streatchinge forth of their hands, as they were commanded. And if
some time violently they fell upon them, back again they recoyled, as if they
had been repelled by divine power from above, which continewing a long time
brought great admiration unto the behoulders. When the first beast raunged
above to no purpose, the second and third were let loose at the one, and the
same martyr. the sufferance of those Saints was to be wondered at, and their
constancy firm The constancy of young men.
and immovable in their fresh and green bodies. Then might a man have seen
a young stripling under twenty years of age, standing still without any
holding, stretching forth his hands in form of a cross, making earnest
supplication unto God, with a settled and immovable mind, not wagging him
self at all, or poynting any whither from his standing place, yea thought the
bears and Libards, breathed out present death, and now as it were teared his
flesh in pieces with their teethe. yet I wott not how as if their jaws had
been glued together, they recoyled back again. Five Martyrs after sundry
torments beheaded and thrown into the seas.
Besides this young man, ye might have seen others in number five, thrown at
the feet of a fierce bull, which tossed into the air and tore in pieces with
his horns such as stood without the ryng. and left them as good as dead:
only the holy Saints he had no power to hurt, with his furious and cruel
threats, though he scattered the earth with his feet, and fanned the air
with his horns, though he were provoked to fierceness with searing iron, and
fomed out present death, yet by the divine providence of God he was pushed
back. When that this beast could nothing prevail against the holy Martyrs,
others were let loose, at length after sundry bitter torments and violence of
wild beasts, all were beheaded, and in stead of still earth and quiet
sepulcher, they swamme in the surging waves of the seas.

CAP. VIII.
Of the martyrs in Egypt.

THe like bickering had they of Tyrus in Egypt, the which they suffered for the
service of God. Martyrs in Egypt maimed, racked, scurged, burned, drowned,
beheaded, hanged, and famished to death.
then would thou have marueled at their martyrdomes, suffered upon their own
native soil where infinite both of men and women and children for the
salvation procured by our Savior Jesus Christ, contemning this transitory
life, have endured sundry kinds of torments. whereof some after mayming and
racking, and scurging, and thousands other vexations (horrible to be heard of)
were burned to ashes, others drowned in the seas, others manfully laid their
necks to ye block, others hanged on ye gallows, some as heinous offenders,
some other far worse, tied to ye tree with their heads downward, and so long
besett with a watch till famyne had bereued them of their lives.

CAP. IX.
The constancye of the Martyrs throughout Thebais.

OUr pen can not sufficiently paynt forth ye punishments, and torments,
endured of the martyrs Martyrs in Thebais their skins rased and schorched,
tied by the on leg and their heads downward. Hanged upon boughs.
throughout Thebais, there bodies in stead of iagged hoofes used heretofore,
had the skin rased all of, with rugged shells of sea fish, the women tied by
the one leg were lifted into the air, and their heads downwards with a
certain engine of wood, and there hanged all bare and uncovered, yelding unto
the behoulders, a foul, a filthye, a cruel and unnatural spectacle. again
others ended their lives upon boughs and branches of trees. They linked
together with certain instruments, the topps of the boisterous and mightier
boughs, and tied them unto either of the Martyrs thighs, afterward loosing
the boughs to speart and spring into their growing place, suddenly rent
asunder the members of their bodies, for which purpose they invented this
pain. all these mischieues continewed not a few days, or for a short space,
but the term of many years. some time more then ten, some other time more
then twenty were executed, one while not under 10. Martyrs. 20. 30. 60. 100.
Some burned. Some beheaded.
thirtye, an other while welnighe threescore. again at an other time an
hundredth in one day of men, women, and very young children, after the bitter
taste of sundry kinds of torments were put to death. We saw our selves with
our eyes, being then present at the execution, a great multitude, whereof some
were burned, others beheaded, until the sword became blunt, and the tormentor
wearyed, so that others came in place and executed by turns. where we beheld
also the noble cheer and countenance, the divine power and valiantness of
mind, in such as builded their faith on Jesus Christ our Savior. as soon as
the sentence was pronounced and judgment given upon the former, there stepped
forth others and stood at the bar, protesting their faith and publishing
them selves to be Christians, not fearing at all the bitterness of manifold and
sundry torments but with invincible minds, laying their whole trust and
confidence upon God, joyfully, meryly, and chearefully took the last sentence
of condemnation, singing Psalms and hymns and thankesgeuing unto God, even to
the last gasp. These were truly to be wondered at, but especially such as were
renowned for riches, nobility, honor, eloquence, and Philosophy: yet
preferred they before all these the piety and faith in our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. Philoromus governor of Alexandria beheaded* Phileas b. of
Thmuis, beheaded.
such a one was Philoromus governor of Alexandria of no small account, put in
trust with weighty matters of the empire, being guarded after the Romayne
dignity and honor, with a troop of soldiers to his train, was daily sifted
and examined. such a one also was Phileas Bishop of the people Thmuitae, a
famous man for the politic government of his country, for the oversight of the
public lyturgies and study of Philosophy* these men though they were
entreated of many their kinsfolks and otherwise their familiar friendas, of
many the chief rulers and last of all of the judge him self, that they would
tender their own case, that they would consider of their calling, that they
would pitye their wives and children: yet could not they for all the
persuasion of such great personages be brought by preferring this present life,
to contemn the faith of Christ, to renounce his laws, but with constant and
Philosophical minds, yea rather divine, enduring all the threats and
contumelies of the judge, ended their lives with the loosing of their heads.

CAP. X.
The testimony of Phileas toutching the constancy of the Martyrs of Alexandria
and the cruelty of the enemies.

IN so much that we have reported Phileas to be famous for his skill in
profane literature, he shall witness both of him self and of the
Martyrdomes of his time at Alexandria, declaring far more diligently then we
use to do, writing unto the Thmuitans in these words: for as much as all
these things are published in holy Scripture for paterns, examples and
momuments Phileas b. of Thmuis writes this epistle out of prison unto his
^locke.
for our learning: the blessed Martyrs which lived among us, lifting up the
eye of the mind, and behoulding with clear sight the universal God, settled
their minds to endure any kind of death for the service and religion due unto
God, and held fast their vocation, knowing that the Lord Jesus for our sake
took the nature of man upon him, to the end he might cut of wholly all sin,
and aid us to enter into everlasting life. for he thought no robbery to be
equal with Philip. 2.
God, but made him self of no reputation, taking on him the form of a
servant, and was found in his shape as man. he humbled him self and became
obedient unto the death, even the death of the cross. Wherefore the blessed
Martyrs of God, reposed Christ in their breast, being desirous of more
excellent gifts, endured not once but some of them twice all pain and
punishments that could be invented, and all the threats of soldiers, practiced
against them either by word or by deed, with an invincible courage, excluding
fear by reason of the fulness of 1. Ioh. 4.
love. whose manhood and valiantness in all their torments what man is able
with mouth to express? and because it was permitted and laweful for every man
to torment them as him pleased best: some smite them with clubbes and cudgells,
some with sharp twigges, some with whippes, some with lethern thonges, some
other with whipcorde. the spectacle was pitiful both for the variety of
torment, the and superfluity of malice. some with their hands tied behind them
were stretched a long and racked in every joint throughout the body, and as
they hong and lay in the rack, the tormentors were commanded to torment all
their bodies over, neither plaguing them as thieves are commonly handled with
the only renting of their sides, but they had the skins of their bellies,
and of their shinnes, and of their eye lidds rased all of, with rugged hoofes,
with the talents and claws of wild beasts. some were seen to hang by the
one hand at an hollow vaute, and to endure that way far more bitter racking
of the joints and members of the body. some were tied to pyllers and their
faces wrested quite kame for to behold them selves, their feet standing them
in no steed, but they violently wagging by the weight and payse of their
bodies were thus grievously tormented by reason of their stretching and
squysing in bonds. this they suffered not only while they were examined and
whilst the President dealt with them, but throughout the whole day* and
when that he passed from the former unto the latter, he gave his ministers
charge to ouersee them behind, if that peradventure any of them, being
overcome with the grievous torments did yeald. He commanded also that if any
were in danger of death by reason of cold, that their fetters and bonds
should speedely be released, and they to be laid on the ground, to be lugged
and trayled all a long to g^^t them heat* they had not one sparcle of
compassion on us, but thought of duty they should thus be affected and
furiously rage against us, as though we had been no living creatures.
wherefore our adversaries invented this second pain and added it to the
former punishments. after stripes they were laid in the stocks, and their
feet streched four spaces or holes asunder, so that of necessitye they must
lie on their backs having no feeling of their bodies by reason of the wounds
which the stripes printed in their members. others being thrown a long upon
the pauement, lay poudred in the dust, in extreme pain, a more piteous and
lamentable spectacle unto the behoulders then the torment it self, bearing in
their bodies diverse wounds diversely invented. The case lying thus: some died
in torment and confounded the adversaries with their patience. some half
dead and shutt in prison, after a fevve days died of their pain. the rest by
careful provision were comforted, and after certain continevvance of
imprisonment became more constant. when they had given them in choice, either
to toutch the detestable sacrifices, and so be at ease and enjoy among them
their cursed liberty, or not to sacrifice and chaung life for death: with all
speed voluntarily they embraced death* for they were skillful in those things
which concerned them in holy Scripture. he that sacrifices to strange God^
(says he) Deuteronomy. 4. Exodus 20.
shall be rooted out from among the people: and thou shall have no other Gods but
me. such are the words of a true Philosopher and godly Martyr, which he wrote
from prison to his parishioners before the judge pronounced the sentence of
condemnation upon him, rehearsing unto them yt state he stood in, provoking
them to march forwards, and to hold fast the profession of faith in Christ
after his death which then was at hand. but to what end do I use many
words, and allege the conflictes of the blessed Martyrs throughout the
world, invented one after an other specially of them which were pursued to
death, not after the public laws, but with deadly hatred.

CAP. XI.
How a whole city in Phrygia with the inhabitants thereof was burnt to ashes
and of Audactus the Martyr.

WHen the soldiers had besieged a whole city in Phrygia, inhabited of
Christians, and compassed in, both men women and children, which called upon
the name of the Lord, An whole city burned.
they set all a fire and burned them to ashes. For with one consent all the
inhabitants thereof, the Lieuetenant, the captain, the whole Senate, and the
people every one protested them selves to be Christians, and could by no
edicts be brought to adore Idols or carved images. And an other also there was,
renowned for Romayne dignity whose name was Audactus, by lineage Audactus
martyred.
coming of a noble house in Italy, and for all his virtues in great creditt
with the Emperors, so that he governed with great wisdom and vprightnes the
common wealth and weyghtiest matters of the empire: but above all he was famous
for religion and says in Christ, so that in the administration and governing
of the common wealth he endured torment and was crowned with martyrdom.

CAP. XII.
Of the regions and contreys where the Christians were martyred, and the
sanadgnesse of tyrannic all he at hen toward the faithful.

TO what end shall I by name recite the rest, or rehearse the maltitude of
men, or describe the sundry torments of famous Martyrs? whereof some were
beheaded, as it happened in Martyrs in Arabia. Cappadocia.
Arabia: some tormented with the breaking and bruysing of their legs, as it
happened in Cappadocia, some hanged by the feet and their heads down ward,
with slow fire set under and smothered to death with choking smoke, as it
happened unto the brethren in Mesopotamia: some Mesopotamia. Alexandria.
Antioche.
others had their nostrells slitt, their ears bored, their hands maimed,
their members and parts of their bodies drawn asunder and unjointed, as it
happened at Alexandria. to what end shall I furbushe the memory of them which
were burned at Antioche, hott burning coals laid under, not quickly to
dispatch them, but with lingering pain to torment them. and of others which
chose rather to burn their hands then they would toutch their abominable
sacrifices, the experience Some dispatched them selves rather A matron of
Antioch together with her 2. daughters drowned the^ selfs rather then their
bodies should be abused of the tormentors.
whereof some going about to avoid, before they were apprehended and fallen
into the hands of their adversaries, threw them selves down headlong from the
top of houses, and thought better so to prevent death then to sustain the
torments of their malicious enemies. A certain matron also, renowned for her
virtue and integricie of life, among all them of Antioch, famous for her wealth
and substance, her noble lynage, and estimation* had brought up two daughters,
that were virgins in the fear of God, which passed all other in brightness of
bewtye and youthly comlines. These, because they were greatly spited and
envied, for all that they hidd them selves they were found out, and when that
at length with much ado they understood of their being among forrayners, they
cyted them to appear with speed at Antioch in their proper persons, and
besett the place of their abode with a band of soldiers compassing them as it
were with a nett. This matron seeing her self and her daughters plunged in
great peri^^, by no means possibly to be avoided, pondered with her self the
punishments ensuing, and that which was most grievous of all, the abusing of
their bodies: she admonished in no wise to be suffered, no, not once to sincke
into their ears, and said further: that if they committed their souls as
bondslaues unto Satan, it were a thing more intolerable then any death or
destruction, yet there remained one remedy for all, and that said she was to
fly unto the Lord for refuge. After deliberation, with uniform consent they
laid down what was to be done, they apparelled them selves gorgeously and
took their journey toward Antioch. In the midst of the way, when their guard
severed them selves, as about to serve nature, they cast them selves unto the
floode that slyded thereby and drowned them selves. These heathen Idolaters
threw The Ethnicks drowned 2. virgins of Antioch. Martyrs in Pontus.
into the sea^ an other coople of Antiochian virgins, renowned for all
virtues, true sisters, of noble lineage, of good life, of tender years, of
goodly beauty, of honest minds, of godly conversation, of wonderful
disposition, as though the earth could no longer bear them. such were the
tragedies at Antioch. In Pontus they suffered horrible punishments to be heard
of, whose fingers of both hands were pricked under the tender nails, with
sharp quills: others had hott buyling lead poured on their backs, the most
necessary members of their bodies maimed: others endured shameful,
intolerable, and such torments as may not be told, in their privy members,
and in the secret bowels of their bodies, such as these noble and counted
lawful judges excogitated, for tokens of their sharp wit, and deep wisdom.
Daily also they found out new torments, contending one with an other who
could excel in spiteful inventions and addition^ of torment. this calamity
was extreme and out of measure cruel. And when as thenceforth they dispayred
of increasing their mischief, and now were wearied with slaughter and gotten
their fill of bloodshed, voluntarily they mittigate their rage they practice
curtesy, their pleasure (for sooth) is henceforth to punish with death no
longer. It is not The Ethnicks pulled out the right eyes, seared the empty
place, sawed of the left leg of the Christians, seared their hames, condemned
the^ to the mine pitts: all this they counted a gracious pardon.
requisite (say they) that the cities should be stained with blood, ishuyng
out of our own bowels, that the most noble empire of the Caesar's should be
blemished and defamed with the title of cruelty, y^ emperor him self being
well known for clemency and benignity, yea rather the gracious goodness and
clemency of the Emperors highness is to be stretched forth and enlarged
toward all men, that they be no more punished with death. They deemed their
cruelty assuaged and the Emperors clemency to shine in that they commanded
our eyes to be plucked out, and the left leg to be unjointed* such was their
clemency and mitigated cruelty toward us. Wherefore by reason of this cruel
curteste it may not be told what number and infinite multitude of men having
their right eyes pulled out, and the empty places seared with hott burning
yrons, their left legs sawed asunder in the hammes and seared likewise: were
condemned to the quarryes and mines throughout the provinces, to the digging of
mettalls, not for commodity and profits sake, but for affliction and misery.
And besides all this they were ledd forth to sundry kinds of torments which
may not be rehearsed, whose valiant acts also can not be described. when the
holy Martyrs shined thus throughout the world in these their afflictions the
beholders wronded at their patience and noble courage, neither without cause,
for they expressed and showed forth unto the world special and manifest
signs of the divine and unspeakable power of our Savior, working by them. it
were to long yea impossible to number them all by their names.

CAP. XIII.
Of the famous Bispops and ministers that were martyred.

TOutching the chief rulers of the Churches, and them which were crowned
Martyrs in the most famous cities: Anthymus bishop of Nicomedia, was beheaded
and crowned the first martyr Anthymus ^. of Nicome ^ia behea^ed.
registered in the catalogue of the Saynctes in the kingdom of Christ. Of them
which suffered at Antioch Lucianus minister of that congregation, leading a
vertous life, preached at Nicomedia Lucianus a martyr. Tyrannion b. of Tyrus
was drowned at Antioch. Zenobius of Sidon scourged to death. Siluanus. b. of
Emisa torn of wild beasts. Siluanus. b. of Gaza beheaded. 39 Beheaded Peleus
and Nilus. b. of Egypt burned. Pamphilus* Peter. b. of Alexandria.
in presence of the emperor the celestial kingdom of Christ, first unto us
in exhortation by way of Apology, afterward in writing unto the posterity.
the most famous martyrs of Phaenicia were the godly pastors of the reasonable
flock of Christ: Tyran^^^n bishop of Tytus, Zenobius minister of Sidon, and
Siluanus bishop of Emisa, who together with others in Emisa was thrown to
feed wild beasts, and is received unto the company of martyrs. The other two,
both at Antioch glorified God by their pacient deaths: Tyrannion buried in the
bottom of the seae, and Zenobius an excellent phisician, after scurginge and
bitter torment died most constantly. Among the martyrs in Palaestina Siluanus
by shop of the Churches of Gaza was beheaded together with nine and thirty
others which were committed to the mine pitts in Phaenos. In Egypt Peleus and
Nilus Egyptian bishops were burned to ashes. And here let us remember the
renowned pillar of the parish of Caesarea, Pamphilus the elder, and the most
famous martyr of our time. Whose life and noble acts we will at time convenient
declare. of them which at Alexandria throughout Egypt and The bais suffered
martyrdom, y^ most famous was Peter bishop of Alexandria a pattern of piety in
Christ unto the godly pastors, and together with him Faustus, Didius and
Ammonius, ministers and perfect martyrs of Christ. Also Phileas, Hesychius,
Pachym^us and Theodorus bishops of the churches in Egypt: and besides these
infinite other famous men, whose names are well known in the co^gregations
through out the region. It is not our drift to describe y^ conflicts of such as
striued throughout the world (we leave that for others) neither exactly to
paint forth unto y^ posterity all that happened: but only the things we saw
with our eyes and were done in our presence.

CAP. XIIII.
The state of the Romayne empire before and after the persecution. and of the
raygne of Constantine.

Unto that which went before I will annexe the recantation or dissanullinge of
the things practiced against us yea from y^ beginning of the persecution,
which I suppose very profitable for the reader. before y^ the Roman empire
waged battle against us, in the space As long as the Emperors did not
persecute the church, so long did their empire prosper.
the emperors favored us and maintained peace, it may not sufficiently be
declared, how prosperously the common wealth flourished and abounded with all
goodness, when as the chief magistrates of the public weal passed the tenth
and the twentieth year in solemn feasts and celebrated gratulatio^s in times
of most gorgeous and glorious renown, with constant and in^noueable peace*
when as there empire after this sort increased without offense, and daily was
enlarged, they had (...) sooner removed peace from among us, but they sturred
up such battles as cold not be reconciled* not fully two years after this
whurlyburly, there was such a change happened unto the whole empire which
turned all vpsid down. Anno Domini* 307. (Eusebius. Chronic.) Diocletian together
with Maximian having raygned 20. years, deposed themselves and live ^ a
private life Constantiu^ and Maximinus rule the Empire. Constantiu^ dies at
yo^^ in England^ Anno Domini. 310. Constatinu^ magnus wa^ proclaime^ emperor
Anno Domini. 311.
for no small disease ouertooke the chief of y^ foresaid emperors and bereued
him of his wits, wherefore together with him which was second person in honor
he embraced the popular and private life. these things then being not fully
ended the empire was with all divided into two parts, the which was never
remembered to have come to pass before that time. not long after Co^stantius
the emperor, passing all other throughout his life time, in clemency and
goodness toward his subjects, singularly affected toward Gods word, ended
according unto the law of nature, the common ra^e of his mortal life,
leauinge behind him his natural son Consta^tinus, emperor and Caesar to
supply his rowme, and was first referred of them into y^ number of the Gods,
enjoying after his death all imperial honor and dignity due to his person. In
his life he was the most benign and of most bountiful suffrayghtie among all
the emperors. who alone of all the emperors in our time governed most
graciously and honorably during the whole term of his raygne, showing humanity
and bountifullness unto all men, no partaker by any means, with any
presumpteous sedition ^ayled against us, he guarded the godly about him in
security without sentence of gylt, and without all contumely, he destroyed no
churches, he practiced no impiety y^ might be prejudicial unto our religion,
he obtained a blessed life and an ^nde thrice happy, he being emperor alone
ended this life both gloriously and peaceably, in prese^^^ of his natural some
and successor, who also was most prudent and religious. His son Consta^^^^^^,
being proclaimed full emperor and Caesar by the army, and long before by God
himself the universal king, he came a follower of his fathers piety in
Christian religion. And such a one was (...) ^ut Liconius while these things
were a doing, by common consent of the potentates was also created emperor
and Augustus. Which* thing greened Maximinus very sore, who unto that time
was alone called Caesar of all me^, who also being tyrannically disposed,
violently of his own mind invaded the empire and entitled him self Augustus.
And being attainted of treason, and found to have conspired the death of
Constantinus, and after deposition to have aspired again unto the imperial
scepter: dyed a most shameful death. He was the first whose titles, pictures
withal that seemed to show forth his honor were overthrown for no other then
the arms of an emperor that was most profane and impious.

CAP. XV.
The dissimuled love of Maxentius toward the Christians, his horrible Cap.
14. after the greek.
offenses and cruelty

HIs son Maxentius which exercised tyranny at Rome, in the beginning of his
raygne Maxentius the son of Maximinus a tyrante of Rome. Flattery. Cruelty.
Lechery.
dissembled our faith egregiously, creepinge into creditt by flatteringe of the
people of Rome, and therefore he commanded his communalty to cease from
persecutinge of the Christians, whereby he might pretend a show of piety and
seem tractable and more benign the^ his auncestres were before him. but in
process of time he was not in deed found the same which men took him for and
hoped he would be, for he fell into all kind of enormyties, omitting no
heinous offense, bow detestable and laciuious soever it were, unassayed.
committing adultery and all kind of lewd wantonness, sendinge home again
unto their husbands the louinge spouses and lawefull wives, taken from them by
force, when he had ignominiously abused them. and these presumpteous practices
he exercised not only upon the obscurer sort, but dealt this opprobriously
with the most renowned of the Roman senators. Wherefore all both high primats
and inferior people, trembling for fear of him, were oppressed with his
intolerable tyranny, yet nether Tyrranny.
by silence neither by suffering this grievous setuitude, cold they be free, from
the bloody slaughter and embrued murder of this tyrante. upon light occasions
sundry times delivered he the people unto the soldiers, which were in compass
to be slain, and an innumerable multitude of the Romayne people in the mids
of the city he offered to the sword and spears, not of Barbarians and
Scythians, but of his own proper soldiers. It may not be recited what
slaughter of senators he Extorcion.
procured, craftily seeking after their substance, of whom an infinite number
he executed for sundry causes and feigned crimes. this was the drift and mark
this mischiefous tyrant shot at. he Sorcery. Inchauntement.
applied himself unto the study of Magical arts. for inchauntement he
opened and ripped the bowels of burdened women great with child, he searched
the entrails of new borne babes, he slew lions, and after a secrett manner
coniured deuells and endeavored to withstand the wars then approchinge. for
he fully determined with himself to be crowned conqueror by means of these
arts. This Maxentius therefore practisinge tyrranny at Rome oppressed the
commonalty Famine cauled by Maxentius.
with such heinous offenses as may not be told, so that they were pinched with
so great penury of necessary victaile, as the like can not be remembered in
this our age to have happened at Rome

CAP. XVI.
The cruel behauiours of Maximinus in the East and of Maxentius at Cap. 15.
in. ^^e Greek.
Rome and other where in the west*

MAximinus the Casterne tyrant of a long time behaved himself to the end he
might conceal Maximinus ^pocrisie
his malice against his brother and his hid friendship toward the Roman
tirant, but in the end he was espied and suffered punishmente due to his
desert. It was wonderful to see how that he committed things a like and
corresponde^t unto the practices of the Romayne Superstition.
tyrant, nay he far passed him in malice and mischief. The chiefest
inchaunters and magicians were in greatest creditte with him, and because he
was a man very timorous and wonderfully rooted in superstition, he highly
esteemed of the erroneous worship of Idols and deuels. without southsaing^ and
answers of Oracles he durst not moan, no, as it is commonly said, not the
breadth Persecution.
of a nail, for which cause he persecuted us without intermission and more
vehemently then his auncesters before him. he erected temples throughout every
city, the Idolatricall worship of ^latrie.
long time defaced and overthrown he carefully restored again, and published
by edict that Idol priests should be ordained, throughout all countries and
cities. besides this he appointed ^haunte^t.
in every province one for high priest of such as were counted famous for
politic affairs being also able with decency to execute that function, whom
he furnished with a great train and guard of soldiers. To be short he
privileged all inchaunters, recounted godly and taken for Gods them selves,
with primacy, dignities, and chiefest prerogatives. He went on still and
oppressed, not on Oppression.
City or region only, but whole provinces under his dominion, exactinge gold
and silver and sums of money, and vexed them with grievous proclamations, on
penalty ensuinge after another. The wealth and substance which his progenitors
had gathered before he took in great Prodigality.
heaps of treasure and great sums of money and bestowed it upon his
flatteringe parasites. He was so drowned with over much wine and drunkenesse
that among his cups he would D^sikenesse.
be stark madd and besides him self, and often times being typsie commanded
such things, whereof afterward being restored to his former sobriety it
repented him. He gave place to no man for surfeting and superfluity, but made
him self ringe leader of that vice, unto all that were Surfetinge.
about him both Prince and people. He effeminated his soldiers with all kind
of delicacy and lasciuiousnes. He permitted his presidentes and captains to
practice ravenous extorcion, and poulinge of his subjects, whom he
entertained as fit companions of his foul and shameful tyranny. To what
end shall I rehearse his unchaste life? Or recite the adulteryes he committed?
He cold pass no City where he ravished not wives, and deflowred not virgins.
And in Lechery. The tyrant cold not overcome the Christians.
these things he prevailed against all sorts of people the Christians only
excepted which contemned death and despised his tyranny. The men endured
burninge, beheading, crucifyinge, ravenous devouring of beasts, drowninge in
the seae, mayming and broyling of the members, goringe and digginge out of the
eyes, manglinge of the whole body, moreover famyne and imprysonment, to be
short they suffered every kind of torment for the service of God, rather then
they would leave the worship of God, and embrace the adoration of Idols* women
also not inferior to men through the power of the word of God, putt on manly
courage, whereof some suffered the same torments with men, some attained unto
the like maysteries of virtue, other some drawn to be abused, yielded sooner
their life unto the death then their bodies to be defiled. For when as others
by reason of the tyrants adultery were polluted a Christian matron of
Alexandria, A chaste matron of Alexandria confounded the tyrant where fore she
was exiled and her goods confiscated.
both noble and renowned alone over came the lecherous and lascivious mind of
Maximinus with the presence of her manly courage. This woman for many* things
was highly esteemed, for riches, for kindred, for learning, yet preferred she
chastity before all. Whom when he had earnestly entreated, yet could not
find in his heart to putt her to death which otherwise was already prepared to
dye, being moved more with lust then with anger, exiled and deprived her also
of all her substance. And infinity other matrons not abydinge, no not the
hearing of the threats of abusinge their bodies, done by the presidents of
every particular nation, endured all kind of punishments, torments and deadly
pains. These are in deed to be wondered at, but in greater admiration, is that
most noble and most chaste matron of Rome to be had in respect of all the rest,
against whom the Romayne tyrant Maxentius, (lively resemblinge Maximinus) went
A matron of Rome slew her self rather then Maxe^tius should abuse her.
about to rage. When that she understood the ministers of tyrannical lust to
be at hand, and her husband (she being a Christian) though he were a Romayne
magistrate, to be in hold among them, and for fear of execution to have
consented thereunto she craved a little leisure, as if she went to trime her
self, and entting into her chamber and there being alone she run upon a
naked sword and dispatched her self, so imediatly by her death she bequeathed
her carcass un to the tyrants baudes, and by this act of hers, soundinge and
pearcinge more then any shrill voice, she pronounced and printed in the minds
of all mortal men both present and to come: that among the Christians alone
virtue can with no money be overcome, neither be destroyed with any kind of
death. This so great a burden of impiety was brought into the world at one,
and the same time by two tyrants which held East and west. If any seek out
the cause of these so The cause of the worlds calamities was the persecution
of the christi^s*
great mischieues, who will doubt to assign the persecution raised against us
for cause thereof, specially in as much as this confusion finished not before
the Christian liberty was first restored. for during the term of these ten
years persecution, there wanted them nothing, which might tend to mutual
hatred, or civil dissension. The sea was besett with ships, and therefore
innauigable, neither was it possible from any place, for any man to arrive and
take land, but he should he sifted with all kind of punishments, his sides
scourged, and himself tried with sundry torments, whether he were not sent
from the enemy as a spy, and in the end he was either hanged or burned.
morouer there were prepared for the purpose, targets, breast plats, darts,
spears, with other warlicke armor, galeyes also and other ordinance for
ships, were heaped in every place, neither waited any man for any other then
daily invasion by the enemy. after these things ensued famine and pestilence,
of the which we will entreat hereafter when fit opportunity is ministered.

CAP. XVII.
The end of the persecution and the final confusion of the tyrant. Cap. 16.
in the Greek.


SUch things had they prepared during y^ whole time of persecution, which in
the Anno Domini. 320.
tenth year by the goodness of God wholly ceased, yet after the eight year it
began somewhat to slack and relent. for after that the divine and celestial
grace of God beheld us with a placable and merciful countenance, then our
princes, even they which heretofore warred against us, after a wonderful
manner changed their opinion, song a recantation, and quenched that great
heat of persecution, with most benign and mild edicts and constitutions
published every where in our behalf. The cause of this was not the humanity or
compassion (as I may ^o term it) or benignity of the princes, being far
otherwise disposed (for they invented daily more and more, grievous things
against us, successively unto that time, they found out sundry sleyghtes and
new puniments one after an other) but the apparent countenance of the divine
providence reconciled unto his people, withstood the power of mischief and
quelled the author of impiety, and the worker of the whole persecution. And
yet according unto the judgment of God it was behoueable that these things
should come to pass, yet vvoe unto them (says the Lord) by whom offense
does Math. 18. Luke 17. God plagued Maximinus the tyrante ^^eng at Tarsus, so
that he was in a lame^ table plight.
rise. Wherefore a plague from above lighted on him, first taking root in
his flesh, and afterward proceeding even unto his soul. there rose upon a
sudden in the secret parts of his body an impostume or running sore,
afterward in the lower parts of his priueyties a botchye corrupt byle, with a
fistula, whence ishued out corrupt matter, eatinge up the inward bowels, and an
unspeakable multitude of lice, swarming out and breathinge a deadly stinche,
when as the corpulency of the whole body through abundance of meat, before the
disease came, was turned into super fluous grossenes, and then being grown to
matter, yielded an intolerable and horrible spectacle to the beholders.
Wherefore of the phisicians, some not able to digest that wonderful noisome
stinche were slain: some other (by reason of the swellinge throughout the
body, there remained no hope of recovery) being not able to help at all with
their physic, were cruelly executed the^ selves.

CAP. XVIII.
An Edict in the behalf of the Christians the which adversity wrested Cap.
17. after the Greek.
from Maximinus.

AT length being thus tormented and lying in this miserable plight, he began
to ponder with himself the rash enterprises he had practiced against the holy
worshipers of God. Wherefore returning unto himself, first he confesses his
sins unto God, whose power reaches over all. next calling unto him such as
then were in compass, he gave commandment that with all speed they should
relent and cease from persecuting of the Christians: that by the decree and
commandment of the emperor they should buyld again their churches: they
should frequent their often conuenticles: they should celebrate their wonted
ceremonies and pray for the life of the emperor. and immediately that which by
word he commanded was in deed brought to pass. The proclamations of the
Emperor were published throughout the cities, and The Edict of Maximinus in
the behalf of the Christians* the which his sickness co^ strayned him to
proclaim ^ In steed of Constantinus ^ome doread Constantius which I find ^ot
in the greek.
a recantation of the practices prejudicial unto us contained in this form:
The Emperor Caesar, Galerius, Maximinus, puysant, magnificent, chief Lord,
Lord of Thebais, Lord of Sarmatia, five times conqueror of Persia, Lord of
Germany, Lord of Egypt, twice conqueror of the Carpians, six times
conqueror of the Armenians, Lord of the Medes, Lord of the Adiabeni. twenty
times tribune, nineteen times general captain, eight times Consul, father of
the country, proconsul. And the emperor Caesar, Flauius, Valerius,
Constantinus, virtuous, fortunate, puysant, noble, chief Lord* general
captain and tribune fiuetimes, Consul* father of the country, proconsull.
Among other things which we have decreed for the commodity and profitte of
the common wealth, our pleasure is first of all to order and redress all
things according unto the aunciente laws and public discipline of the
Romans* and vvithall to use this prouiso that the Christians which have
forsaken the relligion of their auncesters should be brought again to the
right way* for after a certain humor of singularity such an opinion of
excellency puffed them up* that those things which their elders had received
and allowed they rejected and dissalowed, devising every man suchlavves as they
thought good, and observed the same, assembling in diverse places great
multitudes of people* wherefore when as our Edict was proclaimed, that they
should return ^n^^ the ordinances of their elders, diverse standing in
great danger felt the penalty thereof, and many being troubled therefore,
endured all kinds of death* and because we perceive (...) yet to persist in the
same madness, neither yelding due wor^hip unto the celestial Gods, neither
regarding the God of the christians, having respect unto our benignity and
godly custom, pardonning^ ^l^^ ^n af^^^ our wonted guyse, yea we thought good
in this case to extend our gracious (...) f^^^^ able clemency, that the
christian may be tolerated again, and that they repair again the places
where they may me^ro together. So that they do nothing prejudicial to
public order and discipline. VVe^ mean to prescribe unto the judges by an
other epistle what they shall observe. Wherefore as this our gracious pardon
deserves, let them make intercession unto their God, for our health, for the
common weal, and for themselves, that in all places the affairs of the
public weal may be safely preserved, and that they themselves may live
securely in their proper houses. These things after our hability we have
translated in this sorce out of the Roman language into the greek tongue.
Now have we duly to consider of those things which ensued and followed after.

The censure of the Traslator toutching the chapiters which follow until the
end of this. 8. book. Being found in the greek copy as a fragmente whose
author was vnkowen.
ALl that which follows until the end of this eight book* I have found in
the greek copy, distinguished from the 18. chapiters, which went before: Not
divided into chapiters, as the rest was, but lying confusely for a suspected
work, whose author was not known. When that I had translated bit herto and
perceived that the latin interpretours rested here: I perused by my self the
whole fragment, to see whether I cold gather any just cause to the contrary,
but that it should be turned to English: I found the doctrine sound, the
history pleasant, the style artificial, and far more curious then in the
former books. The frase sauored of the latin, (and no force for Eusebius was
well seen in both) the periods long, though not often used throughout his
histories, yet in others his works very ri^^ and common. Though this fragment
be found more curious and artificial, then the rest^n^ marvel at all* for
men's gifts do not serve them at all times alike. If this rule were observed,
and paised in the balance void of all parciality there would not be so many
pe^ces, so many tracts, and so many learned works of ancient writers,
contemned and renounced, by reason that the frase in some point seems to
differ or fall from the wonted grace. The learned clerk Antony Gueuarra was
used to say: that at some times. and at some exercises, his memory would be so
ready, his wits so fresh, and his skill so excellent, that he cold divide a
hear, and swepe a grain* at other times he wished to himself not only five,
but ten senses, which we commonly callwitts. Some things there are to be
misliked wit hall in this fragment, first that it is out of order placed: next
that there are sentences and periods, written by Eusebius in the former. 18.
chapiters repeated in this fragme^t. Toutching the repetion he that is
acquainted with Eusebius will confess: that oftentimes in many places he
repeateth one thing, though not upon the self some occasion, neither in the
self same order, nether with the same words. he has made mention of his book
of martyrs and of the ^okes he wrote of the life of Phamphilus almost in every
book. he reports the self same martyrdomes in diverse books and sundry
places. as for the placinge no marvel at allthough it be out of order,
Eusebius published not his own history but left it with his familiars.
Alexander bishop of Jerusalem gathered bear and there, the scattered works of
the ancient writers, copied them not as the authors wrote them, but as he
found them, and chayned them in the library at Jerusalem* Orige^ compiled into
one volume the translations of the old testament and published them in such
sort as pleased him best. Pamphilus martyr builded a library at Caesarea, and
gathered the works of Origin and other writers placing them as he thought good.
Eusebius confesses that in Caesarea he made indexes unto the before saydw^^ters
altering the titles, chau^ging the inscriptio^s, correcting their order, and
fitting their place: sso it may be that the gatherer of Eusebius works dealt
with his histories not placinge this fragment where Eusebius left it. But of
mine own part (not^inding to conceal any thing from the reader here I found
it in greek and hear I leave it in English. The reasons which move me that it
is Eusebius, doings are these. first in this fragment he numbreth the months
after the Gre^^ans as cap. ^^^. 21. 26. 1.
28. Za^thicus, Desius, Dius, Dystros, Panemus, Apellaeus, Audinaeus, Peritius,
etc* so has he done in sundry other places of his works and namly ca. 3. of
this. 8. book^ Secondly the author of this fragme^t was 2.
in Palaestina and saw with hic eyes the martyr do^es suffered at Caesarea, and
other places he was (cap. 22.) in the company of Apphianus, in one house with
him at Palaestina a little before he suffered. He saw (cap. 27.) the miracle at
Caesarea when the posts, and stones in the street, sw^t^ drops of water. He
saw and heard cap. 30. John the martyr, who was a blind man, preach and
expound the Scripturs with great commendation. This reason is confirmed by that
which Eusebius wrote in the 3. cap. of this 8. book, where he says. It is
not our drift to describe the co^flicts of such as striued throughout the world
(we leave that for others) neither exactly to paint forth unto the posteritye
all that happened: but only the things we saw with our eyes and were done in
our presence. Thirdly the author of 3.
this fragment was a familiar friend of Pamphilus the martyr, he writes of
him cap. 25. thus: Of which number was Pamphilus, of all my famillars, my
derest friend. And cap. 29. be extolleth him unto the skies. Saint Ierom
writes, that because of his familiarity with Pamphilus he was called Eusebius
Pamphilus. Fourthly the author of this fragment, as it is cap. 29. wrote the
life of Pamphilus 4.
in. 3. books, so has Eusebius confessed of him self in sundry places, and
Saint Ierom, in his life writes the same of him, wherefore Eusebius was the
author of this fragment. Fifthly the said author 5.
cap. 19. makes mention of that, which Eusebius wrote cap. 14: and cap. 30. he
makes mention of that which Eusebius wrote cap. 2. as written by himself,
therefore it is like Eusebius wrote this fragmente. The sixth reason that moves
me to annexe this as part of the book, is the shortenes of the book, for 6.
if we end at the 18. chapter where the fragmente begins, the book may
seem to be no book but rather an entrance or beginning of a book. Eusebius
in the beginning of this. 8. book cap. 2. promised to write of martyrs,
think thou Gentle reader, that he would be so brief, and make so short a
treatise, where occasion was ministered to write not one book only but rather.
3. books, if he were disposed (omitting nothing as he promised li. 1. ca. 1.
touching the martyrs of his time) to write of all the martyr doms suffered under
Diocletian, Maximinian and Maximinus. Last of all this fragment ends in very
7.
good order. He promises to discourse of Maximinus the tyrants recantation,
the which Eusebius performs in the book followinge. For look how the. 8.
book ends, with the same the. 9. begins. Therefore Eusebius was the
author of this fragment.

CAP. XIX.
How the. 4. emperors Diocletian, Maximinian, Maximinus and Constantius ended
their lives.

THe author of this former edict not long after his foresaid confession being
rid of that his lamentable Maximinus his practices
plight, departed this life. He is reported to have been the chief author of
the cala mity which befell unto the christians during the time of persecution:
and a good while ago, before y^ whurly burly raised by the rest of the
emperors, to have gone about to pervert the christians which lived in
warefare, but above all, such as were of his own familye: to have deprived
some of their martial dignity and renown: to have encreated some others
reprochefully without al shame. Moreover to have persecuted some of them to the
death, and last of all to have provoked y^ other his fellow emperors to
persecute all christendom, the ends of which emperors, if that I passed over
with silence, I should greatly offend. The empire being divided into four
parts, four several princes bearing rule: they two which were first
proclaimed emperors, and prefer red in honor before the rest, having not
reigned fully two years after the persecution, deposed the^ selves ( Cap. 14.
Diocletian the Emperor pined and wasted away with diseases unto his end.
Maximinian ^he emperor hanged himself. Maximinus ^ormented ^o death. read
^ap. 17. Constantius ^yed godly.
as we have said before) and led thence forth the rest of their lives, privately
after y^ vulgar sort of men, having such an end as follows: the first
having gotten y^ chief honor due to y^ imperial scepter and primate by
creation, after long, great and grievous disseases consumed and wasted away by a
little and a little and so died. The second, secondarily ruling the empire,
being priuey in consci^ce to many his lewd and mischiuous practices committed
in his life time, hanged himself by the procureme^t of a wicked spirit which
ledd him thereunto. The later of them two which immediately succeeded these,
whom we have termed y^ author and ringleader of y^ whole persecution, suffered
such torments as we have mentioned before. Co^stantius who went before him by
virtue of his prerogative in y^ imperial dignity, being a most mild and
courteous emperor (as I said before) led a worthy life, during his whole
reign, not only because yt in other things he behaved himself most courteously
and most liberally toward al me^: but also in y^ be was no partener with y^
enemy in the persecution raised against us, nay rather he maintained and
preserved such as were of y^ godly under his dominion. he neither rifled
neither destroyed the holy churches, neither practiced any other mischief
prejudicial to the christian affairs, he obtained an end both blessed and
thrice happy, he alone in his kingdom to y^ comfort of his natural son and
successor in the empire, a prince in all things both most sage and religious,
enjoyed a noble and a glorious death. His son forthwith entering into
Consta^tinus.
his raygne, was by the soldiers proclaimed chief emperor and Augustus, who
imitated and that diligently his fathers stepps as a pattern of piety to the
embracing of christian religion. such an end at several times had the
aforesaid four emperors. of y^ which, he alone mentioned a little before
together with others his imperial associats published unto the whole world by
his written edict. the aforesaid confession.

CAP. XX.
Of the martyrs in Palastina.

IT was the ninetenth year of Diocletians reign and the month Zanthicus, the
which the Romans Anno Domini. 306.
call April, the feast of Easter the^ drawing nigh, Flauianus being gouerner
of Palaestina, when the emperors edicts were every where proclaimed, in yt
which it was commanded yt the churches should be destroyed, that the holy
scriptures should be burned, yt such as were of creditt should be contemned, yt
such as led a private life if they retained the christian profession should be
deprived of their freedom. and such were the contents of the first Edict. but
in the proclamation which immediately followed after it was added yt the pastors
throughout all congregations should first be imprisoned, next withal means
possible constrained to sacrifice. to be short the first of the martyrs in
Palaestina was Procopius who before he had been any while imprisoned, stepping
forth Procopius beheaded.
at the first iumpe before the tribunal seat of the presidents, and being
commanded to do sacrifice unto their gods, made answer: that to his
knowledge there was but one only God, to whom, (as y^ self same God had
commanded) he was bound of duly to sacrifice. And when as they commanded him
to offer sacrifice for y^ prosperous state of the four emperors, he recited a
certain verse out of a poet which pleased the^ not, for the which immediately
he was beheaded the verse was this:

Not many Lords avail us here, let one bear rule and raygne. This was ye
first spectacle exhibited at Caesarea in Palaestina the eight day of the month
Desius before the seventh of the Ides of June called of the Romans the. 4.
day of the sabbath. After him there suffered many of the inhabiters of the same
city, and of the chief governors of y^ ecclesiastical affayrs, who endured
and that cherefully most vitter torments, and gave the adventure of most
valiant enterprises. other some fainting for fear were quite discouraged at
the first. all the rest tried the experience of sundry torments. one scurged
from top toe, an other wrested until y^ his ribbs brake a sunder in the
squising bonds, by reason whereof it fell out that some had their hands struck
of, and thus together they enjoyed such an end as befell unto them according
unto the secret wisdom and judgment of God. one was led by the hand and
lugged to the altar, and his hands violent stretched to toutch their detestable
sacrifices, and in the end let go for a sacrificer. an other when y^ he had
neither approached neither toutched, and such as were present affirmed that he
had sacrificed, departed with silence. one being half dead was borne away
being thrown of them for dead, the same was tormented with bonds and reckned
among the sacrificers. an other lifted his voice and protested that he had not
yielded at all, the same was beaten on the mouth and constrained to keep
silence, by the force of many hands which stopped his breath and violently
excluded him when he had not sacrificed at al. and so it pleased them well, if
at least wise they might seem to bring their purpose to effect, but for all
their mischievous devises the blessed martyrs of God only bare away y^ victory.
again y^ seue^teenth day of y^ month Dius, after the Romans the fifteenth
of the Calendes of December, Alphaeus Alphaeus beheaded. Zachaeus beheaded.
Romanus first had his tongue pulled out, next tormented and clapped* in prison,
last of all in prison stifled to death
and Zachaeus, after they had been lashed with whipps and mangled with rasors,
after racking and grievous torments therein, after sundry questions demanded
of them, after they had layen in y^ stocks many days and many nights, their
feet stretched four spaces asunder, last of all when they had freely confessed
and boldly pronounced that there was but one only God, and one king and
captain over all Jesus Christ (as if herein they had uttered blasphemy or
treason) they were in like manner beheaded even as the martyr mentioned a little
before. Moreover the history toutching Romanus y^ martyr, who suffered the same
day at Antioch is worthy of memory. He was borne in Palaestina, he was deacon
and exorcist of the church of Caesarea, and as it fell out being in Antioch at
the ruin and desolation of y^ churches, and beholding with his eyes great
multituds both of men women and children flocking unto the altars and offering
sacrifices to the Idols, supposed it was his duty in no wise to winck thereat:
wherefore he being moved with singular zeal of the spirit of God, drew nigh
unto them, exclaimed against them, and sharply rebuked them. Who, for so bold
an enterprise was apprehended, and showed him self a valiant witness or
testifier (if then there was any such in the world) of the truth in Christ.
For when the judge threatened him death with flashing fire that consumes to
ashes, he of the contrary embraced his offer most willingly, with cherefull
countenance and gladsome courage, and with all, is brought unto the place of
execution. Being bound to the stake while the officers threw fagotts about
him, and such as were appointed to kindle the fire, waited for the emperors
watch word and pleasure (who then was present) he shouted unto them from the
stake: where I pray you is the fire? The which he had no sooner spoken, but
the Emperor called him unto him, to the end he should suffer a new and
strange kind of torment, to wete: that his tongue might be plucked out of his
mouth, the which he constantly endured, and thereby declared at large, how
that the divine power, and grace of God, never fails them, which suffer for
godliness sake, but always either eases their labors, and slaketh their
griefs, or else grants courage, and might to endure patiently unto the end.
This blessed saint as soon as he had understood of their new devised
torment, being valiantly disposed, never staggered thereat, but voluntarily
put out his tongue, and yielded the same, which was fully instructed in the word
of God, unto the tormentors hands. After which torment he was clapped in prison,
and there plagued alonge time, at length, when the twentieth year of the
Emperors raygne was now expired, at what time a general pardon was
proclaimed yt all prisoners should be set at liberty, he alone lying in the
stocks and his feet stretched five spaces asunder, had his neck compassed
with a haulter and thus in prison stifled to death, so that hereby according
unto his desire, he was crowned with martyrdom. This man although he suffered
out of the bounds of his native soil, yet being a Palaestinian by birth, is
worthy to be canonized among the martyrs of Palaestina. Such were the tragical
affayrs of the church in Palaestina the first year of the persecution, which
was chiefly bent against y^ presidents of our doctrine and bishops of y^ church
of God.

CAP. XXI.
Of the martyrs which suffered in Caesarea the second year of the persecution
under Diocletian, and of the alteration of the Empire.

THe second year now being come, when the persecution raised against us waxed
hott and the proclamations of the Emperors, (where it was generally commanded
that both me^ women and children, throughout every city and village should be
constrained to sacrifice and offer incense to Idols) were newly come to the
hands of Vrbanus, then lyuetenant of y^ province: Timotheus Timotheus burned.
of Gaza in Palaestina after infinite torments the which he endured, and last
of all being bound to the stake and environed with slack and slow fire, gave
forth a worthy trial of his zeal godwards through pacient sufferance in all
the bitter punishments laid upon him, and in the end bare away the garlande of
victory usually granted to all y^ valiant champions which wrestle for piety
and the service of God. At y^ same time Agapius and Thecla also (which lived in
this our age) she wed y^ worthy Agapius and Thecla, through wen to wild beasts
but not dispatched.
constancy of their noble minds, when as at y^ commandment of the judge they
were thrown at the feet of wild beasts, to be either devoured or torn in
pieces. What man is he that either beholdinge with his eyes the things which
ensued, will not fall into admiration, or lendinge only the bare ear unto the
recital of them, will not be astonished thereat? For when as the Ethniks
solemnized their public feasts, and celebrated their wonted spectacles
amongst other their merry Six young me^ first imprisoned then beheaded. Timolaus
beheaded. Dionysius beheaded. Romulus beheaded. Pausis beheaded. 2. Alexa^ders
both beheaded.
news and gladsome wishes, it was commonly noyced abroad that the christians
lately condemned to wild beasts, made all the sport and finished the solemnity.
This report being far and nigh and every where bruted abroad, young
striplings to the number of six, whereof one was of Pontus by name Timolaus:
the second of Tripolis a city in Phaenicia called Dionysius: the third by name
Romulus, subdeacon of the church of Diospolis: the fourth Pausis the fifth
Alexander both Egyptians: the sixth Alexander (of the same name with him that
went before) of the city of Gaza joining hands and hearts together
(signifiyng thereby the fervent love they owed to martyrdom) went with speed
unto Vrbanus who a little before had let loose the raueninge beasts to rent the
christians in pieces, and freely protested the christian faith, declaring by
this their promptnes and willing minds, as it were absolutely furnished to give
the onsett of what adventure soever: that such as glory in the title, worshipp
and service of the great God, creator of the whole world, have not to tremble
at y^ fierce rage of furious and sauadge beasts. Whereupon both the president
and the people, fell into great admiration, and the confessors were forth with
clapped in prison. Not long Agapius beheaded. Dionysius beheaded.
after there were other two committed to take their lots among them, whereof,
one, by name Agapius, had before that time yielded an account of his faith by
suffering of many bitter and grievous torments: the other by name Dionysius who
carefully provided for the corporal relief of the Martyrs. All these in
number eight, were in one day beheaded in the city of Caesarea, the four and
twentieth day of the month Dystros, that is: the ninth of the Calendes of
April. About that time two of the Emperors, whereof the first enjoyed the
prerogative of honor, the second was next which governed the Empire, embraced
a private trade of lyuinge after the vulgar sort of men, and the state of the
public weal immediately began to decay. In a while after the Roman
Empire was divided, the Emperors among them selves one against an other
fought great and grievous battles, neither was that tumult and sedition
ceased, before that first of all peace was restored and established
throughout all the parts of the world which were subject to the Roman
Empire. for when as peace once appeared again, much like son beams shining
after a mistie and dark night, the public state of the Roman empire was a
gain established, the bond of amity linked again, mutual amity and
concord retained of old, was again recovered. But of these things we will
entreat hereafter more at large, when more fit opportunity shall serve, now
let us proceed unto that which follows.

CAP. XXII.
Of Apphianus the Martyr.

MAximinus Caesar who by maine force intruded him self into the Empire, laynge
wide open unto the whole world manifest proofs of his deadly hatred and
impiety toward God, as it were naturally growing in his flesh and graffed in
his bones: persecuted us more vehemently and more generally then the other his
superior emperors. wherefore when as trouble and tumult and no small confusion
hanged over our heads, and some were here and there scattered, endeavoring by
all means possible to avoid yt peril ensuing, and that a grievous co^motion
had now ouerrunne the contrie: no tongue can worthily declare, no speech
sufficiently express, the divine Apphianus.
love and liberty of faith wherewith Apphianus y^ blessed martyr of God yielded
an account of his profession. Who showed unto y^ citizens of Caesarea,
assembled at their spectacle or sacrifice in y^ porche of the temple, a lively
sign or toke^ of the singular zeal he bare godwards, when he was not at that
time, no not xx. year old. he co^tinewed a long time at Berytos in Phaenicia,
applying his mind to the study of profane literature, for he came of such
parents as flowed in worldly wealth. It is in manner incredible how he overcame
all youthly affections and drowned all his wild otes in so vicious and so
corrupt a city: and how yt neither by reason of his youthly flower, lately
flourishing in his green body: neither by reason of his company and
acquaintance with youthly mates: he sucked the juice neither swallowed the
sopps of lewd and wanton conversation: but embracing temperancie, led a
reverent life, peculier to christian religion in modesty, sobriety and
godliness. If in case we be constrained to mention his country, and to honor the
same for bringing forth so valiant a champio^ to wrestle in the ca^pe of this
world under the ba^ner of Christ, truly we will perform the same, neither
without good consideration. for who so ever knows Pagas, no obscure city of
Lycia, it was Pagas of Lycia.
there, that this young man was borne. he after his return from school, and
the study of profane literature applied at Berytos, not pleased with the
conversation of his father (who then governed that whole country) neither with
the conversation of his kinsfolks with whom he lived, because they framed not
their lives after the rule of piety: being pricked with the instinct and motion
of the spirit of God, and inflamed with a certain natural, nay rather
celestial and true love of sincere wisdom, cast in his mind to consider of
weyghtyer matters, then this feigned and counterfeite glory of the world bears
us in hand. laying aside therefore all the sweet baits of fleshly pleasure,
he forsook and fled away privily from his friends and families, not weying at
all the want of necessary provision, but casting his whole care and confidence
vp^^ God, was ledd no doubt by the divine spirit as it were by a stryng into
the city of Caesarea, where the crown of martyrdom, being the reward of
godliness, was prepared for him. for whilst that he lived among us, he profited
in holy scripture, during that short term of his life, more then any man
could think, and practiced such discipline as tended to godly life, preparing
a perfect way to dye well. But toutching the end he made, who is it that
beholdinge the same with single eye will not be astonyed? and how so ever
again he be disposed which only with fame and hearesay attaineth unto the
knowledge, of his settled mind, his noble courage, his immouable constancy, and
above all his faithful trust and endeavor whereby the tokens of unfeigned
godliness, and fervent spirit appeared which passed all the reach of man's
reasons, how can he choose but wonder thereat? for when as in y^ third year of
our persecution, under the reign of Maximinus, the second whurlyburlie was
raised against us, and the tyrants letters then first of all were brought to
Vrbanus, charging all the people of what degree or calling The cruel edict of
Maximinus.
so ever that they should sacrifice unto their gods (the magistrates also
throughout every city busily applying them selves to the same) and that the
beadells throughout all the city of Caesarea, should by virtue of the
Presidents edict, summone, the fathers, the mothers, and their children to
appear at the Idols temple, and that the Tribunes should likewise out of a
scroule call every one by his name: (by reason whereof there was no where but
heaviness, sobbinge and sighinge): The godly and bold enterprise of Apphianus.
the aforesaid Apphianus (letting not one to understand of his purpose,)
vnknowinge unto us which accompanied with him in one house, vnknowinge unto the
whole band of the captain, came cherefully unto Vrbanus the President as he
was a sacrificinge, and boldly without any fear at all, took hold in his
right hand and stayed him forthwith from doing sacrifice, exhortinge him also
both wisely and gravely with a certain godly protestation and cheerfulness
of mind, thenceforth to cease and be no more seduced: saying moreover there
was no reason that he should despise the one and the only true God, and offer
sacrifice to idols and to deuells. Such an enterprise the young man took in
hand, being provoked thereunto (as it seems unto us) by the divine power of
God, sounding in the ears of all mortal men by this his fact: that the
Christians which ryghtly do challenge that name, are far from falling away
from the service due unto God the author of all goodness, so that they not
only suffer and variantly endure threats, and plagues, and punishments, which
commonly chance unto them but thenceforth also plead more boldly and yield
an account of their faith more freely, their tongue neither stuttinge neither
stammeringe for fear, yea and if it may any kind of way come to pass, they
dare revoke the persecutors and tormentors them selves from their blind
ignorance, and constrayne them to acknowledge and embrace the one only God.
Immediately after, Apphianus after often imprisoning, after sundry horrible
torments was thrown into the sea whose carcass the water threw up and laid
at the gates of Caesarea.
he, of whom I speak (as it was most like to happen unto so bold an
enterprise) was haled of the Presidents train, as of sauadge beasts furiously
raging against him, and tormented over all his body with infinite stripes the
which he patiently suffered, and for a while was clapped in prison. Where for one
whole day and night he was piteously tormented with both his feet in the
stocks streatched far a sunder, the third day he was brought forth before
the Judge. And as soon as they enjoined him to sacrifice, he resisted, and
showed forth the great patience ingraffed in his mind, for the suffringe of
all terrors and horrible punishments: so that the executioners rent his sides
with the lashe of the whippe, not once and twice, but often even unto the bone
and inward bowels, lashinge him also on the face and the neck, until that
his face was swollen with the print of the stripes, so that they which before
time knew him well and discerned him by his countenance, thenceforth missed of
their mark, and knew him not at all. When they saw he would not yield for
all these manifold and sundry torments, the executioners at the
commandment of the president, wrapped his feet in slaxe oyled all over and
set the same a fire, whereof how great, and what grievous pain be suffered, I
am not able to express. It run over his flesh, it consumed the same, and
pierced unto the marowe bredd within A cruel torment.
the bones, so that his whole body larded and distilled much like unto
droppinge and meltinge wax. Yet there was breath left, and life remaininge for
all these torments, the adversaries and executioners them selves were weryed at
his intolerable patience, which far exceeded the common nature of man, after
all this the second time he is cast into prison. Three days after he is
brought again before the Judge, and being found freely to confess the same
faith as aforetime, although by reason of his wounds, he was ready to yield
up the ghost, yet was he thrown into the surginge waves of the seas. If we
should make relation of the miracle which immediately followed, peradventure
such as saw it not with their eyes, will give no creditt at all thereunto, and
though we persuade our selves, that men will hardly believe it: yet there is no
reason to the contrary but that we commit to memory, and deliver in
writing the history as it was indeed, insomuch as in manner all which
inhabit Caesarea are witnesses to the same. There was no, not a child in
Caesarea, but was present at this strange spectacle. As soon as they had
plunged (as it pleased them best) that holy and blessed martyr of Christ in
the deep goulphes of the main sea: there rose upon a sudden such a storm
(not after the wonted manner of weather) and such a noise in the air, (not
only over the sea but over the whole land) which An Earthquake.
shook both the earth, and the whole city, with the violence and force
thereof: and together with this wonderful and sudden earthquake the sea cast
up before the gates of the city, the martyrs carcass, as if it had been of
strength not big enough to bear so holy a burden. Such were the
circumstances toutching blessed Apphianus, who suffered martyrdom, on good
friday, that is: the second day of the month Zanthicus, the 4. of the Nones of
April.

CAP. XXIII.
The Martyrdom of Vlpianus and Aedesius.

THe same time of the year, and in manner on the self same days, in the city
of Tyrus, there Vlpianus wrapped in an ox hyde together with a dog and a
snake is drowned in the sea.
was a young man by name Vlpianus, who after most bitter stripes and grievous
lashes, was wrapped together with a dog and a serpent in a green ox hyde,
and cast into the deapth of the sea. And therefore I thought good to place him
the next martyr in order of history unto Apphianus. Not long after, Aedesius,
not only brother in God, but also by birth and blood, natural brother by the
fathers side unto Apphianus, suffered like brotherly, and in manner the self
same torments with him: after infinite confessions of his faith: after long
fettering and stocking: after sentence pronounced of the president, co^demning
him to the mine pitts and quarries in Palaestina: after his holy trade of life,
led under the philosophical habit, being far more profounde in profane
literature, and better skilled in philosophy then his brother: at length
hearing the Judge, give sentence upon the Christians in the city of
Alexandria and raging against them beyond all reason, shamefully entreating,
some times grave and sage, and sober men, some other times deliueringe chaste
matrons, and consecrated virgins, to brothell houses, to the end they should
be beastly abused: he enterprised the self same thing which his brother had
done before. Aedesius the brother of Apphianus the martyr is drowned in the sea.
And because he could in no wise away with those horrible offenses, he went
boldly and courageously unto the Judge, and told him to his face of the filthy
and shameful acts he had done both by word and deed. for which bold
reprehension he suffered sundry bitter torments, with great constancy and
patience. and last of all he was thrown into the sea, enjoying the like end
with his brother. so far of Aedesius. And these things as I said before
ensued not long after.

CAP. XXIIII.
Of Agapius the Martyr

IN the fourth year of the persecution which plagued us sore, and the twelft
Calendes of December, the twentieth day of the month Dius being the fridaie,
and in the same city of Caesarea, such an act was committed in the presence of
Maximinus the tyrant (who then celebrated his birth day, with royal spectacles
and sumptuous maskes together with the people) as may be thought worthy of
memory, and the printing in marble. And because the custom then prevailed,
that sundry shows (how so ever it fell out at other times) in presence of the
emperors should be exhibited with princely port and majesty to their great
delight and pleasure: and that variety full of new and strange devises
besides the common and usual manner, should then be ministered, so that some
times beasts which were fett out of India, Aethiopia, and other places were let
loose in compass of the theater: some other times men with lewd and wanton
gestures, delited the beholders wonderfully, and the emperor also him self
made sport and pastime: it behooved that a notable spectacle full of admiration
should shine in that gorgeous and princely show. And what think you was
that? A martyr and a witness of our christian religion, brought to the ringe,
and ready to wrestle for the sole and sincere service of God, by name Agapius,
whom (a little before) we have reported to have been thrown together with
Thecla, at the feet of wild beasts. he being brought out of prison and linked
with malefactors to pastime and sport the people, when that he had openly run
the race, and played the man, and that thrice, yea and oftenner to, because the
Judge after sundry threats, and sundry torments, (either pitying his case or
hoping he would recant) reserved him to other new combatts: at length he is
again brought forth in presence of the Emperor, no doubt being appointed for
that fit time, that the saying of our savior, foreshewed unto his disciples
(to wete: They should be brought before kings and princes Mat. 10.
to witness of him) might truly be fulfilled in him. first of all he is
brought forth together with a malefactor and a wicked varlet, of whom the
report went, that he murdered his master. Afterward Mat. 27. In the 21. cap
of this book Agapius is said to have been beheaded at Caesarea, and here he is
said to have been drowned, so it might be, first beheded the^ drowned but
there he says it was the 2. year of the persecution, and here the 4. which can
not be. wherefore he must either be an other Agapius, or ^lie the story lies.
this varlet who of right should have been devoured of wild beasts, was
pardoned by the bountifulnes and clemency of the Emperor, even in manner after
the example of Barrabas the murderer, whom the jews begged of Pilate,
condemning Christ, whereat the whole theater rejoiced and shouted: because that
he was not only graciously pardoned by the Emperor, but also restored to honor
and fredome. But this faithful and godly champion, first of all is called upon
of the tyrant, next entreated to revoke his opinion, he is promised to be set
at liberty: of the contrary he plainly pronounces and that with a loud
voice, that he was disposed, and would willingly suffer, and that with all his
heart, all the torments and plagues that should be laid upon him, not for any
horrible or heinous crime committed by him, but for Gods cause and in his
quarrel, who was the creator of all things. The which he had no sooner spoken
but it came to pa^^e, for there was a Bear let loose at him, the which he
met face to face and yielded him self willingly to be devoured. Last of all
while as yet he drew breath he was cast into prison, where he continewed one
whole day, the third day he had stones tied to his feet and him self thrown
in the deapth of the sea. such was the martyrdom of Agapius.

CAP. XXV.
The martyrdom of Theodosia a virgin, of Domninus and Auxentius, the death of
Vrbanus the president.

THe persecution being now continewed unto the fifth year, the second day of
the month Zanthicus, to wete the 4. of the Nonnes of April, the self same
sunday being the resurrection of our savior, and called the feast of Easter,
again Theodosia a virgin, a modest and christian maid of Tyrus, who had never
yet seen the full compass of eightene years, came to certain prisoners in
Caesarea standing at y^ bar which with co^stancy protested y^ kingdom of
Christ, both lovingly to salute them, and also (as it is very like) to entreat
the^ to remember her after their departure unto the Lord. the which when she
had done (as if hereby she had committed some heinous and horrible offense) y^
catchpoles hale her and present her before the president. he forth with like a
mad man, bereued of his wits scourges her bare sides with bitter and grievous
lashes, renteth with the Theodosia drowned.
whip her white breasts, and tender duggs, unto the bare bones. In the end this
holy virgin hardly drawing breath yet pacient, and cherefull enough, for all
these punishments, was thrown at the co^ma^deme^t of y^ president into y^
swift waves of y^ surging seas. Afterward having ended with her, he takes the
other co^fessors in hand, and condemns the^ to the digging of metalls in
Phaenos of Palaestina. After these things the fifth day of the month Dius,
after the Romans in the nonnes of November, the same president in the self
same city condemned Siluanus (who as then was minister and Siluanus condemned
to the mine pitts with others 39. cap. 13. Domninus burned.
had freely protested his faith, who also in a while after was chosen bishop
and dyed a martyr) together with other confessors, after their great constancy
in defense of christian religion, to the same druggery and digging of metalls.
first he commanded their knees should be unjointed and sawed of, afterward
seared with hott iron, and then sent to the quarries. The sentence was no
sooner pronounced upon these, but he charge that Domninus (a man very famous
among the inhabitants of Palaestina, for his infinite protestations of the
Christian faith, and his liberty of speech in the behalf of our religion)
should be bound to the stake and burned to ashes. after whose comdemnation,
the same judge, a subtle inuentor of michiefe, and deviser of crafty sleyghts
contrary to the doctrine of Christ, found out such punishments as never were
heard of before to vex the godly withal. he 3. Martyrs enjoined to kill one
an other. Auxentius ^orne of wild beasts. The gelding of christians.
gave sentence that three of the^ should buckle, iuyst, and buffet one an
other. he delivered Auxentius a grave, a godly, and a good old man, to be torn
in pieces of wild beasts. other some, of men's estate, and of great strength, he
gelded and condemned to y^ quarries. again others he tormented grievously and
chasticed with imprisonment and fetters. of which number was Pamphilus, of all
my familiars, my dearest friend, a man who among all the Martyrs of our time,
excelled for every kind of virtue. First Vrbanus made a trial of his gift of
utterance and skill in philosophical discipline, next he enjoined him to
sacrifice, whom, when he perceived to be altogether unwilling, and not at all
to weye of his thunderinge speeches, being thoroughly moved with boiling choler,
and Pa^philus had his sides ma^^led with ^^arpe rasors
burning heat of furious rage, co^maundes that forth with he should be
grievously and bitterly tormented. wherefore the merciless and most cruel
president, mangled the tender sides of the blessed martyr with the long
incision of sharp rasors, at length having his fill, and as it were ashamed
of his fact, commands he should be kept in the noisome stinch of the close
prison, where the rest of the confessors remained. but what manner of reward
Vrbanus was like to enjoy after this life, by the just judgment of God and
vengeance like to light upon him (...) for so great cruelty and tyranny
practiced upon the saints of God and blessed Martyrs of Jesus Christ, we may
easily gather by the plagues which happened unto him in this life, which were
(...) or preambles* unto eternal punishments in the life to come* for not long
after this villainy exercised upon Pamphilus, vengeance from above began on a
sudden to take hold upon him (while as yet he governed) in this sort. He who
lately being placed in an high and lofty throne pronounced sentence and gave
judgment: he who a little before was guarded with a troop of soldiers: he who
governed* all the country of Palaestina: he who was hayle mate, and lived
cheek by ^ole with the Emperor* even he who was of his secretie and companion
at meat: the same, by the just judgment of God* in one Vrbanus for his
cruelty fell into great shame and misery, in the end he was put to death.
night, was not only deprived of all so great a port and dignity.
shamefully and ^e^r^^^fully handled in the presence of all them which before
time had reverenced him with princely honor* proved a timorous and a cowardly*
^aytif, so that he whyned like a child and cried help, of the whole nation
which he had ruled: but also found Maximinus an heavy friend, a sore: and
cruel judge (on whom heretofore he boldened him self, he bragged and
boasted, upon whom he builded, who also was in great creditt with him. because
of the cruelty he showed unto the Christians*) so that after great shame and
ignominy (being convinced of heinous crimes and horrible treachery) he was of
him condemned to dye. but this by the way* opportunity hereafter will serve,
with more leisure, largely to entreat of the ends of the other wicked,
specially of such as striued against us, and also of Maximinus together with
his adherents.

CAP. XXVI.
Of diverse confessors that were tormented. The martyrdom of a women that were
virgins, and of Paulus.

IN the sixth year of the persecution when the stir was great, and the smoke
thereof (...) hott in a certain village of Thebais called Porphyris (so named
by reason of the vein of redd marble which there did grow) there was a great
number of confessors, of the which a hundredth (three only excepted) men women
and children together with tender sucklings, were sent to Pirmilianus President
of Palestina who lately succeeded in the rowme of Vrbanus. The which
confessors, when they had protested their faith in Christ, and trust in God,
the creator, and author of all goodness, he so handled, that he commanded (and
that through the advice of the Emperor) not only their left A hundredth
Martyrs tormented and sent to digging of mettalls.
legs should be sawed asunder in the knee; sinews, and all, with a hott
glowing saw: but also their right eyes to be stickt on the point of a bodkine,
the apple, eye lidd and all, to be quite dug out and seared to the inner
beynes, with an hott scalding iron: last of all they should be condemned to
the mine pitts and quarryes within the same province, for further misery and
greater affliction. Neither was it enough for him to behold with his eyes,
these which endured such torments, but he would also se before his face, such
as out of Palaestina (mentioned a little before) he had enjoined to Just one
with an other, being neither relieved at the Emperors cost and charges,
neither trained in any such tryumphant exercise, or brought up, in any such
championlike combat. They signified this not only to the Emperors officers,
but also to the face of the Emperor Maximinus him self, yelding forth signs
of their most valiant constancye in Christ Jesus, both by suffering of hunger
and bitter corments, all which they sustained together with the aforesaid, and
other confessors allotted unto their number out of the said Caesarea.
Immediately after these, there were others apprehended which assembled them
selves together in the city of Gaza to hear a Sermon, of which number some
were alike tormented in the eye and the leg, some others had both their sides
rent in pieces with greater pain. Among the which there was one, by sex a
woman, but in might, and valiantnes of mind, no less then man, when as in no
wise she could away with the threats of abusing her body, (such an inkling
had the tyrant given and committed the government of the common wealth to
cruel Magistrates) first she was scurged, then tied to an high tree, yelding
forth a pitiful show of the sore stripes printed in her sides. When the
executioners at the commandment of the judge had grievously aflicted her, an
other woman deserving far greater commendation then such as the Grecians call
Champions, (who for valiantnes and noble prowess are highly praised of all
men) laying before her the self same mark of virginity to shoot at with the
former maiden, though in beauty she excelled not, though in countenance she
seemed abject, yet in mind was she valiant, showing greater courage within,
then bewty without* misliking therefore with this cruel dealing, out of the
nuddest of the throng, she cried out unto the indg* how long do thou, thus
cruelly torment my sister? he boiling for anger, bid^s them forthwith lay hold
o^ her, then was she brought to plead for her self, who in plain words, and
freely professing the reverent name of our Savior Jesus, is first with fair
speeches allured to sacrifice, the which when she refused, with force they ^rue
her to the altar. Then she behauing her self after her valiant courage,
falling not a jot from her former mind, stood bolt upright, shouldred the
altar, kicked and stamped it with her feet, turned it vpside down and
ouerthrewe the altar, the fire, the fagott, the sacrifice and all down to the
ground. Whereupon the judge much like a furious beast, boiling with collar
and fiery heat of foming wrath, gave out charge, that she should have more
stripes laid on her sides, then any other before time, and could have found in
his heart for very madness, to tear her flesh in pieces with his teeth. Before
this raging tyrant could have his fill, he commanded that this woman together
with the other (the which she called her sister) should be throwe^ 2. women
burned. Valentina.
into the flashing fire, so that their flesh might broyle and their bones
burn to ashes. of the which we have to understand that the first was of Gaza,
the second of Caesarca, by name Valentina, and well known of many. The
martyrdom which immediately after the holy and thrice happy Paulus suffered, I
am not able for the worthiness thereof sufficiently to declare. At the self
same moment, together with the women, and with the one and the same sentence,
he being condemned to dye, requested of the hangeman (when his head was now
going to the block and ready to be chopped of) that he would grant him a little
space to remember him self, the which being obtained, first of all with a
clear and audible voice he prays unto God that his fellow Gentiles the The
prayer of Paulus be fore his mar tyrdome.
Christians might be reconciled unto his favor: he humbly requested that peace
and liberty might be restored unto them: then for the Jews he prays, that
they might have grace to turn wholly unto God by the means of Christ:
afterward going on still in his prayer, he required the same for the
Samaritans: to be short, he craved that all nations wallowing in error and
ignorance so blinded that they could not see the glorious Gospel of the son
of God, might at length he gathered together into one fold and embrace the
true religion and godliness. neither did he forgett (by contemning or depriving
them of his prayer) the seely multitude which was round about him. last of
all (o the wonderful and unspeakable mildnes and patience of the Martyr) he
prayed Paulus prayed for his persecutors.
unto almighty God, for the judge which condemned him to death, for the
Emperors also, and for the hangman which was ready to strike of his head, (in
the hearing of him, and all such as were present) that this their heinous
offense might not be laid to their charge. With these and the like petitions,
being innocent, not deserving death at all, he moved all that were about him to
sobb^ and sighe and to shede bitter and salt tears: he for all that, preparing
him self to dye, laying most willingly his head on the block, and his bare
neck to the sharp edge of the glistering Paulus beheaded.
sword, was martyred the 25. day of the month Panemus, to wete the eight of
the Calends of August. And such were the happy ends of these blessed Martyrs.

CAP. XXVII.
The punishments of a hundredth and 30. confessors. The martyrdom of Antonius,
Zebinas, Germanus, and Ennathas a woman. The straung miracle reproving the
hardness of man's heart.

NOt long after there were a hundredth and thirty valiant champions out of the
country of 130. Confessors.
Egypt, protesting their faith in Christ and religion Godwards, which at the
commandment of Maximinus, suffered in Egypt it self, the like torments of
eyes and legs, with the other mentioned a little before, of the which number
some were condemned to the mine pitts and quarries within Palaestina, the rest
to the mettalls in Cilicia. Wherefore together with these heinous and horrible
treacheries, practiced against the noble, and renowned Martyrs of Christ, the
great heat of persecution was assuaged, and the flame thereof (as it seemed
unto us) by reason of their holy and sacred blood, was quenched, and now
pardon, and freedom, and liberty was granted unto the confessors of Thebais,
who were oppressed with druggery in the digging of the mettalls growing in that
region: and we poor seely Christians, went about to recreate our selves, in
this calm season of quiet peace: but he (as the devil would) in whose hand
it lay to persecute us, I wott not how, neither by what motion, was again
thoroughly and wonderfully incensed against the Christians. therefore upon a
sudden the letters of Maximinus were sent The edict of Maximinus against the
Christians.
to raise persecution against us into all and every of the provinces. Whereupon
the Presidents and the graunde captain of the Emperors whole host, gave out
commandment, by writts, by Epistles, and public decrees unto the wardens
throughout every city, unto the governors and rulers of garrisons, unto
auditors, and recorders, that the Emperors edict with all speed might take
effect: and charged moreover that with all celeritye they should repair, and
baylde again the Idol groves, and temples of devils, lately gone to ruin:
and also they should bring to pass that men, and women, their households and
families, their sons and their servants, together with the tender sucklinges,
hanging at their mothers breasts, should sacrifice, and in very deed taste
of the sacrifices them selves: that the vi^tuals bought, and sold in the
markett, the meat in the shambles, should be defiled and stained with these
impure oblations: and that there should be porters assigned for the bathes to
see that such as purged their filthe and bayned them selves within, should
afterward without, pollute them selves, with those detestable and cursed
sacrifices. These things being come to this pass, and the Christians being
(as it is most like) altogether dismayed at these sadd and sorrowful plunges
wherewith they were held: and the Gentiles and Ethnicks them selves complained
of the intolerable, absurd, and toe toe shameful a dealing (for they were
clo^ed with to much cruelty and tyranny) and this lamentable season hanging
every where over our heads: the divine power of our Lord and Savior again,
gave unto these his champions, such valiant courage of mind, and inspyred them
as it were from above, that (being neither compelled, neither forced to yield
an account of their faith) they should voluntarily offer them selves set at
naught, tread down, and stamp under foot, all the terrors and threats
which the enemy could devise. Three therefore of the faithful Christians
lincked together in one mind, leapt unto the President, as he sacrificed, and
with a loud voy^e, exhorted him, to reform him self, to revoke his error,
and to leave his folly, affirming there was none other God but he, who was the
author and finisher of all thing^^* And being demanded who and what they were?
boldly made answer that they were Christians. whereat Firmilianus being
vehemently moved, without any more ado or farther punishment commanded
forthwith they should be Antonius be headed. Zebinas beheaded. Germanus
beheaded.
beheaded. of the which the first was a minister by name Antonius, the second
Zebinas of Eleutheropolis, the third Germanus. These circumstances which
concerned them were done the 13. day of the month Dius, to wete in y^ Ides of
November. The self same day a certain woman called Ennathas of Scythopolis,
bedecked with the glistering flower of glorious virginity, came thither together
with these martyrs, she offered not her self voluntarily as they did, but was by
force drawn and brought before y^ judge. Whereupon after stripes, after grievous
and reprochful torments, which the judge enjoined her to endure, a certain
tribune by name Maxis, whose office and charg was at hand Maxis a wicked
tribune. Ennathas a virgin burned quick.
a man as in appellation, so in condition very wicked: and as otherwise he was
impiously and perniciously given, so was he in body big set and wonderful
strong, in behavior beastly and toe toe cruel, and among al such as knew him,
noted for an infamous person: this wicked tribune without y^ authority of y^
higher power, took in hand this blessed virgin, put of all her apparel, so
that her whole body (saving from girdle downwards) was seen all bare. this
maid he ledd throughout all the city of Caesarea, and with great pleasure
lashed her with whipps (he was delited with the sound of the lashe) throughout
all the market place and the open streets. The which standing at the bar,
(after all those infinite torments) where the President used to pronounce
sentence, showing forth y^ great constancy of her mind in the defense of her
faith, the judge commanded she should be burned quick. but he proceeding in
cruelty and daily increasing his sauadge woodnes against y^ Saints of God,
passed the bounds of nature, shamefully forbidding the senseless carcasses of
y^ holy saints to enjoy solempe barial, and therefore he commanded y^ the
dead coarses, should be kept day and night above ground, to the end wild
beasts might rent them in pieces. so y^ ye might see, for the space of many
days, no small number of men, obeying this cruel and unnatural
commandment. and moreover some watched diligently, kenning from ^owres,
casements, and high places (as if hereby they had done unto God good service)
lest the dead carcasses were privily conveyed and stolen away. Wherefore the
brutish beasts, the ravenous dogs and griping ^oule of the air, tore in
pieces man's flesh, lugging here and there, their quartered members, and the
whole city was every where strawed with the torn bowels and bruised bones of
the blessed Martyrs, so that they which before time were egerly bent against
us, now confessed plainly that they never saw a more cruel act, or a more
horrible sight then this was, and bewailed not only the misery and lamentable
state of such as were thus afflicted but also their own case, and the
ignominy redounding thereby unto nature, the common parent of all. This
spectacle of man's flesh, not in one place devoured, but piteously scattered
every where, was subject to every man's eye, round about the walls of the town
and exceeded all that thereof may be spoken, and every lamentable and tragical
show. Some reported they saw quarters, whole carcasses, and pieces of bowels
within the walls of the city. while this continewed the space of many days,
such a miracle was seen as follows. When A miracle.
the weather was calm, and the air clear, and the clouds under heaven
(which compasses all) banished away: the pillars of the city, (upon a
sudden,) which held up the great and common porches, swett or rather poured
out many drops of water much like unto tears, the markett place also, and
the streets (when as there fell not a drop of rain) I wot not how, neither
whence, soked with moisture and sprinkled dropps of water: so that immediately
the rumor was bruted abroad in every man's mouth: that the earth being not able
to away with the heinous and horrible offenses of those days, poured out
infinite tears after a wonderful sort: and that the stones and senseless
creatures bewailed those detestable mischieues, reproving man most justly, for
his sto^y heart, his cruel mind void of all pity and compassion. but
peradventure this story will seem fabulous and ridiculous unto the posterity,
yet not unto such as then were present, and were fully persuaded with the
truth thereof.

CAP. XXVIII.
The martyrdom of Ares, Promus, Elias, Petrus Apselamus, and Asclepius a
Bishop of the opinion of Marcion.

THe fourteneth day of the month Apellae^s which next ensued that is about
the nynetenth of the Calends of January, certain godly men, travelers out of
Egypt, (their journey was into Cilicia, minding to find some relief at
Caesarea for the confessors which there abode) were taken of the watch, which
sat at the gates of the city and searched incommers. Of which men, some
received the self same sentence as they had before, whom they went about to
relieve, to were, y^ pulling out of their eyes, the maiming of their ly^^^es
and left legs. Three of them yelding forth a marvelous constancy at the
confession of their faith, ended their lives with diverse kinds of torments
Ares burned Promus beheaded. Elias beheaded.
at Ascalon where they were apprehended. One of them whose name was Ares was
thrown into a great flaming fire and burned to ashes* the other two, whose
names were Promus and Elias, had their heads stricken of from their shoulders.
The eleventh day of y^ month Audinaeus, y^ is about the third Ides of
January, Petrus called also Apselamus, a worshipper or religious man, borne in
the village Anea which bordered upon Eleutheropolis, being very often entreated
by the judge and his asistents, to remember him self, to pity his case and to
tender his youthly years and flourishing age: contemned their persuasions, and
cast his whole care upon Almighty God, preferring that before all other
things, yea and before his proper life: and at Caesarea, tried by fire his
faith in Christ Petrus Apsela mus, burned. Asclepius a Marcionite burned.
Jesus with a noble and valiant courage, much like unto most pure gold.
together with him on Asclepius a Bishop (as men said) of the heresy of
Marcion, with godly zeal (as he thought,) but not with that which is according
unto knowledge, departed this life, in the self same burning fire. and thus
much of them.

CAP. XXIX.
Of 12. Martyrs that suffered together in one day with Pamphilus, and of the
martyrdom of Adrianus and Eubulus.

TIme now draws me away to paynt forth unto the posterity that noble and
glorious theater of Martyrs which suffered together with Pamphilus, whose name I
do always honor and reverence. They were twelve in number, and thought
worthy not only of y^ Prophetical, or rather the Apostolic gift, but also the
number of the Apostles whose captain and principal Pamphilus.
was Pamphilus* minister of the Church of Caesarea: a man very famous, for
sundry his virtues throughout the whole race of his life: singular, in
despising and contemning this present world: bountiful, for liberality
bestowed upon the poor: wonderful, in neglecting the care fixed upon
transitory things: excelling, in behavior and Philosophical trade of living:
moreover passing all the men of our age, for fervent zeal and earnest desire
and study of holy Scripture: marvelous constant in all his doings and
enterprises, and also very ready to aid and help such as were of his kin
and familiar acquaintance. other his virtues and well doings, because it
required a longer treatise, we have lately and that largely published in a
several and peculier volume entitled of his life, and divided into three
books. Therefore such as are desirous to learn more exactly and more
exquisetly to know his virtuous life, we refer thither, and presently we
mind only to prosecute such things as concern the Martyrs which suffered
persecution together with him. The second after Pamphilus that came forth to
wrestle was the reverent whore headed Valens, Deacon of the city Valens.
Aelia, a grave father in every man's eye and greatly skilled in holy Scripture,
if then there was any such in the world, he was so expert therein, that if he
heard any percell thereof by any man alleged, forthwith was he able by rote
to repeat it, as well as if then he read it out of the book. The third was
Paulus, a man wonderful zealous and fervent in the spirit, borne in the city
Iamnia, Paulus.
where he grew to great fame, before martyrdom he endured the scorching and
searing of his flesh with hott yrons, and passed through a worthy combatt at
the confession of his faith, the martyrdom of these was differred by reason of
their continewance in prison two whole days. In the mean while came the
brethren of Egypt which suffered martyrdom together with them. these
Egyptians when they had accompanied the confessors of Cilicia, unto the place
appointed for the digging of metals, returned home again. in their return,
they were taken of the watch which kept the gates of Caesarea (which were
barbarous and rude grooms) and examined who they were, and whence they came.
when they could not conceal the truth, they were laid in hold as if they
had been heinous trespassers, and had committed some horrible crime. In number
they were five, which 5. Martyrs be headed.
were brought before the tyrant, and after their examination, clapped in prison.
The third day being the sixtenth of the month Peritius after the Romans,
about the fouretenth of the Calendes of March, these together with Pamphilus
and the rest of his companions (mentioned a little before) by commandment were
brought before the judge. This judge first of all tries with sundry and
manifold torments, with new and straung devises, the invincible constancy, and
valiant mind of the Egyptians. And with all he demanded of the chief, and
principal in this combat, what his name was, then, when as in steed of his
proper name, he had named himself unto him, after some Prophet or other (for
this was their manner, in steed of the Idolatrous names which their parents had
given them, to chose them new names, they called them selves after the name of
Elias, Ieremias, Esaias, Samuel and Daniel, and expressed not only in word but
in works them selves, the very true God of Israel, hidd from the Jews,
according unto the proper etymology of their names) Firmilianus, hearing such
an appellation of the Martyr weyed not at all the sense and signification of
the word, but secondarily asks of him what contreyman he was, he satisfying
the interrogatorie gives a fl^t name unto the former answer, that his
country was Jerusalem, meaning in very deed the self same whereof Paul spoke:
that Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the mother Gal^^. 4 Heb. 12.
of us all. again in an other place: ye are come unto the mount Sion, and to
the city of the living God, the celestial Jerusalem, for it was this that the
Martyr understood. Firmilianus being earthly minded enquireth earnestly and
curiously where this city was, in what country it lay, and with all tormented
him grievously to the end he should confess the truth* this Martyr having
his hands wrested, and tied behind him, his feet with certain new and
strange kind of engines stretched asunder, auoutched constantly that he had
told him the truth. Afterward when the judge demanded of him again, what he
was, and where that city was situated, made answer: that it was a country
which only belonged unto the godly: that none other should be partaker
thereof, save the godly alone: and that it was situate eastward where the sun
in the morning spreddeth abroad the bright beams of his light. In uttering
these words he entered into so divine a cogitation within him self, that he
forgot the tormentors which laid him on, on every side, and seemed to perceive
no sense or feeling of the pain and punishment, as if he had been a ghost
without flesh, blood or bone. The judge casting doubts with him self, and
greatly disquieted in mind, thought the Christians would bring to pass, that
the city mentioned by the Martyr, should rebel and become enemy unto the
Romans: he began to search and diligently to inquire, where that region (by
report eastward) should be* last of all when he saw this young man after bitter
and grievous torments, with immutable constancy to persevere steadfast in his
former saying: he gave sentence that his head should be stricken of from his
shoulders* such was the mortal race of this miserable life, which this blessed
Martyr did run. The rest of his companions, after the like torments, ended
their lives, with the laying of their heads upon the block. In the end,
Firmilianus, although in manner weryed, and frustrated of his purpose, yet
satisfied to the full with these infinite torments and their terrible
execution, turned him self unto Pamphilus, and his companions. And although he
had experience sufficient heretofore of their invincible constancy in the
defense of their faith, yet again he demands whether at length they would
obey and yield unto him. when he was resolved of their definite sentence and
last answer, which tended to martyrdom, he Porphyrius the servant of
Pamphilus after torment was burned to death.
gave sentence they should be tormented and punished alike with the former
martyrs. which being done, a young man, one of the servants of Pamphilus, so
well brought by and instructed, that he might very well seem worthy the
discipline and education of so worthy a man, as soon as he perceived that
sentence was past upon his master, cries out in the midst of the throng and
requesteth that his masters carcass together with his companions, after the
breath were departed their body, might quietly be buried in their graves. The
Judge being affectioned not like unto man, but to a beast, or if there be any
other thing more sauadg, tendered not at all y^ young man's youthly years, but
forth with demands of him whether he were a christian, who, when that he
affirmed plainly that he was: boiled with anger, as if his heart had been stickt
with a knife, and charged the tormentors they should lay on him the weight of
their hands and the might of their strength. after that he was enjoined to
sacrifice, and had refused: the Judge commanded that without all compassion he
should be scourged unto the bare bone, the inner and secret bowels, not as if
he were man covered with flesh and compassed in a skin, but a picture made of
stone or wood, or some other senseless metal. In which kind of torment
continewed a long time, when the judge perceived that he uttered no language,
neither gave forth to understand y^ he felt any pain: and saw that (his body
being in manner senseless, spent with lashes and consumed away) he tormented
him in vain: he continewed still in that his hard and stony heart, void of all
humanity, and decreed forthwith that his body should be burned by a little and
a little with a slow and slack fire. This young man being the last of them
which before the martyrdom of Pamphilus (who was his master according unto the
flesh) entered into this dangerous skirmishe, departed this life before him,
because that the tormentors which executed the rest seemed to be very slow.
Then might a man have seen Porphyrius (for that was the young man's name) after
trial in every kind of exercise, earnestly and wholly bent with a wonderful
desire, as the manner is of men, to obtain the valiant and sacred victory: his
body be poudred with dust, yet gracious in face and countenance: hastening to
the place of execution for all his affections with upright and noble courage
replenished no doubt with the spirit of God: attyred in the philosophical
habit after his wonted guyse, to wete, wearing a garment after the manner of a
cloak which covered only his shoulders: telling his familiars with signs and
tokens with a modest and mild spirit what his will was to be done: continewing
still yea when he was bound to the stake, his glorious and gladsome
countenance: and moreover when the fire flashed about with great distance, and
waxed extreme hott in compass of him, ye might have seen him with his breath
on either side drawing the flame unto him: and after these words when as the
flame first of all toutched his body, which with loud voice he sounded out
(Jesus thou son of God succor and help me) to have suffered constantly
without any murmuring at al, all those marvelous and extreme torments, even to
the last gasp. such was the affliction of Porphyrius, whose end Seleucus a
confessor and a Seleucus beheaded.
soldier signified unto Pamphilus* who as the author of such a message
deserved, was without delay thought worthy to take the same chance together
with those Martyrs. for as soon as he had certified him of Porphyrius death,
and taken his leave and farewell of one of the Martyrs, certain soldiers lay
hands upon him, and bring him before the President. he as if he went about to
hasten his journey and to join him a wayfaring companion with Porphyrius unto
the celestial paradise, commands forthwith that he should be beheaded. This
Seleucus was borne in Cappadocia, and preferred to this great honor before all
the youth of the Roman band and before them which were of great creditt and
estimation among the Romans, he excelled all the rest of the soldiers in
youthly favor, in strength, and goodly stature of body, his countenance was
gracious, his speech amiable, he passed for comely making, for big setting,
for fair liking, and fit proportion of the whole body* he was famous at the
beginning of the persecution for his pacient suffering of stripes in the defense
of the faith, and being deprived of the warlike dignity which he enjoyed,
became a zealous follower of the worshippers or religious men, he succored and
provided with fatherly care and oversight for the fatherles, the succorlesse,
y^ widows, and such men as were visited with great misery and affliction.
wherefore God being rather delited with such like sacrifices of mercy, and works
of charity, then with smokye incense and bloody oblations, called him of his
goodness, unto this glorious and renowned garland of martyrdom. this was the
tenth champion of the number mentioned before, which suffered death in one and
the self same day, whereby (as it appears) the great and bewtifull gate of
the kingdom of heaven, being set wide open by the means of Pamphilus his
martyrdom, made an easy passage both unto him and the others his companions
to the attayning of the perfect pleasure in the celestial paradise. Theodulus
also a grave and a zealous father, Theodulus crucified.
one of Firmilianus the Presidents family, and in greater creditt with him,
then all the rest of his household, partly for his whore head and great years
(for he was a great graundfather) and partly for the singular good will and
affection borne always toward him: treading the same steps which Seleucus
had done before him, and committing the like crime with him, is brought before
his master Firmilianus the President, to plead for him self: who being
incensed with greater rage toward him then the rest of y^ Martyrs, delivered
him in the end to be crucified, which kind of martyrdom after the example of
our Savior he suffered most willingly. yet because there wanted one Iulianus
burned.
which might supplye the twelfe rowme among the Martyrs rehearsed before,
Iulianus came forth. who coming from far and as yet not entered into the
wrestling place, as soon as he had heard by the way as he came of their death
and happy ends, forthwith he conveyed him straight unto the noble spectacle
and theater of Martyrs, and as soon as he saw with his eyes the blessed
bodies of the Saints lying all a long upon the ground, he was tickled with
inward joy, he embraced them severally, and saluted them after the best manner.
which when he had done the catchpoles and executioners apprehended him, and
presented him before Firmilianus, who after he had executed such things as
were correspondent unto his cruel nature, commanded he should be laid upon
a slow and a slack fire, and so burned to death. Iulianus triumphed and leapt
for joy, and with a loud voice gave great thanks unto God, who voutch safed
him worthy, so great a glory and reward, and in the end he was crowned with
martyrdom. he was by birth of Cappadocia, in life and conversation holy,
faithful and very religious, and besides his fame in other things he was
inspired with the abundance of the spirit of God. such was the train of them
which were tormented, and by the goodness of God crowned Martyrs in the company
of Pamphilus. their holy and happy carcasses were kept above ground by the
decree of the wicked President, four days and four nights to be devoured of
the beasts of the field, and of the fowls of the air. but when as
miraculously neither beast, neither bird, neither dog drew nighe unto
them, again by the grace and goodness of Almighty God, they were carried away
safe and sound, and committed with solemn burial after the christian manner,
unto their still graves and resting sepulchers. Furthermore when the tyranny
and cruelty practiced against us, was bruted abroad, and rife in every man's
mouth: Adrianus and Eubulus of the country Manganaea, taking their journey
toward Caesarea, for to visit the rest of the confessors, were taken at the
gates of the city, and examined concerning y^ cause of their voyage into that
country. afterward freely confessing the truth they were brought before
Firmilianus, he without any more ado, or farther deliberation, after many
torments, and infinite stripes, gave sentence they should be torn in pieces
of wild beasts. within two days after, being the fifth day of the month
Dystros, about the third Nones of March, when the citizens Adrianus be headed.
of Caesarea celebrated their wakes, upon the day of reuells, Adrianus was
thrown at the feet of a fierce lion, afterward slain with the edge of the
sword and so dyed. Eubulus the third day after, about noone, in the self
same Nones of March, being the seventh day of the month Dystros, when the
judge entreated him earnestly to sacrifice unto the Idols, whereby he might
enjoy their freedom according unto law and order: he preferred the glorious
death for godliness sake, before this frail and transitory life: after he was
torn and mangled of wild beasts he was slain (as Eubulus beheaded.
his fellow before him) with the edge of the sword, and being the last he
sealed with his blood all the happy conflicts of the blessed Martyrs of
Caesarea but it shall seem worthy the noting* if at length we remember, how,
after what sort, and that not long after the heavy hand of God lighted upon
those wicked Magistrates, together with the tyrants them selves. for
Firmilianus Firmilianus the wicked tyrant was beheaded.
who frowardly and contumeliously raged against the Martyrs of Christ,
suffering extreme punishment together with the other his parteners in horrible
practices, ended his life with the swords* And these were the martyrdomes
suffered at Caesarea, during the whole persecution.

CAP. XXX.
The pastors of the Churches for their negligence in executing of their office
were punished from above. The martyrdom of Peleus, Nilus, Patermythius, the
punishment of Siluanus and John. The beheading of Nine and thirty Martyrs in
one day.

WHat in the mean time was seen to fall out against the Presidents and
pastors of churches: and after what sort the just judgment of God, revenger of
sin (in steed of shepeherds over sheep, and the reasonable flock of Christ
the which they should have wisely and advisedly governed) made them not only
keepers of Camels, a kind of beast ^oid of reason, by nature crooked, and ill
shapen: but also the Emperors horsekeepers, and this he did for a punishment
due unto their deserts: moreover what contumelies, what reproaches, what
diversity of torments they suffered of the Emperors, Presidents, and Magistrates
at sundry times for the holy ornaments and treasure of the Church: what pride
and ambicion raygned in many of them: how rashly and unlawfully they handled
diverse of the brethren: what schisms were raised among the confessors them
selves: what mischieues certain sedicious persons of late stirred up against
the members of the Church which were remnants, whilst that daily with might
and main (as commonly we say) they endeavored to excogitate new devises one
after an other: how that unmercifully they destroyed and brought all to naught
with the lamentable estate of bitter persecution, and to be short, heaped
mischief upon mischief: all these aforesaid I mind to pass over with
silence, supposing Cap. 2.
it not to be our part (as I have said in the beginning of this book) either
to rehearse or record them, in as much as I am wholly bent and carefully minded
to ouerslipp and conceal the memorial of them. yet if there be any laudable
things, any thing that may seem to set forth the word of God, any worthy act,
or famous doings flourishing in the Church, I take it to be my special and
bounden duty to discourse of these, to write these, often to inculcate these
in the pacient ears of the faithful Christians, and to shutt up this book
with the noble acts of the renowned Martyrs, and with the peace which
afterward appeared and shined unto us from above. When the seventh year of
the persecution raised against us was now almost at an end, and our affairs
began by a little and as it were by stelth to grow unto some quiet stay,
ease, and securitye, and now leaned unto the eight year, in the which no*
small multitude of confessors assembled them selves together at the mine pitts
in Palaestina, who freely occupied them selves in the rites and ceremonies of
Christian religion, so that they transformed their houses into Churches: the
President of the province, being a cruel and a wicked man (as his mischievous
practices against the Martyrs of Christ do prove him for no other) made a
voyage thither in all the haste, and hearing of their doings, their trade of
life and conversation, made the Emperor by his letters priuey thereunto,
paynting forth in the same, such things as he thought would disgrace,
discredit and defame the good name of those blessed confessors. Whereupon the
master of the mine pitts and mettalls came thither, and by virtue of the
Emperors commandment seuereth asunder the multitude of confessors, so that
thenceforth, some should continue at Cyprus, some other at Libanus, and others
also in other places of Palaestina, and commanded that all should be weryed
and vexed with sundry toils and labor* afterward he picked out four of the
chief of them, and sent them unto the judge, of the which, two of them, were
called Peleus and Nilus, Bishops of Egypt. Peleus burned Nilus burned. A
minister burned. Patermythius burned.
the third was a minister, the fourth annexed unto these was Patermythius, a
man wonderfully beloved for his singular zeal toward all men in Gods
behalf. all which the Judge requested to renounce Christ and his religion,
who when they obeyed not, and seeing him self frustrated of his purpose, gave
sentence they should be tied to a stake and burned to ashes. others some
again of the confessors being not fit, for that labor and service, by reason
either of their heavy old age, or unprofitable members, or other infirmities
of the body, were released and charged to dwell in a several and solitary
place. of which number Siluanus Bishop of Gaza was the chief, Siluanus.
who lively expressed unto all the world, a godly show of virtue, and a
notable pattern of Christianity. this man from the first day of the
persecution, and in manner unto the last, duringe all that space, was famous
for the sundry and manifold conflictes he suffered after infinite
examinations, and reserved unto that very moment, to the end he being the
last, might seal up with his blood all the conflictes of the Martyrs slain
in Palaestina. there were released, and partakers with him of the same
affliction, many Egyptians, one was John: who also in fame and renown
excelled all the me^ of our time. Who although he was blind before, yet the
torme^tors John a blind man of a singular memory and rare gifts.
were so truel, so fierce, and so rigorous, y^ for his great consta^cy in
professing y^ name of Christ, they maimed with a burning saw his left leg
(as the other confessors were used before) and seared the aple of the eye,
bereued already of the sight, with an hott scaldinge iron. Let no man marvel
at all, at his good conversation and godly life, though he were blind, in so
much that his manners deserved not such admiration as his gift of memory, where
he had printed whole books of holy scripture, not in tables made of stone (as
the holy Apostle says) neither in the ^ydes of beasts, parchement, or paper,
which moth corrupts and the time wears away: but in the fleshly tables of
the heart, that is, in the prudent memory and sincere understanding of the
mind: so that when it seemed good unto him he was able out of the closett of
his mind, as if it were out of a certain treasury of good learning, to
allege and repeat y^ Law and the Prophets, sometimes the histories, at other
times the Evangelists and works of the Apostles. I confess truly that when
first I saw the man stand in the midst of the congregation and assembly:
and heard him recite certain places of holy Scripture I wondered at him. For
as long as I heard his voice sound in mine ears, so long thought I (as the
manner is at solemn meetinges) that one read out of a book: but when that I
came nearer unto him, and saw the truth as it was all other stand in compass
with whole, open, and sound eyes, and him vsinge none other but only the eye
and sight of the mind, and in very deed vtteringe many things much like unto
a Prophet, and excelling in many things many of them which enjoyed their
senses sound and perfect, I could not choose but magnify God therefore, and
marvel greatly thereat. ^e thought I saw lively tokens, and evident
arguments, that he was a man in deed, not after the outward appearance, or
fleshly eye of man, but according unto the inner sense, and secret
understanding of the mind* the which expressed in this man, though his body
were mayned, and out of fashion, greater power of his inward gifts. God
himself reachinge unto these men (mentioned before and continewinge in
several places and executinge their wonted trade of life in prayer and fasting
with the rest of their godly exercises) the right hand of his mercy and succor;
granted them through martyrdom to attain unto an happy and a blessed end.
But the deuell, enemy and sworn adversary of mankind cold no longer away
with them, for that they were armed and fenced against him with prayers
continewally poured unto God, but went about (as he imagined) to vex them and
to cut them of, from the face of the earth. For God had granted him that might
and power, that neither he in no wise cold be kept back from his wilful
malice and wickedness: neither these men for their manifold and sundry
co^flicts, should be deprived of their reward and glory. For which cause by the
decree of the most wicked emperor Maximinus, there were in one day nine and
thirty martyrs beheaded. These 39 Martyrs beheaded.
were the martyrdoms suffered in Palaestina, during the whole term of eight
years, and such was the persecution raised against us, which first began with
the ruin and overthrow of the churches, which also increased daily more and
more by reason that the emperors at sundry times renewed the same whereupon
also it fell out that there were manifold and sundry conflicts of valiant
champions wrestling for the truth in Christ: and an innumerable multitude of
martyrs in every province, reaching from Libya, throughout all Egypt, Syria,
and the Eastern countries, and every where, even unto the co^fines of
Illyricum: And the coasts adjoining unto the aforesaid countries: as all Italy,
Sicilia, France, and the VVeasterne countries and such as reach unto Spain,
Mauritania and Aphrike: where they were not persecuted fully two years, but
quickly through the mercy and goodness of God obtained peace and tranquillity,
because that the divine providence of almighty God, for there faith and
innocencyes sake, pitied their lamentable estate. For that which from the
beginning was not remembered to happen in the Roman empire, came now in the
end to pass amongst us beyond all hope and expectation. The empire was
divided into two parts because of the persecution raised against us. And
though in some part of the world the brethren enjoyed peace, yet in other
regions and countries they suffered infinite conflicts and torments. But when
that at length the grace of God showed unto us his loving, his merciful, his
favorable countenance, and watchefull care over us, then I say then, the
governors and magistrates even they which before time raised persecution
against us, remembered themselves somewhat better, altered their mind and song a
recantation: quenching the fiery flame of persecution flashing among us with
more circumspect decrees and milder constitutions in y^ christians behalf.
Now let us record unto the posterity the recantation of Maximinus the tyrant.

The end of the eight book.
THE NINTHE BOOK OF THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORYE OF EVSEBIVS PAMPHILVS BISHOP
OF CAESAREA IN PALAESTINA.
CAP. I.
Though Maximinus went not seriously about to succoure the christians and to
relent the persecution, yet it profited, and Sabinus published abroad his
letters in the behalf of the christians so that peace was restored.

THis recantation set forth by the commandment of the emperors, was
published every where throughout Asia and all his provinces which thing being
done, Maximinus the Eastern tyrant, most impious of all and chief enemy to y^
service of God, not pleased with these proclamations in stead of y^ written
edict, commanded his princes by word of mouth y^ they should make league with
the christians. And because he durst none other but obey the sentence of the
higher power, he began to imagine how to conceal the decree already
proclaimed and to prouid lest that it were made manifest unto the countries of
his dominion, and by this advise he commanded his inferior magistrates by word
and not by writing: that henceforth they should persecute us no more. But they
certified one an other of this commandment, and Sabinus who then among them
was in highest dignity certified by epistle written in the latin tongue, the
several presidents of the provinces of the emperors decree by translation
thus: The majesty of our Lords and most noble emperors has decreed now a
good while ago Sabinus unto the preside^ts through out the dominions of
Maximinus.
with great care and devotion to induce the minds of all mortal me^ unto the
holy and right trade of living, to the end these also which have alienated
them selves from the Roman manner, should exhibit due worship unto the
immortal gods: but the stubburnes of some, and the mind of all other most
obstinate, so far resisted, that they could be vvithdravven from their
purpose nether by right nor by reason, neither be terrified with any torment
that was laid upon them. For as much as therefore it fell out by this means
that many putt themselves in great peril, the majesty of our lieges, and most
puysant emperors, after their noble piety (judging it a thing far from their
most noble purpose, for such a cause to cast men into so great a danger) gave
me in charge that with diligence I should write unto your industry. That if
any of the christians be found to use the relligion of his own sect, you
neither grieve nor molest him at all, neither think any man for this cause
worthy of punishment when as it appears in so long a tract of time, they can
by no means be induced to sursease from such a pertinacy. Your industry has
therefore to write to the liuetena^ts, captains and co^stables of every city
and village that they pass not the bounds of this edict to presume any thing
contrary to the same. The presidents through out the provinces, having received
these letters thinking this to be the true meaning of the emperor, in these
lettres contained, declare forthwith by their epistles y^ emperors decree unto
ye live tenants, captains and unto such as governed the common people of the
country. Neither were they only satisfied with the sending of letters, but
rather by the deed doing it self to bring about the emperors will, brought
forth and set at liberty, such as they held captives in prison for the
confession of christian religion, yea releasinge them also which for
punishments sake were committed to ye mine pitts and digginge of mettalls, for
they being deceived thought this would please the emperor. These things being
thus brought to pass, immediately after the son beams of peace shined
brightly as if it had been after a dark or mysty night. Then might a man have
seen throughout every city, congregations gathered together, often synods and
there wonted meeting celebrated. At these things the incredulous heathen were
much dismayed and wondering at the marvelous strau^gnes of so great a change,
shouted out, that the God of the christians was ye great Such as fell in
persecution repented the^ of their fall.
and only true God. Some of our men which faithfully and manfully endured the
combatt of persecution, enjoyed again there liberty among all men: but others
some faynting in the faith, of abject minds in the storm of persecution,
greedely hastened unto their salve and sought of such as were strong and sound,
ye forewardnes of health and destred the Lord to be merciful unto them. Again
the noble champions of godliness being set at liberty from the affliction they
suffered in the mine pitts returned unto their own home, passing throughout
every city with valiant and cheerful courage, with unspeakable joy, and
replenished with inexplicable liberty of mind. They went in y^ voyage and
return lauding God in songs and psalms throughout y^ midd high ways
throughout the market places and frequented assemblies. There might thou
have seen them who a little before after most grievous punishments were
fettred, and banished their native soil to receive and enjoy their proper
houses, with a cherefull and merry countenance, in so much that they which before
time cried out against us, now rejoiced together with us at this wonderful
sight, happening beyond all man's expectation.

CAP. II.
Maximinus again showing his hatred against the christians forbids the
assemblies in churchyards and goes about to banishe them Antioch.

THe tyrant enemy to all honesty and chief practiser of wicked counsel
against all y^ godly, whom we said to have borne rule in the Eastern parts
not well brookinge these things: permoited them not to continewe in the same
state, no not six whole months. wherefore he puts in ure every mischiuous
practice to the overthrow of peace and tranquillity: first by a certain
pretense he goes about to bar us our liberty of meeting in churchyardes,
next by sending certain malicious men, he pricked and provoked against us the
citizensof Antioch, that they should beg of him for a great benefitt, y^ he
would permit no christian at all to dwell within his dominions. This he
assayed by y^ advise of others, ye author of all which mischief, was
Theotecnus, who solicited the cause, and egged them of Antioch forewards, a man
he was of authority, an inchaunter, very spiteful and far from the
signification of his name, who then was liuetenante of that city.

CAP. III.
Theotecnus goes about to mischief the christians, he incenseth the tyrant
against them, and sets up an Idol at Antioch.

THis Theotecnus therefore when he had vehemently impugned us and procured
every kind of way that the christians should diligently be sought out of their
dens and apprehended for heinous robbers: and had imagined all means to the
end we should be charged and accused: and had been the cause of death to an
infinite number, at length he erecteth the Idol of Iuppiter Iuppiter philius.
as of the God of friendship, with certains inchauntments and sorceryes: and
inuenteth thereunto impure ceremonies, execrable sacrifices and detestable
oblations: and causes report to be made unto the emperor of the strange
things the Oracle seemed to utter. This Theotecnus also, being a flatterer
(wherewith he seemed to please y^ emperor) raised a wicked spirit against the
christians and said: God so commanded that the christians should be banished
out of the city, and the liberties thereof, For that they were rebels and
traitors to the crown.

CAP. IIII.
Maximinus again raises persecution by his decrees.

WHen that Theotecnus first of all had done this of his own accord, all the
other magistrates inhabiting the cities of his dominion promulgated the like
sentence: and when as the presidents throughout the provinces saw this pleased
the emperor, they egged the subjects also to do the like: and y^ tyrant very
promptly consented by his rescript unto their ordinances, so yt again ye heat
of persecution was blown against us and that again Idol priests were
ordained by the decree of Maximinus throughout every city and village and
moreover high priests which specially excelled in policies and passed others
in all things who also were zealous folowers of their religion and bestowed
great labor about the service of them whom they worshipped. Wherefore the
emperors superstition and Idolatricall mind was again as it were a fresh
incensed against us, and that I may utter the whole in few words he brought
all his dominion both magistrates and inferior subjects, to practice every kind
of mischief for his sake against us, and to think they requited him fully and
should have great favor asmany as desired to obtain any benefit at his hand,
if they oppressed us with slaughter and executed certain new mischiefs against
us.

CAP. V.
The heathens go about to defame christian religion fayning blasphemies
against the acts of Christ and Pilate, and with certain women's confession
extorted from them by the governor of Damascus.

Again they forge certain acts as of Pilate and our Savior, full of
blasphemy against Christ, the which by consent of the emperor they send
abroad throughout his dominions commanding by their letters y^ y^ same
throughout all places both city and country should be expounded and delivered
to y^ youth by scholmaisters, to be committed unto memory in stead of their
indicted vulgars and exercised discipline. These things being thus brought to
pass a certain ruler of the host, whom the Romans call a captain, drew
from the markett place of Damascus in Phoenicia, certain infamous women and
brought them by threats of torments to that pass that after a register or
record was showed they should confess them selves sometimes to have been
christians and priuey to the wicked and lascivious acts which y^ christians
committed among the^ selves at their solemn meeting on the sundays: and what
other things it pleased him they should utter to y^ sclaunder of our religion,
the which words were registered, copied and lent to the emperor who also
commanded the same every where, in every place and city to be published.

CAP. VI.
The confusion of the captain of Damascus: the commendation of certain martys
and the places where they flourished.

BUt this captain in a while after procured his own death with his proper
hand and suffered punishment due for his malicious deserte. Then again
banishment and grievous persecution was raised against the christians, and
again the presidents of several provinces began utterly Three christians
devoured of beasts Siluanus martyrd. Petrus. b. of Alexandria beheaded.
Lucianus martyred.
to rebel against us, so y^ diverse of them which excelled in ye doctrine of
Christ Jesus, bare away the inevitable sentence of death. of which number were
three christians in Emisa a city of Phoenicia, who of there own accord
professed christianity and were delivered to be devoured of ravening beasts.
Among these also was Siluanus a bishop, far stricken in years, having executed
y^ function of the ecclesiastical ministry y^ space of forty years full.
About y^ time Petrus who notably governed y^ churches of Alexandria, excelling
all other godly bishops, for his vertous lif and godly exercise of preaching;
for no other cause the^ you hear without hope of any reward, suddenly and
unadvisedly by y^ commandment of Maximinus was beheaded: and together with him
after y^ same manner, many Egyptian bishops were executed. Again Lucianus a
notable man, for his continency of lif, and for his skill in holy Scripture
highly commended, being an elder of y^ church of Antioch was brought to
Nicomedia in which city y^ emperor the^ abode. and after he had exhibited unto
the emperor (enemy to all goodness) an Apollogie in defense of y^ doctrine
which he taught and where with he bare rule, was cast into prison and shortly
after executed. This Maximinus in short space exercised so great a tyranny and
crueltye toward us, that the later persecution seemed far more grievous unto
us then the former.

CAP. VII.
The Edict of Maximinus against the christians and the calamities which ensued
after the publishing thereof and daunted the braggery of the tyrante.

IN the midds of every town (which before was never seen) y^ decrees of
cities and besides them y^ copies of y^ imperial edicts engraven in brazen
tables were nailed up. And children in schools sounded every day Jesus and
Pilate and other what so ever for farther contumely cold be forged. It seems
very expedient, for this place to annexe the copy of the edict, which
Maximinus nailed to pillars so that the insolent and arrogant temerity of this
man: his spite toward God: his euidente contumacy: and again y^ vigila^t
justice of God against impious persons, which immediately ouertooke him
according unto the celestial wisdom of God, may be revealed: wherewith he
being provoked though he imagined not mischiefs very long against us, yet at
that time he confirmed them with public edicts. The copy whereof was thus:

The copy of Maximinus translated edict, ratifying the decrees published
against us and borrowed of that which was nailed to a post at Tyrus. Maximinus
against Christians.

At length the weak resista^ce of man's mind laying a side and scattering all
obscurity and mist of error which hitherto possessed the wits as well of
impious and miserable me^, wrapped in the pernicious darkness of ignorance, has
beneable to discern, that the same is governed by the providence of the
immortal gods, embraci^g goodness, the which thing may not be expressed, how
accep table, how pleasing, and gratfull it was unto us, and how great a try
all it shevved of your godly He commends the superstition of the Tyrians, and
their cruelty against the Christians
will, when as also before time every man knew your disposed diligence and
piety toward the immortal gods, whose faith is made manifest, not by naked and
fruteles words, but by firm and wonderful works. wherefore your city may
justly be called the seat of the immortal gods, and by many examples it is
appare^t how she florisheth having the celestial Gods present with her. For
behold, your city laying aside all the things which specially co^cerned her,
and despising the things which chiefly should have been sought for her
wealth, when as she perceived, that cursed vanity, again to creep and like
co^te^ned and covered sparcles of fire by blowing again to se^d forth mighty
flames, immediately without further deliberatio^ you hau^g recourse unto our
grace as unto the metropo litane of all divine worship have made supplication
for remedy and aid: the which sound mind, it is manifest, the gods for your
trusty service, have ingraffed in you. He therefore I mean the most high and
mighty Jove, who rules your most renowned city, to the end he might deliver
your co^trie gods, your wives, your children, your household gods and houses
from all utter corruption, has inspired your minds with this wholesome
counsel, showing and declaring how excellent, and notable a thing it is to
embrace the religion and sacred service of the immortal gods with dew
worship. who may be found so bereaved of all his wits which cannot understand
this thing to happen unto us by the favorable care of the gods, that neither
the earth denies the seed she received frustra ti^g the hope of the husband
me^ by vain expectation: neither is that show of wicked war on earth
stre^gthened without offense: neither does the noisome te^perature of the air
dispatch with death the corrupt bodies: neither is the sea swolle^ with
vnportunate winds, overflowed the banks, neither do the storms which fall
down unlooked for, sturr up pernicious tempest: neither is the earth which is
fostrer and mother of all, drowned in her own bottomlesgulfs by terrible
earthquakes: neither the mountains settled on earth swallowed up by re^ting of
the earth asuder: al which evils A sclaunder.
yea greater the^ these, who knows not often to have happened heretofore. Yet
all these things came to pass, because of the mere folly of those wicked me^,
when as that shameful spot ouershadowed their minds and welnigh as I may so
term it, prevailed ouery where. Again a little after he adds: Let them
behold the wide and broad field, the flourishing corn, and ouerflovving ears,
the pleasant meadows clothed with herbs and flowers moistened with shoures
from heaven, and the weather become te^perate and calm. again let al rejoice,
because that the might of the most pote^t and sturdy Mars is pacified through
your service, sacrifices and worship. let the^ rejoice because that therefore
constantly we enjoy quiet peace, and as many as left that blind error and
returned unto the right and best mind, may the rather be glad for that they
are delivered from that sudden storm and grievous disease, and he^ceforh
attained unto the sweetness of a pleasant life. But if they persist in that
execrable vanitle, our will and pleasure is (according unto your request) that
they be severed and banished far from your city and the bordering regions,
that your city by this means after your laudable industry being made free
from all impurity may busily occupy her self according unto her disposed mind
in offeringe of sacrifices with dew honor of the immortal gods. and that you
may thoroughly understand how grateful your request in this behalf has been
unto us (yea without entreaty or great suit) volu^tarily our most pro^pt mind
to promote good endeuers has granted unto yourdeuotio^, that what gift so ever
of our bou^tifulnes ye list, ye crave it of us in consideration of this your
godly purpose. and that this thing may be accomplished forthwith, ask and
have, which being done, shall be a perpetual testimony unto your city of piety
toward the immortal gods, and shall be a proof unto your sons and
posterity, how that you have been vvorthely revvarded by our goodness for this
your desire to lead a right life.

When these things were nailed to pillars throughout every province they
bereaved us of all hope of better succes, as much as lies in man, so y^
welnigh according unto y^ divine sayi^g of Christ, The elect the^ selves (if it
Man 24.
cold possiblye) had been offended at these things. but when as in manner y^
hope of many lay for dead, immediately while they were yet in their journey,
which were authorized to publish in certain pla ces y^ foresaid edict: God y^
defender of his church, not only resisted y^ insole^t outrage of this tyra^t,
but showed unto y^ world his celestial aid in our behalf. For showers and
rain in winter season, seized from their wo^ted streams in watri^g ye earth:
and famine unlooked for oppressed the^, after this en sued ye pestilence and a
certain grievous disease, in form of a botch, termed for y^ fervent burning
thereof* a carbuncle. this spredding it self over the whole body, brought such
as therewith were infected into doubtful danger of their lives, but specially
taking them about the eyes, it blinded an infinite number both of men, women and
children. Moreover there rose war between the tyrant and the Armenians, who
unto that time from the beginning were friends and fellows of the Romans.
These Armenians when as they were Christians and careful about the service of
God, the tyrant (enemy to God) endeavored to constrain them to do sacrifice
unto idols and devils, and instead of friends he made them foes, instead of
felows, enemies. These things suddenly meeting together in one and the same
time have quelled the boasting of the presumptuous tyrant against God,
wherewith he gloried that neither famine, neither pestilence, neither war,
fell in his time, for that he carefully worshipped idols and impugned the
Christians.

CAP. VIII.
Of the grievous famine and pestilence in the time of Maximinus, and of the
godly affection which the Christians showed to their heathen enemies.

THese things running in a heap and together, contained foresignes of his
death. for he together with his army was sore vexed with the wars against the
Armenians, and the rest I mean the inhabitors of his cities sore pined away
with famine and pestilence, so that one measure of wheat was sold for two
thousand and fifty A^^icks. An infinite number dyed through out the cities,
but more throughout the co^tries and villages, so that now the sundry and
ancient sised valuations of husbandmen were in manner quite done away for
because that all suddenly through want of food and grievous malady of the
pestilence were perished. Many therefore sought to sell unto the welthier sort,
for most sclender food, the dearest things they enjoyed. Others selling their
possessions by pieces fell at length into the miserable peril of extreme
poverty, others gnawing the small shreded tops of green grass and withal
confusely feeding on certain venomous herbs used them for food, whereby the
healthie constitution of the body was perished and turned to poison. diverse
noble women throughout the cities, driven to extreme need and necessity went
a begginge into the country, showing forth by their reverend countenance and
more gorgeous apparel an example of that ancient and free manner of feeding,
certain others whose strength was dried up tottering to and fro, wending and
slyding much like carved pictures without life, for that they were not able to
stand fell down flat in the midst of the streets, groueling upon the
ground, with their faces upward and stretched out arms, making humble
supplication that some one would reach them a little piece of bread, and
thus lying in extremity, ready to yield up the ghost, cried out that they
were hungry, being only able to utter these words: others which seemed to be
of the wealthier sort, amazed at the multitude of beggars, after they had
distributed infinitely they put on an unmerciful and sturdye mind, fearinge
lest they shortly should suffer the like need with them that craved.
Wherefore in the myddest of the markett place and throughout narrow lanes the
dead and bare carcasses lay many days unburied and cast a long, which
yielded a miserable spectacle to the beholders. Yea many became food unto
dogs, for which cause chiefly such as lived, turned them selves to kill
dogs, fearing lest they should become madd and turn them selves to tear in
pieces and devour men. And no less truly did the plague spoil every house
and age, but specially devouring them whom famine through want of food could
not destroy. Therefore the ritche, the princes, the presidents, and many of the
magistrates as fit people for a pestilent disease (because they were not
pinched with penury) suffered a sharp and most swift death. All sounded of
lamentation, throughout every narrow lane, the market places and streets,
there was nothing to be seen but weeping together with their wonted pipes and
the rest of minstrels noise. death after this sort waging battle with double
armor, to wete, with famine and pestilence: destroyed in short space whole
families, so that the dead carcasses of two or three were seen borne to the
grave in one funeral. These were reco^pences for the bragging of Maximinus,
and the edicts which he published aganst y^ Christians throughout The
Christi^ns alone ^ere endu^d with com^assion.
the cities, when as by manifest tokens it appeared unto all men how
serviceable and godly the christians were in all things. For they alone in so
great an ouerflowing of mischief showed forth true compassion, and studious
courtesy, every day some busily occupied them selves in curing and burying the
dead, whereas infinite were otherwise despised of their own friends: others
gathering together throughout the whole city, into one heap and place, the
multitude of them which were in great danger by reason of famine, distributed
bread unto all: to the end they might make that benefit manifest and famous
unto all men, whereby they might glorify y^ God of the Christians, and confess
that they alone were godly in deed, and sound by their works to be the only
worshipe^^ of God. These things being thus (...) might to pass, the great and
celestial God defender of y^ Christians, which by the aforesaid calamities
showed his wrath and indig^^io^ against mortal men (...) because they had
vexed us above measure, made the bright countenance of his prouid^^e toward
us, placable and comfortable, so that thereby peace shined with great admiration
unto us like light unto such as sat in darkness, and made manifest unto all men
that God him self is the continewall ouerseear of our affairs, which
chastises his people and exercises them with calamities for a season* yet
after sufficient correction appears again tractable and merciful unto such
(...) trust in him.

CAP. IX.
The victory of Constantinus against Maxentius, the Edict of Maximinus in the
behalf of the Christians.

Wherefore Co^stantinus whom we have termed emperor, son of an Emperor,
godly of a most godly man, and gracious in all things, being raised up by the
highest king y^ god and savior of all, against these most impious tyrants,
waging battle with the^ by law of arms and boulstred with the aid of God,
ouerthrewe miraculously Maxentius at Rome, and foiled him utterly. Maximinus
also in the east, suruiuing a little after his depare^^e one of this ^^f^, dyed
a most shameful death procured by Licinius, who the^ as yet had not raged
against us, nethe^ turned him self to persecute the christians. but the
forsayde Constantinus, who was ^^st in honor and possession of the empire,
tendering y^ Romans estate, whom the tyrant oppressed, made supplication
unto the celestial God and his word, even to visus Christ the savior of all
y^ world for aid and succor, to the end he might deliver unto the Romans
the liberty they enjoyed from their forefathers, and girded him self to
battle together with his whole host, while that Maxe^tius in the mean space
trusting more in his magical arts, the^ in y^ good will of his subjects, durst
not march forwards to meet him, no not out of y^ town walls, but fortified
every place, every ^^ast and city with innumerable multitudes of armed
soldiers, infinite garrisons full of fleight placed here and there on every
side throughout all Italy and the other contries of his dominion. wherefore
Costa^tinus the emperor being aided from above, set upon the first, the
second, and third band of the tyra^ts host, valiantly overcame all, and so
co^quering y^ chief part of Italy draws now nigh to Rome. and lest he should
be constrained for y^ tyra^ts sake to assault the Romans, God draws forth
very far without the gates of y^ city the tyrant him self as if he had been
bound with certain chains and sets forth and confirms again, that
ancient power against impious persons, incredible and fabulous peradventure
unto many: but unto y^ faithful, certain and ingraffed in holy scripture,
wonderfully with the eyes the^ selves to be beheld, (in truth it self) of all
(and that I may speak in few words) both faithful and infidels. even as
therefore under Moses and that ancient and godly nation of the Hebrews, he
Exodus 14.
overthrew the chariots of Pharao and his host, and covered with the waves of
the sea the chosen horsemen, and drowned the soldiers in the running streams
of the read se^^^^ Maxentius and his armed soldiers, and whole troop
descended like a stone plunginge into the deapth of the water, when as he went
about to avoid and fly away from the power of God (by whom Constantinus was
assisted) and to pass over y^ water, y^ which he had carefully ouerlayd with
cockboats, like bridges linked together and prepared to his own destruction.
wherefore then also it might have been said, He made a pit and dug it up,
and fell him self into the destruction he made for other, for his travel
Psalm. 7.
shall return upon his own head, and his unrighteousness shall light upon his
own pate. For the bridge which was made upon y^ river being overthrown, y^
passage was hindered, and the boats forthwith together with the men in the^
suncke into the bottom, and first of all y^ most impious tyra^t him self,
next his guard which were with him, according unto y^ foresaying of holy
scripture, plunged like lead into y^ depth of y^ running stream. so y^ very
well, this victory being obtained by y^ helping hand of God, y^ self same
which of old was said against y^ impious tyra^t, though not in word yet in deed
even as they which were with Moses the great servant of God, might have been song
and said after this sort: Let us singe unto the Lord, he is gloriously
magnified, he has overthrown the Exodus 15.
horse and rider in the sea, he is become my helper and defender, so that I
perish not. And who is like unto thee o Lord among the Gods, who is like
unto thee. glorified in the saints, vvonderfull, and gloriously bringing
strange things to pass. When Constantinus had song by his works these and
others to the like purpose unto God the prince whose power reaches over all
and author of y^ victory he came conqueror to Rome, where immediately with
cheerful countenance and from the heart he was received of all both men,
women, and children, senators and other noble personages, and of all the people
of Rome with gladsome shouts and unspeakable joy, as a deliverer from
oppression, defender of the city, and general benefactor unto all. but as one
having the service of God engrassed within him, not moved with these triumphant
acclamations, neither puffed up with praises, yet priuey well enough to the
aid of God, commanded immediately the banner of the Lords passion should be
set upon the right hand of his picture, so they set it up in the most famous
place of Rome, holding in his right hand the wholesome sign of the cross, in
the which he commanded this superscription to be engraven in Roman letters.
In this wholesome sign, the true conizance of fortitude, I have delivered our
city from under the tyrants yoke, and have set the senate and people of Rome
at liberty, restoring them to their ancient honor and renown. Moreover when
as Constantinus him self and also Licinius y^ Emperor together with him, (who
as yet was not fallen to tyranny and madness, whereof afterward he was
gyltie) both together pacified God the author of all goodness: with one mind
and will they make a law in most absolute and ample wise in the behalf of the
Christians: they send notice also unto Maximinus who as yet ruled in the east,
how wonderfully God wrought with them, and the victory against the tyrant
and the law it self, and the friendship hypocritically he pretended toward
them. but he like a tyrant acknowledging these things to be most true, became
very sorrowful, next, lest he should seem to yield unto others, and again
about to swerve from the edict, for fear of them which had ordained this law,
as of his own accord and authority he gave forth unto the presidents of his
dominion this edict necessarily in the behalf of the Christians, in the which
craftily against him self he fayneth the things that never were done by him.

Acoppie of Maximinus the tyrants epistle in the behalf of the Christians.
Iouius Maximinus, Augustus unto Sabinus sends greting. I hope it is well
known unto your Maximinus in the behalf of the Chistians.
wisdom and to all mortal men, our lieges and lords Diocletian and
Maximinian, our fathers, to have notably decreed, when as they saw in manner all
men laying aside the service of the gods, and joining them selves to the
Christian nation: that as many as severed them selves from the service of the
immortal Gods, should be called again unto the religion of the gods with
undoubted An impudent lie. he showed no such courtesy.
pains and punishments. I truly first of all when that happily I came into
the east and understood of many men which might have profited the common
wealth, and were banished by the Judges for the aforesaid cause, gave this to
every Judge in charge: that none of them thenceforwards should deal severely
with them of their provinces, but call them back with fair speeches and
exhortations unto the worship of the Gods. When these thigs then according
unto our will were accomplished, it fell out that none of the eastern parts,
either was banished or found obstinate, but by reason that nothing was
grievously or severely practiced against them, they might be revoked unto the
service of the Gods. When as the last year prosperously I came to Nicomedia,
and there made my abode, the citizens of Nicomedia came unto me together with
the images of their gods, craving earnestly that in no case I should permit
such a nation to inhabit their country. But forasmuch as I knevve very many
men of that religion to dvvell in those parts, I framed them an answer in
this sort: that I liked well of their petition, but I saw that all did not
request the same. Wherefore if any continewed in that superstition, (our will
was) that every one should be left to follow the free purpose of his will, so
that they would acknowledge the service of the gods, in like sort they should
enjoy the same city together with the citizens of Nicomedia and the other
cities also, which made the like request unto me, that not one of the
Christians might dvvell among them. It was needful that I should answer
them friendly and lovingly, the which all the ancient Emperors observed and
is of the gods them selves approved, through whom all mortal men and the
government it self of the commonwealth does stand. It pleased us then to
ratify so great a request made unto us in the behalf of the service of their
high God. Wherefore though chiefly heretofore also we have written unto
your vvisdome and commanded the like, that nothing severely were done against
them of the province which went about to succor such a nation, but should
patiently be obeyed, and that they should suffer contumelies and vexations
neither of the officials neither of any other whatsoever. I have thought good
by these my letters to admonish your prompt mind, that with fair speeches
and exhortations you bring them of our dominions to acknovvledge the careful
providence of the Gods. Wherefore if any of his own accord think good to
acknovvledge the service of the Gods, such a one is vvorthie to be embraced:
but if some will cleave to their peculier religion, let them do it at their
free will and pleasure. Your vvisdome has therefore to observe that which is
decreed of us, that none henceforth have this power given him to oppress
with contumelies, rattling speeches, and shaking troubles, our loving subjects,
sithen that as it is written before, it behooves us rather with fair
speeches and mild exhortations to revoke them unto the service of the
immortal gods. And to the end this our commandment be known of all our
prouincials, our will is that you publishe by proclamation directed from
yourselfe, that which is commanded by us


When Maximinus being constrained of necessity and not of his own accord had
commanded these things, for all this was he not of all men thought true in his
dealing, either worthy of trust, for because that before time after the like
grant, he showed a turncoate, a wavering mind, and a lying mouth. There durst
none of us gather a synod together or meddle with public affairs, for these
letters licenced not this: but only commanded: that we should not be
afflicted with any violence or contumely, it commanded not that conuenticles
should be made, that churches should be buylt, or the rest of our wonted
ceremonies should be retained. although Constantinus and Licinnius princes of
peace and piety, had written unto Maximinus that he should grant these things
and permitted the same unto all their subjects by Edicts and decrees: yet the
most wicked would not hitherto have remitted his tyranny, had not he by
divine judgment been compelled and brought at length against his will to this
pass, for such a trouble besett him as follows.

CAP. X.
Maximinus wageth battle with Licinnius, and is overcome, he rages against
his inchaunters, he publishes an Edict in the behalf of the Christians, at
length dies miserably.

WHen as he was no longer able to sustain the weight of the Empire, which
unworthily he had challenged unto him self, but went about his affairs
otherwise then became him, through want of skill being void of a moderate
mind required in an Emperor, and unadvisedly puffed in mind with
ouerflowinge arrogancy and pride: he presumed to wax stately against his
fellow Emperors, far excellinge him in lynage and learning, in worthiness
and wisdom, but especially against him which passed all other in wisdom and
piety toward the true God, and to challenge unto him self the majesty of
the chief Emperor. He became so furious and madd that he broke the league
made with Licinnius, and raised an irreconciled Maximinus wageth battle with
Licinnius.
battle. In short space therefore with all might, he molested in manner every
city, and having gathered all his host together, and mustred a multitude of
many millions of soldiers, he marches to battle and directs the forefront
of his band against him, trustinge in devils whom he took for gods, and was
arrogant because of his infinite multitude of armed soldiers. But in the
skirmishe it self, he is destitute of Gods help, and God the one and the
only ayder and succourer of all me^, gives the victory to Licinnius: and
first of all the force of armed soldiers wherein he trusted fails him,
afterward he was left alone, destitute of all company, forsaken of the
soldiers that were about him which fled unto the co^querour, the unhappy man
put of quickly the imperial attire not pertaining unto him, timorous, cowardy,
and effeminate, he joins him self to the multitude and flies away, and
hiding him self in fields and villages, he hardly escaped the hand of the
enemy, while by all means he sought to save his life, in very deed notably
approving the holy scripture, and showing for manifest truth where it was
said: There is no king that can be Psalm. 33.
saved by the multitude of an host, neither is any mighty man delivered by
much strength. A horse is counted but a vain thing to save a man, neither
shall he deliver any man by his great strength. Behold the eye of the Lord
is upon them that fear him, and upon such as trust in his mercy that he may
deliver their souls from death. After this sort the tyrant subject to most
vile shame and reproach came to his own coasts, and first of all being stricken
with rage and madness, he slew many priests and prophets of their gods, whom
before he had suspected, and by the procurement and trust of whose oracles he
had taken armor upon him to wage battle* as inchaunters and deceauers, which
also had villanously betrayed his person, afterward when he had glorified the
God of the Christians, and ordained a most perfect and absolute decree in the
behalf of their liberty, suddenly vexation ended his life, so that there
remained no time afterward for him to deliberate, the law which he published
was thus.

The coppie of Maximinus the tyrants constitution in the behalf of the
Christians translated out of Roman letters into the Greek tongue.
The Emperor Caesar, Caius, Valerius, mighty, lord of Germany, lord of
Sarmatia, gracious, Cap 10. in the Greek. Maximinus in the behalf of the
Christians. He dissembleth with his subjects.
fortunate, puissant Augustus. It is requisite that without ceasing we provide
for the prof^^ of our prouincials and by all means that we be willing to
exhibit those things unto them whereby they may obtain such things as may
chiefly profit the^. The things which avail for public profit and
commodity, the advantage of the commonwealth and pleasing unto every man, we
are well persuaded that there is none but knows the^ very well* that every
one has recourse unto that which is done, and that every wight in the world
understands of our affairs. when as before time it came to our knowledge,
that for the same cause (for the which it was commanded by Diocletian and
Maximinian, our progenitors of famous memory, the synodes and asse^blies of the
christians should be cut short) many were troubled and spoiled by the
officials, and the same as yet we perceive to be further practiced against our
louig subjects, whom chiefly as reason requires we ought to provide for,
whose substance was taken away. by our letters sent unto the preside^ts
throughout every proui^ce of our dominions the last year we have decreed: that
if any were disposed to cleave unto such ceremonies, or to addict the^ selves
unto the observation of that religion, it might be lawful for the^ without
offense to follow their own will, and that they should be hi^dred or forbidden
by no man. our pleasure was moreover that without fear and suspision they
should use that service which pleased every man best. Nevertheless you can not
be ignorant of this, that certain judges despised our decrees and made our
subjects uncertain of our edicts, and to have done it of set purpose, that
they might the longer abide in those rites which pleased the^ better. That
therefore hereafter all suspicio^, doubt and fear may be removed, we have
decreed to publishe this edict, whereby it may appear manifest unto all me^
that it may be lawful for the^ as many as will follow that opinion and
religion, by this our gracious gift and letters pate^ts, as every one lists
and is delited, so to use that religion which him pleases, and after his own
manner to exercise the same. Besides this also is permitted unto the^ that they
may buyld places of prayer for the lord. last of all that this our gift may be
the greater, we have voutchsafed to decree that also: that if any house or
manours heretofore belonging unto the christians title, by the commandment of
our auncetors have passed unto the crown, either presently enjoyed by any
city either otherwise soulde, or given to any man for a reward, all these we
have commanded, they should be revoked, to the ancient right of the
christians, whereby all may have experience of our piety and providence in this
behalf.

These words of y^ tyra^t, not one year being fully past, followed ye edicts
which against y^ christians were engraven in pillars* and to whom a little
before we seemed profane, impious, and the plague of all mankind, so y^ he
forbad us to dwell not only in y^ cities but also in ye fields, yea and in ye
desert: by y^ same man, edicts and iniunctio^s are decreed now in ye behalf
of the christians: and they which of late were in peril of fire and sword, and
the ravenous deuour^g of beasts and ^oules of ye air before y^ tyra^ts face,
and suffered all sort of pains and punishments, and miserable ends of this life
as profane and impious persons: unto the^ now it is permitted, openly to
exercise and use ye christian religion, and to buyld places for prayer unto the
Lord, again y^ tyra^t affirms this unto the^ yt they may enjoy certain
rights and privileges. when The death of Maximinus the tyrant. God plagued
Maximinus. Famine. Inward burning. Hewme.
he had proclaimed this his protestation therefore in ye end he received this,
in stead of recompense, y^ enduri^g y^ lesser torment which by right he should
have suffered, he being stricke^ of God with a sudden plague from above, should
die in y^ second skirmishe of y^ battle. he dyed not as captains in war
fighting ma^tully in battle for their co^try, for virtue and their friends,
are commonly wo^t to endure courageously a glorious death: but like an impious
person and a rebel to God (his army as yet lyi^g in ye field, and he tarying
at home and in secret) he suffers dew punishment, being stroke^ with a sudden
plague of God over all his body so yt he was vexed with great torments and
griefs, pyned away with hunger, fell down from his bed, his flesh altogether
wasted by invisible fire sent from above, so yt it consumed, dropped away, and
lost al ye fashion of ye old form, when as there remained nothing unto him
save only the bare bones like a painted image, dried up of a long time.
Neither did the beholders take his body for other then the sepulcher of the
soul, buried in a body that was now dead, and all together consumed. When
that as yet he burned more vehemently then the boiling bathes are wo^t, out of
ye inward closets of ye marow, his eyes lept forth and passing their bounds
left Blindness. His last confession.
him blind. but he breathing as yet in these torments making his confession
unto the Lord, called for death, and at length confessing himself to have
suffered these things justly, and in steed of reuengment, for the madness he
presumed and practiced against Christ Jesus, gave up the ghost.

CAP. X^.
After the death of Maximinus, the Christian affairs began to be in better
estate. the executors of Maximinus tyranny are punished. Constantinus and
Licinnius are proclaimed Emperors.

WHen Maximinus had thus departed this life, who alone continewed of all the
tyrants the utter enemy to all piety and godliness: the churches through the
grace of almighty God were builded again and erected from the fundations: the
Gospel of Christ Jesus shining unto the glory of the universal God, received
greater liberty then aforetime: but the impiety The ignominy that befell
Maximinus after his death.
of the sworn enemies to godliness was subject to extreme shame and
ignominy. For the said Maximinus was declared by public edicts the first
most deadly enemy of all the Emperors, the most impious, the most
ignominious, and a tyrant that was abhorred before the face of God. And what
monument so ever of letters or proclamations stood throughout every city to
his or his childrens honor, they were partly worn and thrown from aloft unto
the pauement, partly so ouerlayd and darkened with so black a color, that
they became unprofitable for public sight. Likewise the pictures, as many as
were erected to his honor, being thrown down after the same sort, and
defaced, were set forth to the laughter and derision of such as would use
them The executors of tyranny are plagued.
both ignominiously and contempteously. Afterward all the ensigns also of
others that were enemies to piety and christian religion were taken down, all
the persecutors as many as favored Maximinus were executed, specially such as
by him were honored in the head cities, and to the end they might flatter
him, hated more deadly our doctrine and religion, of which sort of people
Peucetius a wicked magistrate. Culcianus a wicked magistrate. Theotecnus
Peucetius was one, whom before all other he esteemed for most honorable, most
reverend, and of all his friends best beloved, twice, and the third time
Consul, and had appointed him the chief governor in all his affairs: next
was Culcianus enjoying the authority of every degree and office, who also
having shed throughout Egypt the blood of an infinite number of
Christians, was of great fame: besides others not a few through whom chiefly
the tyranny of Maximinus prevailed and took increase. Moreover also bengeance
lyghted upon Theotecnus, not forgetful of the things he had committed against
the Christians, who because of the image and idol he erected Inchaunters and
idolatrer^ punished.
at Antioch became famous, and was also made president by Maximinus. Licinnius
after his coming to Antioche, to the end he might find out the inchaunters
which had foully deceived him he punished with torments the prophets and
priests of the late erected image, and made inquisition in what sort they
cloked y^ deceate. When as they driven by torment could not conceal ye truth,
they reveled the whole secretie to be a deceit wrought by the subtletie of
Theotecnus. Wherefore Maximinus children, and kinsmen, received their deserts.
he rewarded all with punishment dew for their desert, and first of all
Theotecnus him self, afterward the other co^panio^s of inchauntments when he
had first diversely tormented the^, he executed to death. After all these the
next turn lyghted upon the children of Maximinus, whom he had made companions
of the imperial honor, of the pictures and public ensigns. Last of all the
kinsmen of the tyrant, who before time by their insolency oppressed all men,
together with the aforesaid tyrant now suffered punishment with utter shame.
For they received not the discipline, they knew not neither understood they
the admonition which speaks in holy scripture: Putt Psalm. 146.
not your trust in princes, nor in any child of man, for there is no help in
them. When the breath of man goes forth he shall return again to his earth,
in that day all his thoughts and devises shall perish. The impious persons
after this sort being bereaved of their lives, the empire stood Co^stantinus
and Licinnius Emperors.
very stable void of all envy unto Co^stantinus and Licinnius alone. These
men (when as before all things they had wiped out of this life the enemies of
God) joyfully possessinge benefits and graces from above, showed forth the
study of virtue and of godliness, piety and thankfulness of mind toward God,
by a constitution published in the behalf of the Christians.

The end of the nynth book.
THE TENTH BOOK OF THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORYE OF EVSEBIVS PAMPHILVS BISHOP
OF CAESAREA IN PALAESTINA.
CAP. I.
The thankefulnes of the Christians for the peace granted unto them from above
after the great storm of persecution.

MAny and infinite thanks be given in all things unto God almighty and king
of He beg^neth with thanks unto God for the peace after persecution.
all kings, and to Jesus Christ the savior and redemer of our souls, through
whom we wish unto us continewally the preservation of such things as
concern peace, both from outward vexations, as also firm and immouable
inwardly in our minds. Seeing that hitherto we were furthered by thy prayers,
and now having finished nine books of the ecclesiastical history, we annexe
the tenth and dedicate it unto thee, most holy Paulinus, sealinge and shuttinge
up the whole work with the publishinge abroad of thy praise. Justly therefore
we place here in a perfect number the absolute and solemn sermon gratulatorie
of ye repayring of the churches, obeying no doubt herein the holy ghost
commanding Psalm. 98.
after this sort: Singe unto the Lord a nevve song, because he has done
marvelous things. with his own right hand and with his holy arm has he
gotten him self the victory. The Lord has showed his salvation: in the sight
of the heathen has he openly declared his ryghteousnes. Insomuch that these
words of ye Prophet require a new song, of duty then we must have a song in
our mouth, because that after vglesome and dark spectacles, after thunderinge
and terrible threats, we have been thought worthy now to see such things,
and to celebrate such solemnities, such as I say before us many just men and
Martyrs of God have desired to see upon earth and have not seen, to hear and
have not heard. But they passinge very speedely, have possessed far more
myghtie joys, being taken away into the heavens them selves unto the
celestial Paradise and to divine dayntyes: but we confessinge these present
things to be greater then we deserved, do honor above measure the grace of
Gods great goodness. We honor him justly, reuerencinge the same with all the
might of our minds, and testiflyng truly according unto the prophecies
written where it is said: Come and see the works of Psalm. 46.
the Lord, what marvelous things he has done upon earth, he makes the
vvarres to cease unto the ends of the world. He breaks the bow,
bruyseth their armor, and burns their chariots with fire. Reioycinge
therefore together in this sort because of these things which in us
manifestly are fufilled, we will join this book to the other former
treatyses. For the whole rabble of the hateful persons and enemies to God was
wyped away, and so suddenly taken out of the sight of men, that again the
word of God was fulfilled, saying: I savve the wicked lyfred up and exaulted
like the ceders of Libanus, and I passed by and behold Psalm. 37.
he was not, I sought his place and it could not be found. This day being
lyghtsome and clear, cast over with no dark clouds, has shyned to all the
churches of Christ throughout the world, with the son beams of celestial
bryghtnesse. Neither did any foreyner envy at our joyful assemblyes, or at
the enioyinge of the same gracious benefits, but all mortal men being
delivered from tyrannical oppression, had liberty to communicate with us in
the things given us from above.

CAP. II.
The heathens are gladd of the Christians success, the churches are repaired,
and the Emperors show themselves liberal and bountiful.

(...) heathen being delivered and(...) the only true (...) was y^ defender of
the god^ joy, which wi^ gladness inspired all, seeing the places a little before
(...) (...) (...) (...) of the tyrants* to be raised up as it were out of a
long and deadly calamity, and the (...) (...) from the foundations to be
erect^^ The temples builded again.
(...) an vn^^eas^^able height* and to receive greater (...) then ever they
enjoyed before their destruction. Moreover the most puysant Emperors by their
often (...) published in the behalf of the Christians, have (...) and enlarged
the (...) granted ^e by the ^^ee ^o^^tifulnes of God, unto the Bishops also
^^ere came favorable letters from the Emeprour, dignities were bestowed, (...)
of money and presents were sent them, the ^oppy of which letters translated out
of the Romayne into the greek tongue, it shall not be amiss in his proper
place to annexe it unto this present history as unto a certain pillar, to the
end they may be committed to the memory of all posterity to come.

CAP. III.
Of the dedication of the temples then every where celebrated, and their
festival orations.

THen the wished and desired sight was seen of us, to we^e the celebrating of
the dedications, Consecrations and the dedications of temples.
throughout the cities, and consecrations of oratories lately builded: the
meeting of Bishops: the coming together of them which being far severed
asunder, (...) in forreyne contreyes: the love of nation toward nation: the
knitting together of the members of Christ, closing into one harmony. so that
according unto the foreshewing of the Prophet signifying mystically before, the
thing which should come: bone was joined to bone* joint to joint, and what so
ever Ezech. 37. An uniform consent of the Christians.
other thing the saying of the Prophet though darkly, yet truly foretold us.
One power of the divine spirit wrought in all the members: all had one mind,
and the same readiness of faith: the celebration of the divinity among all
was one: Moreover the orderly service of such as governed the Churches and
public ministration of the holy things appointed of them for the purpose:
comely rites and ceremonies of the Churches were celebrated, ^^^e, with
psalmodies and other songs of praise delivered us from above, there, with
divine and mystical ministration as the secret pledges of the Lords passion
were solemnized, and withal men and women of every age, with all might that in
them lay, with cheerful mind and will, in prayer and thankesgeuing, honored
God the author of all goodness. to be short, the governors of the Churches as
many as were present with solemn Sermons every one as much as in him lay, set
forth and extolled the solemn meeting and assemblies. There went up into the
pulpitt one among all the rest, counted very sage, expert in the words of God,
well exercised in preaching, who chose a parcel of Scripture, discoursed at
large as it were in the gathering together of the members and uniting of the
congregations, whom many learned clerks and famous Bishops heard with quiet
and atte^ti^^ ear. This preacher therefore in the presence of Paulinus a
Bishop that passed all other for rare and singular gifts: by whose means and
procurement also the famous temple of Tyrus in Phoenicia was builded with most
gorgeous furniture uttered this Sermon in such sort as follows.

CAP. IIII.
A solemn Sermon in praise of the buylding of the Churches, but expressly
directed unto Paulinus Bishop of Tyrus.

OYe friends and Priests of the most high God, which are bewtified with holy
robes and the heavenly crown of glory: with the sacred ointment and priestly
atyre of the holy ghost: and thou the ornament of the new holy temple of God,
which art honored of God him self He prayseth Paulinus the Bishop.
with wisdom of ancient years, yet have brought to pass noble deeds and
enterprises with fresh and flourishing virtue, to whom God him self
comprehending the whole world has granted this great honor, that thou
should build and repairs on earth this house, unto Christ the only begotten
and his first begotten word, unto his holy and noble spouse whom one may very
well call either Beseleel. Solomon. Zor^babel.
a new Beseleel, chief builder of Gods tabernacle, or Solomon king of a new and
more mighty Jerusalem, or else a new Zor^babel: which have purchaced far
greater glory unto the temple of God then it had before: and O you the
sucklinges of the holy stock of Christ, the house of good literature, the
school of wisdom, the honest and godly audienc^ of pietye: It was lawefull
for us of old to laud God with hymns and songs, which have he^^^^ out of
holy Scripture the mainelous wonders of God, and the miraculous bountifulnes of
the Lord showed toward mankind being to this end instructed that we should
say* O God we have heard with our ears, our fathers Psalm. 44.
have declared unto us the works thou have wrought in their days of old:
but now have we learned it not by hearing, neither by reheatsall and rumor of
the high arm, and heavenly hand of our God and high King, but by deeds, and
(as I may so say) with the eyes them selves, beholding the things of old to
be certain and true, we may sing an mother hynme of victory and to good
purpose shoute and say: like as we have heard so have we seen, in the
city of the Lord of hosts, Psalm. 48.
in the city of our God* I mean in an other city, then this lately builded
and exected unto God, which is the Church of the living God, the pillar and
ground of all truth, of the which 1. Timoth. 3.
a certain other testimony of holy Scripture thus happily reports: Glorious
things are spoken Psalm. 87.
of thee, o thou city of God. In so much as then we are gathered by the
benefitt of Almighty God through the grace of the only begotten unto this
Church, let every one of us here presently assembled together praise and laud
God, and with all cry and say: I was glad when they Psalm. 122. Psalm. 26.
said unto me we will go up into the house of the Lord. and again, Lord I
have loved the bevvty of thy house, and the place where thine honor
dwells. And not only he which sits but also altogether, with one spirit
and with one mind honoring the Lord, let us then singe and say: great is
the Lord and worthy to be praised, in the city of our God, even upon his
holy Psalm. 48.
hill. for he truly is great and his house great, high wide and bewetifull
in comparison of the sons of men. great is the Lord which alone does
vvonderfull things, great is the Psalm. 113.
Lord doing great things, unsearchable things, glorious and excellent
things whereof there is no number great changing moments and times, removing
and ordayning things, raising the poor out of the dust, and lifting the needy
out of the mire, he has deposed the mighty from their seats, and exalted the
meek out of the earth, he has filled the hungry with good things, Luc. 1.
and has broken the arms of the proud. thus has he confirmed the memory of
the things rehearsed of old not only to the faithful, but also unto the
Infidels: it is the Lord of all, the maker of the whole world, the Almighty,
the most excellent, the one and the only God, which does wonderful and
great things, unto whom we obediently do singe a new song even unto him
which alone does marvelous things, because his mercy endures for ever:
which smote Psalm. 106. Psalm. 107. Psalm. 136. Psalm. 105.
great Kings and slew mighty Kings, because his mercy endures for ever:
because that when we were brought low the Lord was mindful of us, and
delivered us from our enemies. with these praises let us not cease to celebrate
God the universal father, but also the second person, author of all goodness
exhibited unto us, the bringer of the knowledge of God, the teacher of true
pietye, the rooter out of the wicked, the dispatcher of all tyrants, the
governor of our whole life, let us (whose case was lamentable) honor him
sounding continewally with mouth and mind, I mean our Savior Jesus. for he
alone the only most excellent son of the most excellent father, according
unto the will of his father, wherewith he loved man, most willingly like a
passing cunning Physician for the health of the pacients, took upon him our
nature which lay as it were in a bottomless pit of perdicion, the beholding
of whom in this case was very grievous, and the handling unpleasant: and of
the miseries of others he heaped unto him self great miseryes, he saved not
only such as were sick with fore botches and festered wounds: but also such
as lay among the dead, he him self by him self has delivered us from the
most dark dungeons of death. there was not so much power given to any other
in heaven which could without offense and undoubtedly minister the salvation
of so many castwayes, but he alone took upon Esaias 53.
him our perdicion, subject to many grievous passions, he alone took upon him
our troubles, he alone took upon him the punishments due for ourimpietye, and
he saves us whom he found not only half dead, but to be abhorted, now
stinking in the graves and sepulchers them selves, heretofore and presently
also with the carfulness of his good will, beyond all other men's expectation,
yea and ours to: and delivers unto us the great abundance of his fatherly
goodness being our quickner, our day star, our great Physician, our King and
Lord the Christ of God. When all man kind was then ouershadowed, with the
night all cloudy and palpable darkness, with the wilines of seducing devils,
and the working of spirits hateful to God, he alone appearing unto us, loosed
with the sun beams of his heavenly light the knobbye fetters of our sins:
but now after that for so great (...) and ^lnes, spyte being grieved Satan
the enemy of makinde and worker of all mischief.
with all goodness, and the devil himself busily going about all ^^^ele, only
not b^^sting for grie^e, has raised eruell war against us with all ^ly
(...), and fi^s^^ after the manner of a ma^d dogg^, which gna^^th with his
^^^^h^ the st^^es flo^^ (...) him, and p^^reth out the rage of reuengem^^t upon
the dar^s which have no life: he set upon the (...) o^^s of the oratoryes and
the senseless buylding of the houses with s^^adge woodnes, to the end he
might bring in as he s^pposed a waste desert of Churches: agayns he sent out
cruel (...) and and poysored speeches pattly by the threats of wicked tyrants,
and partly by the decrees of prophant Princes: moreover so^^ing out his death
he has i^^^^ted with his ^e^^mous and ^^^dly poys^n the souls which he caught
in his snare, and slew them with the dai^^able sacrifires of dead images, and
raised against us all sorts of b^astes coueted with m^^s skin^e and all kind^
of (...): again the Christ aideth the comfortless.
Angel of great counsel, the great g^au^d^^ap^ayne of God, after sufficient
(...) the which the most valiant soldiers of his kingdom endured thoroughly
with ^ible patience and sufferance, had eftsoon showed him self, he destroyed
the hurtful and (...) things and brought all to naught, as if they never had
be^e named, but unto him self he made all acceptable and peculier, above all
glory, not only among all men, but among the heavenly powers them selves, the
sun, the moon, the stars, all heaven and earth together. so that now
which otherwise never any where came to pass, the most excellent Emperors,
considering the honor they received of him, have detested the sight of dead
images and trodden underfoot the unlawful service of devils: they have set
at naught the seducing of old time received of the Elders: they have known
one only God, the common benefactor of all: they of them selves consessed
Christ the son of God supreme Kings of all: upon pillars they have entitled
him a Savior: for everlasting memory they fastened his virtues and victories
against the wicked in the mids of the city which had dominion upon earth
unto the imperial arms, that Jesus Christ our Savior alone of all the men
from the beginning of the world, yea of the head Princes of the whole world,
was honored not as a common King, treated of men, but adored as the natural
son of the ^^^uersall God and God himself. and not without just cause. What
Prince of all them that ever were, brought so much power, that by the
appeliation of his name he should fill the ears and mouths of all mortal
men throughout the whole world? What King has ratified so godly and so wise
laws decreed by him that they might sufficiently and durable he read to the
hearing of all men from the ends of the earth to the bounds of the whole
world? Who has wyped away the barbarous and sauadge manners of the Gentiles
with his loving and tractable laws? who ever since the beginning of the whole
world, being impugned of all men has showed power passing the reach and
strength of man, so that he seemed daily to florishe and through out all his
whole life to wax young? who has ordained and planted a nation not heard of
from the first beginning, not secret in some corner of the earth, but
throughout the whole compass under heaven? Who has so fenced his soldiers
with the bright armor of godliness that they were found in their fighting
against their adversaries of courage harder then the Adamant stone? What King
after his desease so governs, and warreth, and trecteth signs of victories
against the enemies, and fills every place, coast and country as will of the
Grecians as Barbarians with his princely palaces and consecrated temples? as
these ornaments and dedicated ^ewells The ornaments of the temple, and the
meaning thereof. Psalm. 33. Psalm. 148.
of this temple are gorgeous, which being royal and notable in deed, are
worthy of wondering and admiration and as it were certain and manifest tokens
of our Savior (for now also: he spoke the word and they were done, he
commanded and they were created, for who will with stand the beckning of the
word of God the supreme King and governor of all) which require special rest
and convenient leisure that they may diligently he considered and expounded,
whereof also proportionally the readiness of the workmen is to be weyed, in
presence of him whom we celebrate with divine praises, which considers the
spiritual temple of us all, and beholds the house builded with lively and
growing stones which being soundly and securely laid upon the fundation of the
Apostles and Prophets has Jesus Christ him self to the corner stone, whom
the wicked head builders of mischief have rejected not only of that building
which now is ancient and has no longer contine wance: but also of that
presently consisting of many men. but the father has alloweded him for head
of the corner of our common Church, both then and now also. Therefore this
lively Church of the living God builded of our selves, I doc call that chief
vestrye serving for the word of God, whose inward chauncells not seen of
many, holy in deed and most holy places, who by beholding of them ever durst
presume to explicate? yea who could behold the inner parts of the hallowed po^
but the only great high Priest of all to whom only it is lawefull to
search the secrets of every reasonable soul? per adventure it may be
possible for some one or other of his equals to enjoy the second place next
after him to we^e, for the President and Captain of this warrefare, whom the
chief and great high Priest him self has or^^ayned a shepeherd of this
your holy flock, enjoying the second honor of these holy things, taking in
charge your people by lot and appointment of the father as his servant and
interpreter, like a new Aaron or Melchisedech likened unto the son of God,
remaining and preferued by him for ever by the prayers in common of you all
unto this man therefore only be it lawefull next after the chief and greatest
high Priest to see and to behold; if not the chief things, at least wise
the second closset of the inner contemplation of your souls, when he has
exactly sifted every one of you by experience and proliritye of time, and when
as with his own industrye and care he has enstructed all you of the world,
in honestye and the doctrine which is according unto godliness, and has been
made mighty, above all others, to set forth with works agreeable to his
calling that doctrine, which by aid of the divine power he has gotten. the
chief therefore and our great high Priest, the things which he John. 5.
sees the father do, the same likewise (says he) does the son: but this
man secondarily, even him self, beholding with the clear eyes of the mind
the first as a teacher, whatsoever things he saw him do, using as it were
the first framed paternes, the portracture of them as much as lay in him to
the like resemblance, as a workman he wrought the things which you see with
your eyes, differing not a ^ote from that Beseleel, whom God him self endued
with Beselc cl.
the spirit of wisdom and understanding, and other industrye and skylfull
knowledge, whom he called and ordained the workman of the buylding of the
temple by forms of the celestial types. after this sort this man, garnishing
and bewtifying whole Christ, the word, the wisdom and light in his mind, it
may not be told with what courage of mind, with what plenteous and insatiable
power of the mind, and with what great liberalitye of you all and earnestly
contending with largeness of gifts, lest by any m^aues you should slide away
from his purpose: he has ordained this most renowned and most excellent
temple of the high God, as a visible pattern agreeable with nature, resembling
y^ better invisible temple. This quyre, worthy The clensing of the polluted
temple.
to be spoken of, though first of all it were covered through the wiles of the
adversaries with the sincke of all filthiness, he despised not, neither yealded
unto the cruel spyte of them which were authors of that mischief, for if his
pleasure had been to have passed unto some other place, (a thousand others had
been easily sought in this city) he had found great ease of his labor, and
had been ridd of so much business. but first of all he styrred up him self to
this work, next all the whole people being settled with readiness, and made
of all as it were one will, first he took this labor in hand: to the end
that he might specially restore her that was destroyed by the enemy, which
before time had endured great trauells, and before our time the same
persecution which we suffered, I mean the Church like a mother deprived of
her children, he thought good that she altogether with us should enjoy the
magnificency of our gracious God. for as much as the great shepeherd has
voutchsafed to gather into one fold his children, the beasts and wolves
driven away, and every sort of cruel and sauadge creatures put to flight, the
Psalm.
jaws of the Lions he has broken, as the holy Scripture does testify, he
has also most justly restored again the very fold of his flock, that he
might still the enemy and auenger, and resist Psalm. 8.
the rebellious enterprises of the wicked against God. and now they are not
hated of God, no more were they then. but after that in short space they
molested, and were also molested them selves, they suffered punishment due for
their desert, and were utterly destroyed them selves, their friends and
families, so that the prophecyes written of old in holy Scripture they have in
very deed confirmed, where among other things the holy Scripture truly
pronounces these things of them: the wicked have drawn their svvord, bended
their bovv that they may shoot Psalm. 37.
at the poor and needy, and sleye the pure of heart. their svvorde shall
pearce their own heart, and their bow shall be broken. and again: the
remembrance of them is perished with a sound, and their name have thou wiped
away for ever and ever. and when they were Psalm. 9. Psalm. 18.
in misery they cried, but there was none to deliver them. unto the Lord, and
he heard them not. they stumbled and fell, but we rose and stand up. and this
that was foretold of them (Lord in thy city thou shall bring their likeness
to naught.) is now in all men's sight found true. Psalm. 73.
but they after the manner of the giauntes, goinge about to war with God,
purchased unto them selves such an end as berewed them of their lives and but
she that was desolate and bewailed among men, obtained such an end of her
patience in God, as is now to be seen, that according unto the prophecye of
Esaias it may be tried unto her: Rejoice thou dry desert, let the wilderness
Esaias. 35.
be glad and florishe like the ^^^y, the vvast places shall bring forth and
rejoice. You loose hands and dissolute knees ye shall be strengthened.
Comfort your selves, you faint hearted, you shall be strenthened fear not.
Behoulde our God has restored judgment and will requite. He will come and
save you. For says he the waters shall flow in the deserte and the valleys
in a thyrsty land, and the dry land shall beturned into marishe, and the
fountaynes of waters into dry land. And these things of old time foretold
by words were graffed in holy Scripture, but the things now brought to pass,
are not only delivered unto us by hearesay but by works themselves. This
desert destitute of water, this widow and desolate (whose gates with axes like
timber in the woods they have hewed down, For they have broken her in pieces
with axes and hammers: Whose books they have destroyed, And Psalm. 74.
burned vvih fiere the Sanctuary of God, for they have thrown to the ground
the tabernacle of his name: whose grapes they have gathered as many as passed
this way and thrown down her hedges, the which the vvilde bore out of the
wood has rooted up, and the vvilde beast of the field devoured) By the
wonderful works of Christ, presently where it pleased him is Psalm. 80.
Proverb. 3. Heb. 12.
become like the lily. For then by his commandment according unto the
providence of the father she was chasticed (Whom the Lord loves he
chasticeth, he scurgeth every child whom he receives) and after due
measure converted, she is commanded to rejoice from above and now florisheth
like the lily and breaths unto all me^ an holy sweet smelling savor. for
says he the water shall flow in the desert, they to wete which are holy, of
the sauinge fountain of newebyrth. And now that which a while agde was desert
is turned to marishe, and the wellspringe of the water of life issued out into
thyrstie land. And to say the truth, the hands before loose are
strengthened, these works also which we presently behold are great and
famous tokens of the wonderful power and handy work of God. Moreover the
knees of old withered and weakened, having recovered their strength and
wounded paces, do enter the right and high way of divine knowledge and hasten
unto the flock of the high sheepherde. But if their minds have been amazed
with the threats of sundry tyrants, neither has the word of salvation
contemned the cure of them, but healinge them notably, leads them unto
heavenly comfort, saying Comfort yourselues you faint hearted be strong fear
not. and because it behooved this wilderness wrought for God to enjoy these
benefits, this our new and passing Zorobabel, endued with that Esaias. 35.
readiness of mind he is of, to give ear, obeying the sayings of the prophets,
after that bitter captivity and abomination of desolation, despised not this
dead carcass, but before all things pacifying God the father with prayers and
supplications together with the consent of you all: and taking him for a
helper and fellow worker which alone quickens the dead, raised her being
fallen, after that he had purged and cured the mischiefs which were wrought:
and gave her a stole, not wherewith she was cladd of old but that which she
learned again of holy scripture which testifies thus: And the later glory of
this house shall pass the former. Wherefore enlarging this The wall of the
church.
quire with far greater rowme, he has fortified the outer compass of the
whole buylding with a wall, that it might be a most safe hedge of all the whole
work: next he has erected a great porch, reaching very high eastwardes unto
the sun beams, so that unto them which stand a far of The porch.
without the hallowed walls it yealdeth a clear show of the artificial work
contained within them, and with all turning, or entising the countenance of
foreyners toutching the faith unto the first entrance, so that none pass by,
which is not pricked in mind first with the remembrance of the former
desolation past, next with the sight of this wonderful work (unto such as
were hoped and wished for) a prick paraduenture to draw men and by the
beholding thereof to entice me^ to A space between the Sanctuary the porche.
enter in: them also who already are entered within the gates he suffers not
with foul and unwashed feet to draw nigh unto the inner parts of the most
holy places. For making a separation with great distance between the temple it
self and the first entrance he has bewtified this place on every side with
four ouerthwarte porches, and after the form of a quadrangle he compassed
them about one every side with high pillars, the distance whereof he has
shut with latice like netts, made of wood and measured after the breadeth of
the place, the open middle he left free that the gorgeous sky might be seen,
and that it might yield the aere tempered with the bright beams of the sun.
Hither has he referred pleadges of holy purgations, to meet welsprings lying
over against the temple which with great plenty of water grant license of
purifying unto Welspringes cocks or cund^^^s.
such as enter into the holy cloysteres. The first exercise for such as enter
yeldeth unto every one bewty and brightness, to were the washing of their hands
and clensing of their body, but unto the^ that desire the knowledge of the
chief principles of our religion a fi^^e mansion place to continewe. Moreover
when he had wonderfully garnished the sight of these he proceeded on and made
the entraunces of the temple wide open, as yet with more artificial porches
wrought within side. And again he placed three gates of the one side subject
to the sun beams, the which he made to excel, Gates.
with the midd distance of both sids, by reason of the biggnesse and breadth
thereof, the which also he notably set forth with bows of brass, linked with
iron and sundry kinds of carved work, and substituted them unto it as gardinge
soldiers unto a queen. After this manner he added the same number of porches
unto the galeryes on every side of the whole temple, and over the^ from above
Porches. Windows.
he inverted sundry falls of greater lights unto the whole house and the
setting out or front of the^ he has diversely wrought over, with carved
timber. But the princely palace he has fortified with more precious and more
gorgeous stuff, using for this more ple^teous liberality of expe^ces. It
seems unto me herein a thing superflous if y^ I would describe the length and
breadth of this house, these gorgeous ornaments, the unspeakable greatness, y^
glistering show of the work, the height reaching unto y^ heavens, and if that
I would extol with speech the precious cedre trees of Libanus hanging over,
the which holy Scripture have not passed over with silence, saying: The trees
of the Lord will rejoice, and the cedres of Libanus which the Lord has
planted. To what end shall I entreat Psalm. 104.
more curiously of the most wise and chief devised disposition of the
building, and again of the excellent ornature of every several part, when as
the testimony of the eyes them selves passes and excludes that knowledge which
pearceth the ear. But this man having finished the temple and the most high
seats for the presidents honor, again having placed the vnderseates in a
passing good order, and last of all the most holy place, the alter being set
in the midst: again he so compassed these things with wooden rayles wrought
up to the top with artificial caruynge, that many might not come therein,
yeldinge a wonderful bewty to the beholders. Nether The floor or pauement
has he neglige^tly strawed the pauement. This he gorgeously bedecked with
marble stone and now consequently he took in hand the utter parts of the
temple, he builded seats and goodly chapels one either side very artificially
and joined the^ to the temples side, he beat out windows and coopled them to
the doors of the middle temple, the which things also our Solomon an earnest
maintainer of peace, and builder of this temple has brought to pass, for such
as yet want the sacrifice and sprinklings done by water and the holy ghost. So
that the prophecy above mentioned, consist no longer in words but is
accomplished in deed it self. For as yet, as it is most true, The later
glory of this house passes the former. For it behooved and most meet it was,
In so much that the Lord had been in agony and had once embraced death for
her, and after his passion, the foul body (which for her sake he putt on)
being translated unto brightness and glory, and the flesh it self after
dissolution, ledd from corruption to incorruption: that she in like manner
should enjoy the gracious goodness of our Savior. Although she had promises
of the Lord himself of far more excellent gifts, and desires incessantly to
obtain a greater glory of new birth at the resurrection of the incorruptible
body, together with the glisteringe brightness of the Angelical quire above in
the heavens and palaces of God, with Jesus Christ him self the chief
benefactor and Savior in the world to come: yet in the mean space, in this
present life, she which of old was a widow and solitary now adorned by the
grace of God with these flowers and become in deed like the lily, according
unto the saying of y^ prophet she has put on her weddinge robe and is
compassed about with a crown of bewty and as it were instructed by Esaias to
dance for joy. let us hear of her how she offreth with reverence,
thanksgeuing unto God the king with the voice of praise when she says: Let my
soul rejoice in the Lord. For he has putt upon me the garment of salvation,
and covered Esaias. 61. The church ^ioy^eth.
me with the mantell of righteousness. He has bedecked me like a brydgrom
with a crown and like a bryd with ornaments: for eue^ as the earth
multiplieth her flovvrs and like as the gardene shoots forth her seeds, so
has God caused righteousness and praises to florishe before all the heathen.
With such sayings does she triumph, but hear with what words, the brydgrome,
the celestial word, Jesus Christ himself does answer her, the Lord himself
saying: Fear not because Esaias. 54.
thou vvast confounded, neither be thou ashamed because thou have been set at
naught. The Lord has not called thee as a woman forsaken and faint hearted,
neither as a woman hated from her youth up, says thy God. A little while have
I forsaken thee, and in great mercyes will I pity thee: when I was a little
while angry I turned my face from thee but in great mercies will I pardon thee
says the Lord thy redemer. Awake, awake, thou that from the hand of the Lord
have Esaias. 51.
drunk the cupp of his wrath. Thou have drunk of, and emptied clean the cupp
of destruction, the cupp of my wrath. There was not of all thy sons whom
thou have begotten not one left to comfort thee, not one which might hold
thee up with the hand behold I have taken the cupp of destruction out of thy
hand, even the cupp of my wrath and henceforth see thou drink of it no more
and I will putt it into their hand which wrongfully troubled thee and which
have humbled thee to the dust. Awake, awake* putt on thy strength, put on thy
glory. Shake from thee the dust Esaias. 52. Esaias. 49.
arise and sit up* pluck out thy neck from the collar* lift up thine eyes
and look about thee and see thy sons gathered about thee. Behold they are
gathered together and come unto thee. As truly as I live says the Lord, thou
shall put them all upon thee as an apparel, and gird them unto thee as a bride
does her jewels* as for thy land that has layen desolate waste and
destroyed: it shall be frequented of thine inhabitors and they which have
deuored thee shall be far of. For the sons which thou have lost shall say in
thine ears: this place is narrovve for me, provide a place where I may dvvell,
and thou vvilt say in thine heart: who has begotten me these? I was barre^
and a widow, but who has nurished these for me? I was left alone, but
whence come these unto me? These things has Esaias prophesied* these things of
old were graffed in holy Scripture concerning us and requisite it was that
somwhere we should behold y^ truth thereof showed in works themselves.
Wherefore because the bridgrome, the word of God has thus spoken unto the
spouse his most holy church, very well has this chief solemnizer of the
mariadge raised and restored this desert lying after the manner of a dead
carcass, destitute and void of all hope of man, by the common prayers of you
all and the true hands stretched forth at the commandment of the universal
king and by showing of the power of Jesus Christ: and being raised ordained her
such a one as he had learned by the description of holy scripture. This miracle
then passes and is above measure to be wondered at, of them specially which
only make the show of outward things. The chief typs and foreshewes
spiritual of these do excede all marvelous and miraculous things, y^
intellectual and theological patterns, to wete the renewing and repayring of
the divine and reasonable building in the souls, y^ which y^ son of God
according unto y^ likeness which he made of him self, made it in all things like
unto God, to wete an incorruptible nature, an incorporeall a rational, severed
from all earthly substance and a self spiritual essence* which at the
beginning ordained y^ it should be of that which was not and made unto him
self and to y^ father, an holy spouse and a most sacred temple which he
shows affirming manifestly when he says: I will dvvell in them and walk
among the^. I will be their God and 2. Corinthians. 6.
they shall be me people. And in deed the mind of man was perfect and purged and
so prepared from the beginning, that it might bewtifie the heavenly word and
fructify in it self: but it became envious and by the motion of the malicious
deuell, subject of his own accord to passions and set on malice that it was
forsaken of God, and destitute of his help, unarmed, set forth and left to
the snars of them which of old have spited and envied at his salvation,
overthrown by the terrors and sleyghtes of the ^^uisible and spiritual
enemies: has fallen with such a fall as may not be recovered, so that not
one virtuous stone cleaued to an other in it, but lay all prostrate upon the
earth and dead, be re^te of the natural understanding of God. And being
fallen which was made after the likeness of God, no wild bore out of the wood as
is visible among us, rooted it up: but some pernicious deuell and spiritual
wild beast which have set it a fire with their passions as with the firye
darts of their malice: burned with fire the true Sanctuary of God: and thrown
to the earth the dwelling place of his name and trodde^ it, thus miserably
lying ouercast with a great heap of earth for ever to despair of salvation.
But the holy word of salvation, careful hereof, obeing the bountifullnes of
his most gracious father, revenged him of the sinners with punishmente due for
their desert. First of all then by taking away the lives of the most impious
and pernicious of all, the most grievous and hated tyrauntes of God, he purged
the whole world with the industry of the most godly princes: next he brought
unto the open face of the world; men well known of him dedicated and
consecrated unto him of old in godly life and protected by him, though in
secret (the troublesome times then drawing nigh) them again has he honored
sufficiently with plenteousnes of his spirit, and by the means of these has
he wiped and cleansed the souls a little before infected, oppressed with all
kind of filthe, and heaps of impious decrees, with reprehensiue leasons of
Discipline as it were with digginge and deluinge instruments, as spades, and
the company of your minds garnished and made glorious he has delivered unto
this most wise captain and beloved God: who otherwise preuailinge in
judgment and industry of invention knowing and discerning the disposition of
the souls committed to his charge, beginning as I may say from the first day to
build has not yet unto this day rested, one while framinge in you all
glistering gold, an other while, tried, and purified silver and precious
stones, to the end he may accomplish a fresh, in you by works themselves the
sarred and mystical prophecy which is thus read: Behold I will make thy
vvalls of precious stone and thy fundations of Saphires, thy bulwarks Esaias. 54.
of Jasper thy gates of Crystal and thy borders of chosen stones. Thy children
shall be taught of God. I will give all thy children plenteousnes of peace and
in righteousness shall thou be grounded. Therefore building in righteousness he
has proportionably severed y^ powers of the whole people, by some, comprising
the only outward wall, he has fortified the faith that is void of error. But
this people being many and great in number is not fit to resemble the buylding
of a more excellent work. Unto some he committed the entrances of the house,
giving them in charge to watch the doors and to guide such as enter in, who
not unworthily are showed to be the porches of the temple, Some he has
firmly set about the inner court with chief pillars after the manner of a
quadra^gle and to the chief bulwarks he has referred the Scripture of the
four Evangelists. Again some he has coupled with fortresses one either side
about the princely palace, which as yet are nouices in the faith they both
increase and prosper, yet set farther of from the inward holy co^templation of
the faithful. Of these has he taken the incorrupt souls, purified with the
divine fountain after the manner of gold, and others has he set up with
pillars, far mightier then those outward, out of the inner wrytings of
mystical. Scripture, and set them forth lively to minister light. The
glorious doctrine of the high and supreme king, that is, of the one and only
God, has adorned the whole temple, with one porche and the same very notable.
He has atributed the second bewtifull brightness unto the power of Christ, and
to the power of the holy ghost, and every where unto the power of the Father,
as for y^ rest he has expressed the excellency of every truth, both
plentiful and manifold throughout the whole house, every way forth and one
every side he has builded a great a princely and a noble house full of light
throughout, with lively, seasoned, sure, and chosen stones of the souls. He
has bewtified the inner and utter parts with the most flourishing atyre of
continency and temperance, in so much as they consist not only of soul and
mind but also of body. There are also in this temple thrones and infinite under
seats and receptacles in all those souls, wherein the graces of the holy
Ghost have their abode, such as of old appeared unto them which had their
conversation with the holy Apostles, of whom also cloven tongues were seen as
if they had been fire, and rested upon each one of them* but whole Christ him
Act. 2.
self has fastened his seat in him which governs all, in others
secondarily next after him placed, rateably as every ones capacity can
comprise the diuisio^s of the power of Christ and his holy spirit. The under
seats are both Angels and souls of certain men, even of such as are
committed unto every on for institution and custodies sake. The noble, the
great and only altar, what other thing is it than the most holy place and y^
sincerity of the priests soul which is common to all, at y^ right hand of
which altar stands the great high priest of all, Jesus himself the only
begotten son of God, which directs unto the father of heaven and the
universal God, that sweet smellinge perfume, the unbloody, and spiritual
sacrifices of prayers, received of all with swift eyes and stretched out arms,
and first of all he himself with adoration, and alone exhibiteth due honor unto
the father and next prays, that he will be unto us all pacified and gentle,
firmly and for ever? This great temple, which is in the whole world under
the sun, the great workman of al* eue^ the word of God has ordained: and
again he has finished upon earth this spiritual likeness of them which clime
over the same circular form of the heavens that the father, might be honored
and worshipped through him of every creature and reasonable things on this
earth: again he has made the supercelestial host and the shows of these
things there to be seen: to be short that Jerusalem which they call new, and
Sion the celestial mount and supernatural city of the living God, in the
which infinite solemn troops of Angels and the church of the first begotten
which are written in heaven, do honor with secret and unsearchable praises, our
maker and the g^ll prince of all whom no mortal man can worthily set forth.
For the eye has not seen and the ear has not heard, neither has the
heart of man conceived the things which God prepared 1. Corinthians. 2.
for them that love him, Whereof we now partly being thought worthy, both
men, women, and children, all together as well small as great, with one spirit
and with one soul, let us not cease with thankesgeuinge, to celebrate the
author of so great benefits bestowed upon us* Which has mercy on all our
sins, and cures all our maladyes, which has redeemed our life from
destruction, he crovvneth us in love and mercies and fills our desire with
goodness. For he has not dealt with us acordinge unto our sins, neither
revvarded us according unto our iniquities. For look how far the east is
from the vveast, so far has he set our sins from us. And even as a father
tendreth his sons, so has the Lord tendered such as fear him. Ponderinge
therefore in our minds these things always hereafter, and settinge before
our mind the author and solemnizer of this present feast, of this joyful
and renowned day, yea day and night, every hour and as I may so say unto
the last gasp, embracinge and reuerenringe him with all the might of our
mind, and now risinge: let us humblye beseech him with the great voice of
our earnest desires, that he keep and defend us in his sheep foulde unto the
end, and that he always govern the peace, which he him self has
granted, never to be broken, always immovable, in Christ Jesus our Savior,
to whom be glory world without end.

Amen.
CAP. V.
The edicts of Constantinus and Licinnius toutching Christian religion and the
liberty thereof.

GO to now let us proceed on and annexe the coppies of the imperial edicts
of Constantinus and Licinnius translated out of the Romayne into the Greek
tongue as follows: VVeyinge The copy of the Imperial edicts translated out
of the latin into the Greek and out of the Greek into English.
with our selves that of old the liberty of religion was not to be hindered
and that every one had license after his mind and will: we have presently
commanded that every one shall handle the holy affairs at his pleasure, and
that the christians shall retain the faith of their former opinion and
wonted service. But in as much as manifold and differente opinions do rise
by reason of that edicte in the which such a license and liberty was
granted: we have thought good to lay down manifestly the things whereby
paraduenture diverse of them were restrained from such an observation. When
as with prosperous success I Consta^tinus emperor and I Licinnius emperor
came to Millayne, and enquired of the things which made for the commodity and
profit of the common wealth, these amongst many other things seemed
expedient, yea before all other we purposed to decree, wherein the reverence
and service due to God is comprised, that is to say, by the which we might
grant unto the christians altogether free choice to embrace what service and
ceremonies pleased the^ best, to the end the Godhead of the caelestiall
affairs now every where received might in some part be reconciled unto us
and to all our subjects, The^ according unto this our pleasure we have decreed
with sound and most right judgment, that license and liberty be henceforth
denied unto none at all, of choosing or following the christian service or
religion, but that this liberty be granted unto every one to addict his mind
unto that relligion, which he thinks fit for him, to the end that God may
grant unto us his wonted care and goodness. It was necessary for us to
signify unto thee this our pleasure, to the end the opinions contained in our
former letters sent unto thy wisdoms in the behalf of the Christians may
altogether be taken away, and that the opinions which seem very foolish and
far from our elemencies liking may be cut of, and now whosoever freely
and firmly is thus disposed to retain the christian religion, let him do it
without all molestation or greuance. These things have we determined to
signify fully unto thy carefullnes, that thou may know us to have granted
unto the christians free and absolute license to retain their own religion,
and because that we have granted absolute liberty to use their observance and
religion, if so please any it manifestly avails for the tra^quility of our
times that every one have liberty to choose and worship what God please him
best. This have we done lest ought of our doings seem prejudicial unto any
service or religion: and this besides other specially we thought good to
decree concerning the christians, that they enjoy their places where before
time they were accustomed to frequent, whereof in our former letters sent
unto thy vvisdome, there was an other order concerning the former time: that
if any had bought them either of our treasury or of any other, they should
without all delays or doubts restore them unto the christians, without
silver and without any other demand in recompense for it. And if any (having
obtained the same by gift graciously bestovved upon him by our goodness)
demand ought in their names for recompense let, them have recourse unto the
liuetenante and judge of the place that consideration be had of them by our
benignity, all which, without any delay thou shall by thine industry require,
to be granted unto the christian society. And because the said christians are
known, not only to have enjoyed the place of their meetings and assemblies
but also certain others peculier, not to every one privately, but belonginge
by right unto their proper persons: see that thou command all those according
unto the decree mentioned before, to be restored unto the christians, that is
to every their society and Synod, all delay set aparte, obseruinge in the
mean time the aforesaid manner, that if any as we have said restore the^
without receiving of reward they may assure themselves to suffer no damage
through our gracious bountifullnes. In all these aforesaid see thou employ
great industry in the behalf of the said christian society, to the end this
our decree may speedely take place and that in this behalf we provide by our
clemency for the common and public peace and tra^quility. by this means as
it is aforesaid the goodness of God toward us the which we have diversely tried
already, shall continewe at all times immovable. And to the end the drift of
this our constitution and goodness may be made manifest unto all men, it shall be
expedient that these our wrytings be every where proclaimed and brought unto
the knowledge of all our loving subjects lest that the constitution of this our
gracious goodness be hid from any man.

The copy of another Imperial constitution, by the which it is signified that
this gift concerns the Catholic Church.
We greet you well-beloved Anilinus. The order of our gracious goodness is this.
we will that Consta^tinus and Licinnius the Emperors unto Anilinus proconsul
of Aphrick.
the things which belong unto others by right be not only not hindered: but
also with speed restored. wherefore our pleasure is that as soon as thou have
received these letters, If any of the things which belong unto the catholic
church of the christians throughout every city or in any other place be
occupied by the citizens or by any others: thou see the same immediately
restored unto their churches. we have already heretofore decreed the same: that
the possessions belonging unto the churches before time should be restored to
their right. In as much as then thy wise dome perceaueth this to be the
manifest commandment of our constitution, provide that if other gardens or
houses or other possessions whatsoever have belonged unto the title of their
churches all the same be speedely restored unto them again, to the end we may
understand that thou have diligently obeyed this our commandment. Farewell
most honorable and our dear friend Anilinus.

The copy of the Emperors epistle by the which he summoned a Synod of
bishops to meet at Rome for the uniting and reconciling of the churches
Constantinus the emperor unto Meltiades bishop of Rome and Marcus sends
greeting. Consta^tinus the emperors unto Militiades bishop of Rome.
In so much as many such epistles are brought unto me from Anilinus liuetenant
of Aphrick, in the which it is said that Cecilianus bishop of Carthage is
reprehended in many things of diverse his collegs co^morant in Aphrick, and this
seems unto me very grievous, that there should be found in these provinces (the
which the providence of God has allotted peculiarly unto my discretion) a
great multitude of people prone unto the worse and disagreeing, and that among
bishops there should be variance: it seemed good unto me that Cecilianus
himself together with the ten bishops which seem to reprehende him and ten
others whom he thought necessary in the behalf of his cause, do sail unto
Rome: that there in presence of you all, together with Reticius, Maternus, and
Marcus, your collegs, whom therefore I commanded to hasten to Rome he may be
heard, to the end you may be enstructed what things agree best with the most
religious law. And that you may have full intelligence, toutching all these
things, I have sent underneath my letters unto your said collegs the copy of
the letters sent from Anilinus unto me. The which being read your fidelity may
prove how the aforsayd matter may exquisitly be ^ifted and ended after the rule
of equity. Your industry is not ignorant but that I attribute so much reverence
unto the catholic church, that I would have you suffer in any place no
schism or dissension at all. The divinity of the great God keep you (most
honorable) many years.


The copy of the emperors epistle by the which he commanded a second Synod
to be summoned for the remouinge of the dissension and debate risen between the
bishops.
Constantinus the emperor unto Chrestus bishop of Syracula sends greeting.
Heretofore Consta^tinus the emperor unto Chrestus bishop of Siracusa.
truly when as some wickedly and peruersly went about to sever themselves
from the religion of the sacred and celestial power, and from the catholic
opinion, I purposing that such contentions of theyrs should be cut of, have
written and ordained, that certain bishops should be cited from France and
again that they should be called from Aphricke which of the other part
conte^tiously and stiffly strive among themselves (the bishop of Rome also being
present) to the end whatsoever this dissension now raised seems to be, it
might in their presence with great industry and diligence be sifted out and
redressed. But in so much as, (as it commonly comes to pass) diverse of them,
being negligent, forgetful of their own salvation and the reverence due unto
the most holy opinion cease not as yet to dilate their enmytie, and being
altogether unwilling to consent unto the sentence already given, they
definitiuely affirm that few of the^ brought forth their sentences and
judgments and before they had narrowly sifted out all that was to be enquired,
to have stepped forth toe swiftly and to hastily toe give judgment. of all
these things, this came to pass that they whose part it was to maintain
brotherly unity and concord, shamefully yea wickedly disagre among the^ selves
and minister an occasion of moccage unto men whose minds are far alienated
from the most sacred religion. Wherefore I must be careful that, that which
should volu^tarily have been appeased after that judgment was given: now at
length in the presence of many be ended and finished. Because that we have
commanded diverse bishops out of sundry provinces to meet in the Calends of
August at the city of Orleance, we thought good to write unto thee that thou
(taking of the famous Latronianus liuetenant of Sicilia, an ordinary vvagan
and together with some two of them, of the second order, whom thou shall
think good to choose, moreover with three servants which shall be able to
serve thee in thy journey) hasten within the compass of the same days unto the
said place, that by the means of thy faithful industry, with the peaceable
and uniform wisdom of the rest which there shall meet, this dissension
which hitherto wickedly endured with a certain shameful winching and
repininge (all being heard which may be said of either parts varyinge among
them selves whom we have likewise commanded to be present) may now at
length be closed up with religion, and faith, and brotherly concord that ought
to be required of us all. The almighty God keep thee in health many years.


CAP. VI. Consta^tinus unto Cecilia nus bishop of Carthage. Pholes according
unto Epiphanius is a weight other wise called Talantiu^ and the same is too
fold the one containing 312. pou^des and six ounces: the other weying 208.
pence. it is used of Suidas and Augustine de ciuit. Dei lib. 22. cap. 8. for a
halfpeny.

A copy of the Emperors epistle by the which h^ granted money unto the
Churches.

COnstantinus the emperor unto Cecilianus bishop of Carthage sends
greetinge. In so much as it pleased us to minister some thing for expenses sake
unto some certain ministers of the approved and most holy religion, throughout
every the provinces of Aphricke Numidia and Mauritania: I have sent letters
unto Vrsus the renowned liuetenant of Aphricke and signified unto him that he
should cause three thousand pholes of silver to be told unto thy fidelity.
Therefore as soon as thou have received the said some of money, see the same
distributed unto all the aforesaid, according unto our writ sent by Osius. If
thou perceive ought to be wantinge, so that our will herein toward all may
not be accomplished, demand of Heraclas our tresoror as much as assuredly
thou think lackinge. This I gave him in charge when he was present, that
if thy fidelity required any money of him, he should without any more a do
deliver the same unto thee. And for as much as I understand that some
troublesome persons were disposed to peruerte by some lewd corruption, the
people of the most holy and Catholic Church: I give thee to understand that
I gave forth such injunctions in presence of Anilinius the liuetenante and
Patricius the gouernoures vicegerente, that among all other things they
should specially have due regard hereof, and that they should in no wise
permit such a thing, to fall out. wherefore if thou perceive some such men
to persist in this their folly, without anymore a do have recourse unto the
said judges and make them priuey thereof, that they consider of these as I
charged them when they were present. The divinity of the great God long
preserve thee.

CAP. VII.
A copy of the epistle by the which he fraunchised the bishops from payinge
tax or tribute.

WE greet you most honorable Anilinus. Because that diversely it appears, if
that the Consta^tinus unto Anilin' governor of Aphrick.
religion wherein great estimation of holiness is maintained be set at naught,
great dangers will ensue to the public affairs: and again if the same be
orderly handled and maintained, great prosperity and special felicity will
follow unto the Roman empire and the affayrs of all men, the goodness of God
exhibiting the same: it seemed good unto us that those men which labor in this
godly religion, with due holiness and diligent observation of this law, shall
receive recompense of their travels. wherefore our pleasure is that they of the
prouin^e committed to thy charg which in the catholic church where Cecilianus
governs, minister in this holy religion, whom we commonly term clergy
men, be wholly free and exempt from all public burdens, lest by any error or
cursed svva^uinge they be withdrawn from the service due unto God. But rather
may occupy themselves about their profession without any molesting at all, who
while they acco^plishe the great ministry of the holy service, do seem to
profitt very much the public affayrs. Farewell most honorable Anilinus. To be
short, such things has the divine and celestial grace of our Savior at the
appearinge thereof granted unto us: such great benefits were bestowed by
reason of our peace upon all men: and thus went our affairs in joy and
solemnycies.

CAP. VIII.
The ingratitude of Licinnius toward Constantinus, and his cruelty toward
the Christians.

The sight of these things was intolerable for y^ deuel, enemy of honesty, and
worker of malice to behold. neither in like sort did y^ things which happened
unto the foresaid tyrants, suffice Licinnius better to advise him self. Who
while he enjoyed a prosperous raygne and the second honor next after the
emperor Constantinus the great, and was hyghly reverenced for his affinytye
and kynrede with Constantinus, layinge aside the example of good princes,
imitated the wickedness and impiety of cruel tyrants: and whose tragical
lyfes he saw ended before his face these men's censures would he follow rather
then continue in the favor and friendship of the better. wherefore being
moved against his dear friend in all things with the prycks of envy, raised
against him a wicked and a very sore battaill, neither tendering the laws of
nature, neither mindful of protested oaths, neither of blood, neither of the
couenauntes passed between them. Yet the renowned emperor, that he might show
him the tokens of true friendship and hearty good will, envied not at his
kindred, neither denied his company in honorable wedlock with his sister: yea
he Licinnius had married Constantinus sister.
voutchsafed to make him partaker of his fathers kindred and the imperial
blood: and to be short he had granted him as to his alliance and fellow
emperor authority over the whole empire, and committed unto him no small part
of the nations subject to the Roman empire, for to govern and rule. He
likewise practicing the contrary, invented daily all kind of wiles against him
that was of higher power, and devised all subtle sleyghts to recompense his
dear friend euel for good. where fore in the beginning to cloak his conspiracy
he feigned friendship, and often in the mean space guilfully and deceatfully by
his laying of wait he hoped easily to bring to pass y^ which he desired. But
God being the friend and fauorer and keeper of Constantinus brought to light
the wait laid for him in secret and in hugger mugger. For truly the power
and the strong armor of piety is of great force both to revenge the enemy and
to preserve proper health: so that the most godly emperor being strengthened
therewith escaped the manifold sleyghts of the cursed enemy. But Licinnius when
he perceived that his secret conspiracy framed not after his mind, for that God
revealed unto the godly emperor, all his guyle and deceate, when he could no
longer cloak his rebellion, be rayseth open wars: and withal when he
purposed to give battaill unto Consta^tinus he went about to impugn almighty
God himself, whom he knew to be worshipped of Constantine. Afterward he
endeavored to impugn by a little little and secretly the saints under his
dominion, who never molested nor endomaged his empire, neither hurt him any
kind of way at all. and to bring this to pass, he was sore pricked and given
to do mischief of his proper malice ingraffed in him. Wherefore neither laying
before his eyes the remembrance of them which persecuted the christians before
him, neither of them whom he had chastized and executed for committing of
impiety, but renouncing his right wits he embraced open madness, and purposed
to impugn in stead of him that was helped, God him self the helper of
Constantinus, and first of all he banished all the Christians from his court,
depriuinge him self (seely wretch) of their prayers which they made unto God
for him, the which also they were wont to make for all men after their country
discipline. Afterward he commanded that the soldiers appointed in the city
should be deprived and spoiled of their honor and dignities, unless they would
do sacrifice unto devils. These were small things in respect of greater
practices which he committed. To what end should I rehearse the things which
the enemy of God committed severally and by pieces: how the most unjust, made
unjust laws, who by his injunctions gave commandment that no charity by any
man should be extended toward them which were afflicted in prison: neither
compassion should be had on them which in fetters were like to perish for
famine, neither was it lawful for any to be honest or to practice charity,
which were bound by the laws of nature to pity their kinsfolks? and that
law was in deed to shameful and most cruel exceedinge all paciencie of
nature, unto the which there was a penalty annexed, that such as had ministered
of their charity, were punished alike with them unto whom it was ministered,
and such as had showed any kindness toward them, were fettered, imprisoned, and
punished alike with the afflicted. Such were the constitutions of Licinnius. To
what purpose shall repeat his practices toutching marriage, and his innouations
toutching dead men, whereby he presumed to abolishe the ancient laws of the
Romans well and wisely ordained: and brought in certain barbarous and cruel
laws in deed very unjust and unlawful, and infinite fained leasings, the
which he devised against the nations subject to his dominion, sundry taxes of
gold and silver, surueying of lands, gainful penalties upon the men
throughout the country which then lived not, but of old were deseased: and to
be short the enemy of all goodness, devised for swearing of the land to such
intent and purpose against them which had done no harm, and doing away of
noble and honest personages, whose youthly and tender wives being severed from
their husbands he delivered to servants of his to be contumeliously and
shamefully handled, and many married wives, virgins and maidens, has he
shamefully abused (though he being now in his latter days, and as it were at
deaths door) to the satisfying of his lecherous and beastly lust. to what end
shall I use many words in this matter, when as the excess of his later doings,
made the former which were small, to seem in manner noth^g. Wherefore his later
madness assaulted the bishops, he took the^ in so much they were worshippers of
almighty God, to be enemies to his doings, whom he took in hand, though not
openly, for fear of the superior, yet again in secret and deceatfully, and
^lew through wiles diverse of the best approved governors. The manner of that
slaughter he used, was strange and never heard of before, his practices about
Amasia and the other cities of Pontus, exceed all that pass in cruelty:
where he ouerthrewe some of the churches of God even to the pauements, shut up
others, lest that any in them should assemble after the wonted manner, and
perform the service dew unto God. neither was he persuaded that they in them
prayed for him, because he was of a corrupt conscience, but thought that we
made supplication unto God, and did all for the godly Emperor Constantine, and
for this cause he brake out into a furious rage against us. Moreover the
flattering presidents supposinge in this behalf to gratify the mischievous
tyrant, tormented some of the bishops, as lewd persons are punished, led them
forth, and punished without cause such as had committed none evil as if they
had been murderers: whereof some endured a more strange death, their bodies
cut in many small pieces, as bouchers do use, and after this cruel and
horrible spectacle, thrown into the bottomless goulfe of the surginge sea, to
become food for fishes. While these things were a doing, again the flight of
godly men began, and again the fields, and again the deserts, the woods
and mountains receive the worshippers of Christ. When these things in this
sort prevailed with the wicked tyrant, he thought thenceforth to raise
persecution against all, and had brought his purpose to pass (for there was
nothing to hinder him from this heinous offense) unless that God which
fights for the souls of his servants, had speedely forestopped and prevented
his malicious enterprise, and had brought forth with a mighty arm in defense
of the quarrel his servant Constantinus a defender of all the godly, as it were
a great light in a dark and thick mistie night.

CAP. IX.
Constantinus after that he over came Licinnius enjoyed the empire alone,
favored the Christians, and restored peace.

GOd from above granted unto this man, this deserved fruit of godliness, to
wete victory and triumphant signs against wicked persons, and brought
subject the ungracious tyrant together with all his counselors and friends
even groueling at the feet of Co^sta^tine, For when he was fallen into extreme
folly, the godly emperor and furtherer of christian religion, perceauing that
he was no longer to be borne withal, weyed this matter wisely, and mingling
the severity of justice with the clemency of his nature, thought best with
voluntary mind, to delider from injury such as were oppressed by the tyrant.
And to the end he might save many, he went about to cut of a few hurtful and
pestilent persons. For when as Constantinus in times past had used clemency
and pitied him, which was worthy of no compassion at all, thereby Licinnius
enjoyed no great commodity for that he forsook not his malice, but rather
increased his rage against the nations subject unto him, for them, to wete,
being oppressed and wearied by the sauadge beast, there remained no hope of
salvation. Wherefore the defender of piety joined the hatred of the evil with
the love of goodness, and together with his son Crispus, the most clement
emperor he went forth to battle, and stretched forth his helping hand unto
all that were oppressed. These therefore together, the father and the son,
using for guide and helper God the supreme king and the son of God the
savior of the whole world, having both on every side scattered the armies of
the enemies of God, and all the adversaries in that conflict by the power of
God, (eden as they wished) being foiled and overthrown: they got an easy and
a speedy victory. Immediately then, sooner then the word uttered, they which
yester night and the day before breathed out present death and threaming
thunder bolts of fiery persecution were not afterward remembered, no, not as
much as once by name, their tytles and honors had deserved shame and ignominy,
and Licinnius him self suffered the self same things a like, the which he saw
with his eyes to chance unto the wicked tyrants his predecessors. For be
admitted no correction, neither advised him self by the stripes of his
kinsfolks, but treadinge with them the same path of impiety, is brought by
just judgment into the same downfall. and thus was this man prostrated.
Constantinus then being renowned for every rare virtue and godliness, being
also chief conqueror: together with his son Crispus the most godly
emperor, like unto his father in all things, took the eastern and the
Roman empire of old time one, and brought subject to their peace from the
East every where throughout both parts of the world, North and South, even unto
the farthest place of the West. All the fear of them by whom they were before
time oppressed was taken away, and wiped from of the face of the earth, they
celebrated solemn and royal feasts. All was replenished with the bright
beams of joy and gladness, and they which before time full sadly beheld each
other, now they do it with gladsome countenance and cheerful eyes, they
honored before all things (for so they were instructed) the supreme king,
next the godly emperor together with his sons beloved of God, with daunces
and hymns throughout towns and contries. Moreover all old injury was
forgotten, neither was there mention of any man's impiety at all, but the
enioyinge of present prosperity, and the expectation of goodness to come. The
constitutions of the victorious emperor, full of clemency and laws
containing manifest tokens of bountifulness and true piety, were every where
proclaimed. Thus therefore all tyranny being rooted out, the empire fit and
dew for Constantinus and his sons was preserved firm and free from all
envy, who, wyping away all impiety of their predecessors in life, and
enjoying meryly all the benefits best owed from above, have set forth by their
laws, decreed in the behalf of the Christians, the study of virtue, and love,
and piety toward God, with thankfulness of mind.

The end of the tenth book of the Ecclesiastical history of Eusebius
Pamphilus Bishop of Caesarea in Palaestina.
THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOCRATES SCHOLASTICVS COMPRISED IN SEVEN
BOOKS, BEginning where Eusebius left, and ending a hundredth and forty years
after. WRITTEN in the Greek tongue above a thousand years ago, and
translated by M. H.



Imprinted at London by Thomas Vautroullier dwelling in the Blackefriers. 1576.

THE PREFACE OF THE TRANSLATOR UNTO THE READER TO VTCHING THE LIFE, AND
HISTORY OF SOCRATES.
IN so much that I find not in any one writer either ancient or otherwise
howsoever, a sufficient treatise or ample discourse of the life and history of
Socrates Scholasticus: I thought good for the Christian readers sake to cull
here and there such proofs as may bring him the better acquainted with this
learned Historiographer, lest that upon the so day ne he conceive of him any
sinister opinion or mis^^king not knowing, either who, wh^^^ or what doctrine
he wrote of I do gather by his own history that he lived in the time Socrat.
lib. 6. eccl. hist. cap. 12. Volater. li 19. Anthropolog Socrat. li. 7. cap. 47
of Damasus Bishop of Rome, and flourished in the time of (...)sto^e Bishop of
Constantinople, about 412. years after Christ. of this opinion is (...) where
he writes* Socrates wrote the Ecclesiastical history unto the time of
Chrysastome, when as it is most like he flourished him self* but his own
words in my judgment are playne^ where the time is exactly laid down in this
sort: Our whole historye (says he) being divided into seven books,
compriseth the compasso of one hundredth and forty years, beginning at the
first year of the two hundredth and first Olympiade when Constantine was
proclaimed Emperor, and ending in the 2. year of the two hundredth eight and
twentyeth Olympiad being the (...) Consulship of Theodosius the Emperor.
Theodorus Zuinger calls Socrates, Pistoriensom presbyterian, minister of
Pistoria in Theodor. Zuinger. Volaterr.
Italy: and Volaterran calls not him, but Soc^^^^s (who lived about that time
and wrote in like sort the Ecclesiastical history) minister of Pistoria. I
do not see how either of them being Grecians could be minister of any the
latin or west Churches. Sozomenus was of Salamina an I Will hard by Athens where
he wrote his historye in the Greek tongue: Socrates was of Constantinople the
which Volaterran does confess, nay his own words do testify the same where
he writes in this sort: I of mine own Socrat. li. 5. cap. 23.
part (says Socrates) in so much I lead my life here at Constantinople, where
I was borne, bredd and brought up, no marvel though I write more at large of
the famous acts done within this city: partly seeing that I saw most of them
with mine eyes, and partly also in so much they are more famous and thought
far worthier of memory then many other Acts. Nicephorus that fabulous
Historiographer doubts not to sclaunder him with the heretical sect of
Nouatian, when as no such thing can be gathered Niceph. lib* 9. cap. 13. lib.
11. cap. 14. Eusebius. lib. cap. 2. Eusebius. lib. cap. 27. 28* Eusebius. lib. cap. 23.
by the works of Socrates. he dreameth that in so much he had familiarity,
and commends diverse of the Nouatian Bishops for many their rare and singular
virtues, therefore without all peradventure (says he) he was a Nouatian. I
read that Origin was of a long time in one house together at bed and board
with an old heretic whose name was Paulus: I see that Eusebius highly
commends the heretic Tatianus for his book against the Gentiles, he
extolleth also Bardesanes the Syrian, who was a Valentian heretic: I find
that Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria reverenced wonderfully the person of Nepos
the Chiliast, he doubted not to affirm that his soul was in rest: yet as we
may in no wise call Origin an heretic for his familiaritye with Paulus:
neither Eusebius a Tatian or Valentinian for commending of Tatianus and
Bardesanes, neither Dionysius a Chiliast for extolling of Nepos, no more may we
call Socrates a Nouatian for his familiarity with Auxanon and praising of the
Nouatians. where he commends the Nouatians, where he makes report of
Auxanon, where also he excuses him self, his words are these. I have learned
moreover (says Socrates) Socrat. li. 1. cap. 9.
that Eutychianus a man of sincere religion flourished about that time, who
though he were of the Nouatian sect, yet did he many strange things. I will
reveal him that reported me his doings, neither will I cloak or conceal that
at all, though therefore I may seem to incur suspicion or the reprehension
of diverse persons. It was Auxanon a priest of the Nouatian Church. In an other
place he commends the Nouatians Socrat. li. 2. cap. 30.
for embracing the Nicene Creed, for joining with the true Christians against
the Arian heretics: who would not in like sort commend them for the same?
he says further that almost they had been at unity with the true Catholics,
had not the fault been in the Nouatians them selves. What other thing is this
then commending of them for well doing and reprehending of them for ill doing?
is he therefore to be termed a Nouatian? This Nicephorus sticked not in like
sort to call Eusebius an Arian, Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 5. lib. 2. cap. 17.
who as it is well known unto the whole world was at the council of Nice,
wrote the creed and condemned Arius with his own hand. sure I am of this,
that toutching the history, this Nicephorus has patched together out of
Eusebius, Socrates, Euagrius and other ancient writers: if every bird took
her fether from him there would be nothing left of his own part but fables.
Tritenhemius wrote reverently of this author in this sort: Socrates by birth a
Grecian, a learned and an eloquent man, a notable Historiographer, Tritenhemius
li. de eccl, scrip.
of great fame by reason of his profounde skill: wrote a volume containing the
Ecclesiastical history from the raygne of Constantinus magnus the first
Emperor of that name unto the raygne of Theodosius junior. I find by
translating of him the doctrine sound, the style familier, the story
faithful: in commending he observes a mean, in reprehension modest, in
confutation earnest and zealous in defense of the truth: the author him self
learned, his judgment grave, and his writings of great antiquity.

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORYE OF SOCRATES SCHOLASTICVS.
CAP. I.
The proeme of the book. He begins his history where Eusebius ended.

EVsebius syrnamed Pamphilus, comprising wholly in ten books the
Ecclesiastical Socrates in this his first book contains the history of 31
years, being the whole reign of
history, continewed the same unto the time of Constantinus the Emperor. in
the which times the heat of persecution kindled by Diocletianus against the
Christians was quenched. The same author writing the life of Constantine,
passed over very lightly the practices of Arius. for that he chiefly endeavored
to publishe the praises of the Emperor, and exquisitely to set forth with
majesty of words the oration wherewith he might highly commend Constantine
and the end of 340 years after Christ. Where Socrates begins his history.
him, rather then diligently to describe the acts of that time. We therefore,
purposing to write the things which happened in the Church since that time,
will begin where Eusebius left, not minded with curious and lofty style, but
plainly to set forth only the things which either we have found faithfully
recorded, or else have been showed unto us by such as saw them with their
eyes. And in as much as it seems very necessary for our present purpose, to
mention the manner home Constantinus the Emperor became a Christian, we will
speak somewhat hereof, and herehence take our beginning.

CAP. II.
How Constantinus the Emperor became a Christian.

WHen as Diocletian and Maximinian by syrname Herculius, had by uniform
consent Diocletian Maximinian.
deposed them selves of the emperial scepter and embraced a private kind of
life: when as also Maximianus otherwise called Galerius reigning together with
them had taken his journey into Italy, and appointed two Emperous, Maximinus to
rule the East, and Seuerus to Maximinus.
govern Italy: Constantinus is openly proclaimed Emperor in Britanny to
succeed his father Seuerus.
Constantius which died the first year of the two hundred seventy and first
Olympiad, the five and Constantinus.
twentyeth of Iulye. but at Rome Maxentius the son of Maximianus Herculius,
is chosen of the Maxentius.
pretorian soldiers not to govern the empire but rather to practice tyranny.
Not long after, Herculius inflamed again with desire of rule, went about to
dispatch his son Maxentius, but y^ soldiers hindered his purpose, in the end
he died at Tarsus a city of Cilicia. Seuerus the Emperor which was sent to
Rome by Galerius Maximinianus to take Maxentius, was of the soldiers betrayed
and put to death. Last of all Maximianus Galerius being chief Emperor, after
he had crowned Emperor Licinnius, by original a Dane, his old fellow
soldier and familiar friend, departed Licinnius.
this life. Maxentius in the mean while handles the Romans ill fauoredly,
he oppresses The tyranny of Maxentius.
them and shows him self rather a tyrant then an Emperor toward them, he
far passes the bounds of shamefastnes abusing the spouses of noble
personages, sleying many with the sword and putting in ure other such like
lewd practices. Constantinus the emperor being certified hereof devised with
him self which way possibly he might ridd the Romans from under this
grievous yoke of servitude and dispatch the tyrant out of this life.
deliberating thus with him self, he forcasted also what God be were best to
call upon for aid to wage battle with the adversary. he remembered how that
Diocletian which (...) dedicated him self unto the service of the heathenish
Gods, prevailed nothing thereby, also he persuaded him self for certain that
his father Constantius who renounced the idolatry of the Gentiles ledd a more
fortunate life, musing this doubtfully with him self, and taking his journey
with his soldiers I wott not whither, a certain vision appeared unto him, as
it was strange to behold, so in deed incredible to be spoken of. about
noone, the day somewhat declining, he saw in the sky a lightsome pillar, in
form of a cross, wherein The sign of the cross was seen of Constantinus in
the aere.
these words were engraven: In this overcome. the which vision so amazed the
Emperor, that he mistrusting his own sight, demanded of them that were
present, whether they perceived the vision: which when all with one consent had
affirmed, the wavering mind of the Emperor was Christ appears to
Constantine in his sleep.
settled with that divine and wonderful sight. The night following in his sleep
he sees Christ which says thus unto him: frame unto thy self the form of a
cross after the example of the sign which appeared unto thee, and bear the
same against the enemies as a fit banner or token of victory. he being fully
persuaded with this oracle, commands the victorious sign of the cross
(which as yet is reserved in the palace of the Emperor) to be made, and
therewith proceeds forewards in his affairs with greater courage and
promptnes of mind. and joining with the enemy right over against Rome, about
the bridge commonly called Bulbia, he got the victory, for Maxentius Maxentius
died about the year 318.
being drowned in the river, died. it was the seventh year of his reign when
y^ he overcame Maxentius. after these things when as Licinnius his fellow
Emperor and his brother in law, having married his sister Constantia, ledd his
life in the East: Constantinus enjoying ample benefitts received at the hands
of God, showed him self grateful in offering of thanks and praises unto the
author of all goodness. his practices were these: to deliver the Christians from
persecution, to call again The godly study of Constantine.
the exiled unto their native soil: to set at liberty such as were in prison:
to restore again the goods confiscated: to build again the Churches that were
overthrown: all which things he accomplished with great promptnes of mind. in
the mean while Diocletianus which had resigned The death of Diocletian Anno
Dom. 318.
the empire departed this life at Salon a city of Dalmatia.

CAP. III.
How Constantinus favoring the Christians, and Licinnius persecuting them, wage
battle one against the other.

COnstantinus the Emperor fixing his whole mind upon such things as set
forth the glory of God, behaved him self in all things as a Christian,
erecting Churches from the ground and adorning them with goodly and gorgeous
consecrated monuments: moreover shutting up the temples of the heathens,
purging and publishing unto the world (in the way of derision) the gaye images
glistering within. but Licinnius famous among them for his fond opinion in
gentilisme, hated the Christians, who for all he durst not openly persecute for
fear of Constantine the Emperor, yet in secret he menaced and dispatched
many Christians. but in process of time he endeavored openly to afflict them.
This persecution was prouincial, for it was kindled there only where Licinnius
made his abode. after these things, practicing in other things also y^ part of
a tirant, being fully persuaded that Constantine was not ignorant here of, and
knowing full well y^ he was greatly offended with him for it, he hasteneth to
clea^e him self, flattering and fayning to join with him in league of
friendship binding him self with anoth never to perpetrate any tyrannical
act, and not only swearing but with all for swearing him self, for he ceased
not from tyranny, neither relented from raising against the Christians the
greeuo^s ^^orme of persecution. he forbad the Bishops by decree that they
should not confer at all with the Gentiles, to the end the religion of the
christians might nether take root, nether be raised at al. Then was the
persecution ri^e in every man's mouth and in deep silence, secret in word yet
open in deed. the persecuted members of Christ endured intolerable pain of
their bodies and sustained great loss of their substance. Cap. 4. in the
Greek.
Whereby he incensed greatly the Emperor Constantine against him, so that they
breaking the league of feigned friendship which was between them, became deadly
foes. Not long after they waged battle and meting often by sea and by land, in
the end at Chrysopolis a city of Bithynia, to wete at the docke or haven of
Chalcedon, Licinnius was overcome and yielded him self unto Constantine. He
takes him alive, The humanitye of Constantine.
he deals courteously with him, he slays him not, but enjoined him to dwell
in Thessalonica, and there to lead a quiet and a peaceable life. it was but a
small time that he lived in peace, for immediately after, he gathered an host
of Barbarians and endeavored by fighting again to revenge his former foil. the
which when Constantine had understood he commanded that he should be
Lici^nius was put to death for his perjury and breaki^g of league Anno Dom. ni
327. Cap. 5. in the Greek.
put to death, at whose commandment he was dispatched. Constantinus now
having the upper hand and published Emperor and King, endeuoreth forthwith to
amplify the Christian affairs and that diversely by his means also the
Christians lived in great peace and tranquillitye, but after this peace there
ensued wars and deadly hatred among the Christians them selves, what it was,
how it began, and the manner of it we will declare.

CAP. III.
The contention between Arius and Alexander Bishop of Alexandria, and how that
Alexander deprived Arius with his accomplices of the ministry.

AFter Peter Bishop of Alexandria which suffered martyrdom under Diocletian,
Achillas succeeded Peter. Achillas. Alexander.
in the Bishopric. After Achillas, Alexander in the time of the aforesaid
peace was chosen Bishop. who leading a quiet and a peaceable life brought the
Church unto an unity. and on a certain time in presence of the Priests which
were under him and the rest of the clergy he entreats somewhat more curiously
of the holy trinity and the unity to be in the trinity. Arius Arius
contraryeth his Bishop and ordinary.
then being one of the Priests placed in order under him, a man very skillful
in the subtelties of sophistical logic, suspecting the Bishop to have brought
into the Church the erroneous doctrine of Sabellius the Aphrick, and being
kindled with the desire of contention, sent him self opposite against the
opinion of Sabellius the Aphrick, and as it seemed directly against the
allegations of the bishop, The original of Arius heresy.
saying: if the father begatt the son, then had y^ son which was begotten a
beginning of essence: hereby it is manifest that there was a time when the
son was not, and the consequent to follow necessarily that he had his
essence of nothing. Cap. 6. in the Greek.
When he had with this straung kind of doctrine concluded and laid down this
position, he provoked many to reason hereof, so that of a small sparcle a great
fire was kindled. for this noisome pestilence beginning from the Churches of
Alexandria spredd it self throughout all Egypt, Libya, and the upper Thebais,
yea passed moreover through the rest of the provinces and cities. many others
also embraced the pestilent opinion of Arius, of which Two Eusebius, the first
was writer of the former histor^. the 2. Bishop of Nicomedia, and an Arian.
number chie^^y Eusebius (not he of Caesarea) but an other which before time was
bishop of y^ church of Berytus, but then craftily crept in to be Bishop of
Nicomedia a city of Bithynia, claue fast unto him. which things when Alexander
had both heard and seen done with his eyes, was very much moved thereat, and
summoning together a counsel of many Bishops, he depriueth Arius and such as
favored his opinion of the priestly order: and wrote unto the several Bishops
throughout the cities in this manner.

The epistle of Alexander Bishop of Alexandria.
TO the well-beloved and most reverend brethren fellow ministers with us
throughout the churches whersoeuer. In so much as we are commanded by holy
Scripture to retain the bond of unity and peace, it is requisite that we
write and signify one to another the things that severally happen among us,
to the end that if one suffer or one rejoice, we all may suffer together or
rejoice together. Now in our church there are risen certain men which
transgress the laws: which impugn Christ: which lead men into Apostasy:
whom a man may rightly suppose and justly term the forrunners of Antichrist.
I was disposed truly to be silent and not to blason at all so heinous an
offense if peradventure by any means possibly this blemish might have been
wiped away from among them which alone fell from the church, lest that straying
abroad into straung places it might infect with the filth thereof the ears of
simple and seely souls. but in as much as Eusebius now Bishop of Nicomedia,
supposing the whole state of the church to be under his jurisdiction, and
seeing with him self that he is to be charged of none for leaving the Church
of Berytus, and for that he greedily gaped after the Church of Nicomedia, and
in that he is become the patron and ringleader of these Apostatas, going about
to publish letters into all provinces, highly extolling them that he may plung
certain of the ignorant sort into an extreme pestilent heresy altogether
contrary to Christ him self: I think it necessary (seeing the like is
written in some part of the law) no longer to be silent. but to declare
unto you all the whole matter whereby ye may not only know them which
fell from the truth, but also their derestable doctrine and the circumstance
of their heresy, and also if peradventure Eusebius do write unto you that
you give no ear unto him. for he having concealed for a season his old
festred corruption of mind, and now disposed to renevve the same, fayneth to
further their cause by his epistels, but in very deed he shows plainly that
these his practices be directed to the furtherance of his own cause. such as
fell from the Church were these: Arius, Achillas, Aeithales, C^rpones, a
second Arius, Sarmates, Euzoius, Lucius, Iulianus, Menas, Helladius, Gaius,
and together with them also Sec^ndus and Theonas which sometime were called
Bishops the things which they published abroad contrary to holy Scripture
were The blasphemies of Arius and his accomplices.
such: that God was not alvvayes a father, but that there was sometime when
he was no father: and that the word of God was not from everlasting, but
had his beginning of nothing. For that God which is, made him which was not,
of that which is not, for which cause there was a time, when he was not.
that the son was a creature and made, neither like unto the father in
substance, neither the true word of the father by nature, neither his true
wisdom, but made metaphorically the word and the wisdom, and the same to
be made by the proper word of God and by the wisdom which is in God, in the
which God made all things and him toe. for which cause he is of a changeable
and diuerous nature as all other reasonable creatures be. that the word is
straung, diuerous and severed from the wisdom of God. that the father can
not be expressed by the son, that the son knovveth not the father fully
neither absolutely, neither can perfectly discern him. and that the son
perceaueth not the substance of the father as he is, but that he was made for
our sakes, that God by him as by an instrument might create us, and that he had
not been, had not God been moved to create us. One at that time demanded of
them whether the word of God could be changed as the devil was changed?
and they were not afraid to answer: yea, it may be. for that he is of a
chau^geable nature and begotten, he is mutable. Arius therefore and his
adherents which uttered these things and impudently auoutched them together
with all such as favor the like fond opinions: We together with other
Bishops of Egypt and Libya in number vvel^^ghe a hundred meeting for the same
purpose, have pronounced to be held of all men for accursed. Eusebius and his
adherents endeuer to mingle falsehoode with the truth, and pietye with
impietye, but they shall not prevail, for truth gets the victory and light
has no fellowship with darkness, no agreement between Christ and Belial. who
ever heard of the like practices? and who presently The confutation of Arius.
John. 1.
if he heard the like would not wonder as at straung things, and stop his
ears lest the dregs of so detestable a doctrine should annoy the sense of
hearing? what man hearing John affirming: in the beginning was the word, will
not forthwith condemn these which say: there was a time when he was not? or
who is it when he hears in the Gospel: the only begotten son and by him
were all things made, that will not detest these, which affirm that the
son is one of the creatures? and how can he resemble the things which
were made by him? or how can the only begotten (as their opinion is) be
numbered with all other living creatures? or how is he made of nothing when
the father says: My heart has endited a good matter. Psalm. 44. Psalm. 109.
Coloss. 1. Heb. 1. Ioh. 14.
and: Before the morning in the womb have I begotten thee? Or how is he in
substance different from the father, being the Perfect image and brightness of
the Father? and when as he him self says: He that has seen me, has seen
also the Father. or how can it be if the only son of God be the word and
the wisdom, that there was a time when that he was not? it is as if a man
should say: God sometime vvanted both word and wisdom. or how is he
chaungeable and mutable, when as he reports of him self: I am in the
Father, and the Ioh. 14. Ioh. 10. Malach. 3.
Father is in me. also: I and the Father be both one. and by the Prophet
Malachy^ also: Consider me that I am God, and am not changed. and although
this saying may be referred unto the Father him self, yet presently it is
applied more aptely unto the son, for in that he was borne and become man, he
is not changed at all, but as the Apostle vvriteth, Jesus Christ yester Hebr.
13.
night, and toe day, and he is the same for ever. What therefore ledd them (I
be^eache you) unto so erroneous and detestable an opinion for to say: he was
made for us, when as the Apostle 1. Corinthians. 8.
vvriteth: For of him and by him are all things? no marvel at all, in that
they falsely reported, the son not fully and perfectly to know the Father,
for when they had once determined with them selves to war against Christ,
they utterly rejected the words of our Lord where he says: as the Father
knows me, (says the son) so do I know the Father. Ioh. 10.
if the Father knovveth the son imperfectly, then is it manifest that the
son knovveth the Father imperfectly also. but if this be impiety and open
blasphemye, and that the Father knovveth the son perfectly and fully, then
does it follow that even as the Father knovveth his own word, so the
word knovveth his own father, whose word he is. but when as at sundry
times we convinced them with allegations and expositions out of the sacred
and heavenly Scriptures, for all that, they again changed them selves like
unto the chaungling and diuerously bespotted beast Chamaeleon, wresting with
all might possible to light upon their own pates the saying of the wise man:
When the ungodly person comes to extreme impiety Prouer. 18.
then he disdayneth. and though many heresies sprange before their time,
which exceeding out of measure in impudencye fell out at length for all that
into extreme follye: yet these men, which endeuer vvithal their gloses to
take away the divinity of the word, dravving nerer unto the time of
Antichrist, do in manner declare those heresies, in comparison of the impitie
Arius and his accomplices excommunicated.
of their blasphemous opinion, to be in the right truth, Wherefore they were
excommunicated and banished the church and pronounced to be held of all men for
accursed. And though we took their fall heauyly, specialy because that
sometime they supped the svvete joyce of the ecclesiastical doctrine and now
are fallen from the same: yet we marvel not greatly at the^. For the like
happened heretofore not only to Hymenaeus and Philetus but also before them
unto Judas 2. Timoth. 2.
which was the disciple of our Savior, afterward a traitor and an
Apostata. Neither are we here of ignorant or unmindful. For our Savior has
forewarned: take heed, lest any deceive Math. 24.
you. For many will come in my name, saying: I am, and the time is now at
hand, And they will deceive many, go not after the^. and Paul when he had
learned these things of our Savior, wrote: 1. Timoth. 4.
that in the latter times some shall fall from the sound faith and shall give
ear unto spirits of error and doctrines of deuells oppugning the truth.
Now therefore in as much as our Savior Jesus Christ has commanded the
same, and signified the same also unto men by his Apostle, and we truly
hearing their impiety with our ears, not without just cause, have (as we
said before) pronounced this kind of men for accursed, and proclaimed openly
that they are cut of, from the Catholic church, and far from the right
faith. And we have certified your holiness well beloved and most reverend
brethren, which are joined with us in the same fellowship of the public
ministry, that, if peradventure some of them ouerboldly presume to present
themselves before you, ye give no heed unto them, neither be persuaded by
Eusebius, neither by any other whosoever, that shall write unto you in their
behalf. For it behooves us that be christians to eschevve all such as open
their mouths against Christ, and such as are alienated in mind from him, as
enemies of God and rotten sheep corrupting the sense of man's mind, and that
we bid not such kind of men (as Saynct John has commanded) no not so much
as 2. John.
God speed, lest that we become partakers of their offenses. Salute them
which are among you, brethren: the brethren with us salute you also.


When Alexander had written these letters unto the bishops every where
throughout the several cities, this pestilence infection hereby was the more
scattered abroad, because that these unto whom these letters were directed
began to burn among themselves with the sparcles of contention and
discord. For some condescended and subscribed unto the letters: some others
with all might impugned them. But specially among all the rest Eusebius bishop
of Nicomedia was provoked to the schism and dissension, for that Alexander had
often in his letters charged him by name. And at that time Eusebius was able to
do much, because that the emperor then made his abode at Nicomedia, where
Diocletian a little before had builded a princely palace. For which cause many
bishops favored the opinion of Eusebius. But he seized not to write unto
Alexander that he would let pass the controversy raised between them: that
he would admit again Arius and his adherentes into the church: and others
also throughout the cities he exhorted that they should by no means
condescende unto the drifte of Alexander. whereby their rose every where no
small tumult. For then a man might have seen not only the presidentes and
chief rulers of the churches, inueying one against an other with spiteful and
opprobrious terms: but also the lay multitude severed a sunder into two
parts, the one favoring the one side, the other, the other side. Wherefore the
case became so heinous and shameful, and into so lamentable a plighte that the
christian religion was openly derided of all men, even in the public theaters
and solemn spectacles. The inhabitors of Alexandria contended very
childishely, yea without all modesty about the chief poinctes of christian
religion, they sent also legates and ambassadors unto the bishops throughout
the other provinces, who seueringe themselves unto either side, raised the like
contention. The Meletians who not long before were cut of from the church,
joined themselves The meletia^ heretics join with the Arians. Meletius why
he was deprived by Peter bishop of Alexandria.
with the Arians. I think it expedient to note what kind of men they are.
Meletius bishop of a certain city in Aegypte, besides sundry other causes,
specially for that in the time of persecution he had renounced the faith, and
sacrificed to Idols, was deprived of his byshoricke by Peter bishop of
Alexandria, which suffered Martyrdom, under Diocletian. Who being deprived and
favored of many for all his fond doings, became the ringeleader of the
heresy, among them, who in Egypt, of him unto this present day are called
Meletians, and having no just cause or cloak to defend his doings, in that
he presumed to separate himself from the church, made a sleeuelesse answer:
saying that he was greatly iniuryed, wherefore he brake out into raylinge
speeches and reviled Peter. And as soon as Peter, in that heat of
persecution, had ended his life with Martyrdom, he posted over his opprobrious
terms and railing speeches to the paintinge of Achillas who succeeded Peter
in the seae of Alexandria. And last of all he leueled the pearcinge darts of
spiteful language at Alexander, who after the death of Achillas was there
placed bishop. While this tumulte and dissension was tossed to and froe, the
opinion of Arius was called into controversy, then Meletius with his accomplices
took part with Arius, and together with him conspired against the bishop. But
they unto whom the opinion of Arius seemed absurd, approved of Alexanders
sentence toucchinge Arius, and affirmed the condemnation pronounced against
such as were of that opinion to be just and according to right. But Eusebius
bishop of Nicomedia, and as many as favored the fond opinion of Arius, wrote
unto Alexander that he should revoke the deprivation and digraduation past,
and admit into the church, such as were excommunicated and excluded the
company of the faithful, and that they maintained no detestable doctrine at
all. So then when of either side letters were brought unto Alexander bishop of
Alexandria, the letters of both sides were gathered together into one, Arius
took such as were in his behalf, Alexander gathered the contrary. Here
occasion was ministered unto the heretical sects of the Arians, Eunomians, and
Macedonians which in these days disperse themselves abroad, to defend their
damnable doctrine. Arians. Eunomians. Macedonia^s.
For every one severally alleges for proof and testimonye of his opinion the
epistles of such as are of his own sect.

CAP. IIII.
How Constantinus the Emperor being careful for the concord and unity of
the church sent Osius a Spanyarde unto Alexandria to reconcile Alexander Cap.
7. in. the Greek.
and Arius, wrytinge, also an epistle unto both the parties

WHen the emperor was certified hereof he was wonderful sorye and supposed
this schism to be his own calamitye. Forthwith therefore he went seriously
about to quench the heat of discord kindled among them, and sent letters
unto Alexander and Arius by a man worthy of creditt whose name was Osius bishop
of Corduba a city of Spain, this man the emperor loved entierly and highely
honored. Some part of which letters I supposed Osius a Spaniard, bishop of
Corduba.
not impertinent for this place, which are wholly alleged by Eusebius in his
books of the life of Constantine.

Constantine the puysant, the mighty, and noble emperor unto Alexander and
Arius sends greetinge.
Hereby I gather the original ground of this controversy in that thou
Alexander have demanded of the elders toutching a certain place of holy
Scripture yea rather toutching a certain The epistle of Constantinus unto
Alexander and Arius taken out of the 2. book of Eu sebius of the life of
Constantine.
vain piece of a question, what every ones opinion was: and thou Arius have
unadvisedly blased abroad and set abroche that which thou should not at
the first have conceived, and having conceived it, thou should have past it
over with silence. Whereby this dissension is risen among you, the wonted
assembly of the church hindered, the most devout people diversely distracted into
either side and rent a sunder, being before time one body co^pacted together in
harmoniacal unity. wherefore let either of you, pardoning each other, like of
that the which your fellow minister not without cause exhorts you unto: and
what is that? that you neither obiecte at all, neither answer any objection
that concern such matters. For such questions as no law or ecclesiastical
canon necessarily defines, but the frutelesse contention of idle brain
sets abroad, though the exercise thereof avail for the sharpening of the
wit, yet ought we to retain them within the inner closett of our mind, and
not rashly to broch them in the public assembly of the vulgar people,
neither unadvisedly to grant the common sort the hearing thereof. For how
many be there that can worthily explicate and sufficiently ponder the weight of
so grave, so intricate, and so obscure a matter? but if there be any such that
persuadeth himself able easily to compass and to attain unto it, how many
parts are there (I beseech you) of the multitude whom he can sufficiently
instruct therein? and who is there in sifting out so curious a question that
can well pass the peril of plunging error? wherefore in such cases we must
refrain from verbal disputations lest that either we by reason of the
imbecility of our wit, can not explicate our mind, either our auditors when
we teach by reason of their dull capacity can not comprehend the curious drift
of our doctrine, whereby the people of necessity incurreth the danger either of
blasphemye or the poisoned infection of discord. wherefore both the rash
objection, and the unadvised answer (being cause of the heretical sects of
the Arians, Eunomians, and of as many as favor the like folly ought ere other
of each other crave pardone. Neither is there occasion ministered to co^tende
about the chiefest commandment in holy Scripture, neither is there sprung any
new opinion toutching the service of God: for you retain the on and the same
sentence in substance of faith, so that you may easily embrace the uniform
consent of unity and co^cordo. For it is not well that for your contention
about so sclender matters and trifling toys, so great a multitude of the
people of God through your negligence should be at such discord among
themselves. Yea it is supposed not only not well, but altogether
intolerable. And that in few words I may lay before your eyes some president
hereof I will reason with you: ye are The contention of Philosophers.
not ignorant as I suppose that the philosophers agree* among themselves, all
jointly profess one title and name of discipline, yet for all that, they vary
and disagree in some odd opinion which severally they hold, who though they
dissent by reason of their several opinion, yet because of there compacted
profession, they join hands and hold together like birds. If then the case
be thus, why may it not be thought far more expedient that we wearing the
cognizance of the Brethren and christians may not brawle co^tentiously about
words.
most mighty God, even for the christian religion the which we profess, should
be at peace and unity among our selves? but let us vveygh more diligently and
consider more deeply with our selves, what I shall now say: whether it be
right or reason that for light and vain contention about words, one brother
should dissent from an other, and the renowned peace by pestilent discord
through us which spite one an other for sclender and unnecessary matters
should thus miserably be profaned and rent in pieces. These practices are
rather popular and far more agreeable with the youthly rashenes of green
heads, then with the sobriety of the grave and priestly personages.
wherefore of our own accord l^^ us put to flight the temptations of the
deuell. And in as much as our Lord God almighty the Savior of all me^, has
graciously given abroad of his common light unto all, therefore be it lavvefull
unto me (I beseech you) as much as in you lies, that I being aided with the
helping hand of his providence, may happily bring my purpose to good effect,
and that also I may lead his people, partly with often calling upon them,
partly with the diligent oversight of their life, and partly also with
sharp admonition, to mutual love and amity one with an other. And seeing that
(as I said) there is but one faith among you, one consent of profession, one
trade of life and order of law, the which with mutual consent of the mind
linketh and compacteth into one the whole body with the several members of
the same: that therefore, which through your discord, moved no small stir
among you, for that it concerns not any weyghty substance of all our
religion, there is no reason why it should breed any division at all in mind,
or discord in doctrine. And this do I say, not to compel you in this light
and fond question, of what sort soever it be, altogether to condescende unto
the same sentence, and though you dissent among yourselues about a matter of
small importance (for neither truly are we all in all things like minded,
neither have we all the same nature and gift ingraffed in us) nevertheless
for all that, it may come to pass that the sacred unity may soundlye and
inuiolably be retained among you, and one consent and fellowship co^serued
between all. But toutching the providence of God let there be one faith among
all, one consent of mind, and one opinion concerning God. and as toutching the
sleyghty and subtle sifting out of these vain questions, though you agree not
altogether in one, yet should you have limited the^ within the bounds of your
cappacity and laid them up within the secret closett of your mind. let the
common lincke of amity, let true faith, let the honor due unto God, and the
reverence of his law dwell for sure and certain among you, join hands
together, be friends one with an other, render unto the whole multitude of the
people their wonted familiarity, and purging your minds of the spott of
contention embraceye again one an other after the most loving and friendlyest
manner. for oftentimes when enmity is banished, amity is of more delectable
force among friends. let me therefore enjoy the days in peace and the nights
without molestation, that the pleasure which rises of the pure light of
concord and quiet life, may he^ceforth inuiolably be co^serued. If it
otherwise happen, it behooves us to sobe and sigh, and to shede many a salt
tear. for it can not be that he^ceforth we lead the rest of our life in peace
and tra^quility: for it can not be that the people of God (I mean that people
which jointly with us is tied to the service of god) as long as they thus
iniustly and da^gerously disagree one from an other, do live peaceably, or
how can I in this case quiett my self and setle my conscience? And that you
may perceive the great grief and sorrow I conceive in my heart for the same, I
beseech you give ear unto me. Of late as I came unto the cyty of Nicomedia
forthwith I purposed in mind speedely to travel toward the East, and
when I hastened toward you and had passed the greater part of my journey,
so that now I seemed in manner to be with you, tidings hereof constrained me
to alter my mind, lest that I should with mine eyes behold the things
which I verily supposed my self not able to tollerat with mine ears.
Toutching that which remains, see that with your peace and concordeye make
plain and set vvide open the way for my journey into the East, the which
you have shut with your debate and discord, kindled of the one against the
other. And bring speedely to pass that I may perceive not only you to hold
together, but also the whole multitude of the lay people reioycinge, and let
us all jointly render thanks (as our bounden duty requires) unto God
almighty with convenient laud and praise, for the public peace, the common
unity, and liberty of all men.


CAP. V. Cap. 8. after the greek.

Constantinus the Emperor summoneth the Nicene council, it was held at Nicaea
a City of Bithynia for the debatinge of the controversy about the feast of
Easter, and the rootinge out of the heresy of Arius.

THough the emperors letters contained a wonderful exhortation full of grave
and sobre council, yet y^ poison of dissension had taken such root, that
neither the industry of the emperor, neither the credit of the messenger
which brought the letters cold suppress it. The messenger was Osius bishop of
Corduba ^n Spain.
For neither Alexander, neither Arius, tempered the madness of their co^tentious
minds for all the emperors letters. There was moreover no small contention and
a great tumulte among the vulgar sort, before the which there was an other
pestilent kind of sedition, scattered abroad into certain particular
provinces, which greatly molested the quiet estate of the church: to weete, the
schism about the time of the celebration of the feast of Easter, which then
had only possessed the Eastern parts, whilst that some curiously observed
the Judicial celebration of the feast, some other the general custom and
manner of the christians throughout the world. And while they thus contend
about the feast, they communicate nevertheless one with an other, and
accomplish the solemnity with bitter contention of mind. When therefore the
Emperor saw the church vehemently tossed, by reason of both these troublesome
tumultes, he summoned a general council, and cited by his letters from every
where the bishops to appear and meet at Nicaea a city of Bithynia. So that
many bishops out of many provinces and cities came thither The first general
council of Nice. ^^seb. lib. 3 (...) vita Co^st.
of the which Eusebius called Pamphilus in his third book of the life of
Constantine writes thus: There were gathered together into one, the chief
ministers of God inhabitinge all the churches throughout all Europe, Aphrick,
and Asia: there was one sacred senate framed as it were by the handye work
of God, which also embraced within the bounds thereof both Syrians and
Cilicians, and such as came from Phoenicia, Arabia, Palaestina, Egypt,
Thebais, Libya, and Mesopotamia: there was also in this Synod the bishop of
Perses, neither was the Scythian absent from this company. Pontus, Galatia,
Pamphilia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Phrygia, ministered chosen men from amongst
them. Moreover the Thracians, Macedonians, Achaians Epirotae, and they whose
dvvellinge was far distant came thither: of the Spaniardes also Osius by^^op
of Cor^^b^ as I sup^^se. ^^e bishop Rome was ^t at the ^^uncell, but ^^t
thither ^^taine of (...) clergy. ^^^. 2.
there was present together with many others in that company,* one that was
counted notable, of great fame and renown. But the bishop of the princely
city by reason of his old age absented himself, yet there were then
present of his clergy which supplied his rovvme. Such a garlande of
immortal memory, tvvisted the emperor Constantine being but one, through the
bond of unity unto the glory of Christ: and to the end he might be found
thankful unto his Savior, he set up that renowned sign of victory against
the enemy, lively resemblinge in this our assembly the Apostolic quire. For
it is written that in those times there were gathered together holy men of
every nation which is under heaven, among whom there were Parthians,
Medes, Elamits, and inhabitors of Mesopotamia, Iudaea, and Cappadocia, Pontus
and Asia, Phrygia and Pamphilia, Aegypte and the parts of Libya which is
beyond Cyren, straungeres of Rome, Jews and Proselytes, Cretes and Arabians.
But this one thing failed them, for all they that met there, were not of
the ministers of God. The number of Bishops in this assembly was three
hundred and over, but of Priests, Deacons, Acolyts, and others which
accompanied them the number could not be told. And of the ministers of God,
some for their sage and sober speech, some for their gravity in life, and
patience in adversity, some other for their trade of living as mean between
both were highly commended. There were of these not a fevv, who for their
old years and ancient days were greatly honored: other some in the flower
of their youth, for sharpnes of wit, gave a glistering shine: certain others
were late practitioners and nouices in the ministry. unto all which the
Emperor commanded that all necessaries, large and liberal food for
sustenance should daily be ministered. And so far out of Eusebius toutching
that assembly. When the Emperor had finished the triumph solemnized in
remembrance of his victory against Licinnius, he took his journey unto Nicaea.
Among the bishops there assembled, Paphnutius bishop of the upper Paphnutius.
b. of Thebais. Spirid^on. b. of Cyprus.
Thebais, and Spiridion bishop of Cyprus were recounted famous. But the cause
that moved us to rehearse them, hereafter shall be showed. There were present
also many of the laytie which were skillful logicians, ready to defend ereother
part. Eusebius bishop of Nicomedia (as I have said before) Theognis and Maris
maintained the opinion of Arius. This Theognis was bishop of Nicaea, and Maris
bishop of Chalcedon a city of Bithynia. Against these Athanasius deacon of
the Eusebius. Nicomed.
church of Alexandria, strove manfully, this Athanasius did Alexander the
bishop highly esteem, Theognis an Arian.
and therefore there ensued great envy against him, as hereafter shall be
declared. Before the bishops met together in one place, the logicians busted
them selves propoundinge against diverse Maris an Arian.
others certain preambles of disputation, and when diverse were thus drawn to
disputation, and allured as it were by bayte: a lay man one of the number of
confessors, of a simple and sincere mind Athanasius. Alexander.
set himself against the Logicians, and told them thus in plain words:
that neither Christ, neither his Apostles had delivered unto us the art of
Logic, neither vain fallacies, but an open and plain mind to be preserved
of us with faith and good works. The which when he had spoken, all that were
present had him in admiration, and held with his sentence. Then the Logicians
Ruffinus in his first book cap. 3. lays down the circumstances of this
history more at large.
after they had heard the pure words of plain truth quieted and settled them
selves aright. So that at length by that means the stir raised by occasion
of Logic, was wholly suppressed. The day after all the bishops met in one
place, after them came the Emperor, being come he stands in the midst,
neither would he first sit down, before he had beckened to the bishops to do
the same. So great a reverence of person and shamefastness of mind did the
Emperor show unto those grave fathers. After that all were silent, as the
opportunity of the time did Constantine the Emperor shows great reverence
unto t^ bishops.
require, the Emperor as he sat in his seat made an oration unto them,
exhorting them to embrace unity of mind, concord, and agreement, wherein
also he counseled them to remove from their minds all private malice and
grudge, which they did owe one^ toward an other. For diverse of them had
accused each other, and putt up the day before unto the Emperor libells one
against the other. But he exhorted them earnesty to apply them selves unto the
purposed business, Constantine exhorts t^ unity, and burns the^^ libells.
which was the cause of their assemblye, and commanded the libelles to be
burned: ioyninge withal this only saying: that Christ commanded him that
looks for forgiveness, to forgive likewise his brother. When that he had
largely entreated of concord and peace to be preserved among them, he referred
unto their discretion to discern more exquisitely of the principles Mat. 18.
of Christian religion, even as the self same Eusebius reports in his third
book of the life of Constantine, whose allegation may presently seem very
commodious. For thus he writes: When many things of either side were
alleged, and a great controversy raised Eusebius. lib 3* de vit. Constantini.
even at the entrance into disputation, the Emperor gave pacient and peaceable
ear unto all, he received their positions with earnest and careful study:
some times he help in reasoninge ere other part: when that they disputed
with heat of contention he reconciled them by little and little: he conferred
with every one lovingly and courteously: he uttered his mind in Greek,
neither was he ignorant of that language. his speech was both sweet and
pleasant, persuading with some, pacifying some other with gentle words,
praising others for their sage sentences. He ceased not to reduce them all unto
concord, until that he had brought them to that pass, that they all became
of one mind, and concluded with one opinion toutching all the things that ever
toe fore were called into question, so that not only there flourished among
the^ one faith: but also they agreed all together to celebrate the solemn
feast of Easter at one and the same time throughout the world. Now therefore
the canons concluded upon by common consent of all, were ratified by the
subscription of every one, and recorded for the posterity. These things has
Eusebius to like purpose rehearsed and left behind him in writing, neither
have we in this place cyted them out of season, yea we have used his words for
He co^futeth the sclaunderous report which Sabinus made of the bishops
assembled in the council of Nice.
witnesses and knitte them to this our history, to the end we give not ear
unto some which have condemned the counsel assembled at Nice, as though it had
crred in the faith: again that we creditt not Sabinus the Macedonian, who
called the men that met there, idiots and rude persons. For this Sabinus
bishop of the Macedonians, which inhabit Heraclaea a city of Thracia, whilst
that he gathers into one volume those things which diverse counsels and
assemblies of bishops have committed to writing, he condemns with opprobrious
languages the bishops which met at Nice for unlearned and ignorant men. not
remembering that in so doing he condemns Eusebius for an idiote, who published
the same faith with the great trial and experience he had therein. Moreover
some things of set purpose he ouerskippeth: some other he peruerteth: those
things which seemed to make for his purpose which tended to the mark he shot
at, all those he culled out diligently. And though he praises Eusebius
Pamphilus for a witness to whom creditt may worthily begeuen, and though he
hyghly commend the Emperor as one that prevailed very much in the
establishing of Christian religion, yet for all that does he reprehende the
faith published in the council of Nice, as delivered by such as were rude and
all together unlearned. And whom he calls a wise man, and counts a true
witness, the same man's testimony of set purpose does he reject. For Eusebius
reports that of the ministers of God which then were present, some excelled
for their sage and sober sentences, some for their gravity of life, and that
the emperor with his presence reduced them all unto concord, and linked them
together in one mind and in one opinion. but of Sabinus if time do serve and
occasion hereafter be offered, we will say more. The uniform doctrine of faith
agreed upon and published by open consent of all in the general counsel of
Nice, is this: this Nicene creed was not found thus placed in the greek
copy, wherefore the Greek seemed vnper^ect, for to what end ^hold Socra^es
write: The ^niforme do^trine of faith *c. is this. ^nlesse some thing folow^d,
or how ^oulde he after all con^lude as he ^oth: This ^^th unless ^^ere were
^^mewhat ^terlaced. we ^^ue therefor suppli^d the want (...) this vnper^^ct
place by ^rowinge ^e copy of ^^is Creed ^ritte^ truly the same ^ords by
Eusebius Pamphilus, and recited toward the later end of this chapter by
Socrates, the which we have presently laid ^wne in different letters.
We believe in one God the father almighty maker of all things visible and
invisible, and in one Lord Jesus Christ the son of God, the only begotten
son of the father, that is of the substance of the father, God of God, light
of light, very God of very God, begotten not made, being of one substance with
the father by whom all things were made, both the things in heaven and the
things in earth. Who for us men and for our salvation came down, and was
incarnate, he was made man, he suffered and rose the third day, he ascended
into the heavens, he shall come to judge both the quick and the dead. And we
believe in the holy Ghost. therefore they which say that there was a time
when he was not, before he was begotten, or that he had his beginning of
nothing, or that he is of an other substance or essence, or that affirm the
son of God to be made, or to be conuertible or mutable: these the Catholic
and Apostolic church of God does pronounce for accursed. This faith three
hundred and eighteen bishops have confirmed and all consented thereunto, and
as Eusebius writes they all with one voice and one mind subscribed thereunto.
five only excepted, which allowed not of this clause, to we^e: Of one
substance, by name Eusebius bishop of Nicomedia, Theognis of Nice, Maris of
Chalcedon, Theonas of Marmarica, and Secundus of Ptolemais. For they affirmed,
that to be Of one substance, which has his original of some thing either by
division, or deriuation, or production. By production as a budde out of the
roots: by deriuation as children of the parents: by division as two or three
pieces out of a mass of gold. The son of God by relation was after none of
these manners, and therefore they said they would not agree unto the form of
faith confirmed in the council of Nice. Whereupon they derided exceedingly the
clause of One substance, and would not subscribe unto the deposition of Arius.
Arius accursed with his accomplices.
For which cause the council not only accursed Arius and all his adherents,
but also forbad him Alexandria. Morouer by the Emperors edict Arius, Eusebius,
and Theognis were exiled, Eusebius and Theognis being Arians, do recant.
whereupon Eusebius and Theognis in a while after they were banished, gave up a
book of their conversion and repe^ta^ce, signifying withal their consent
toutching the faith Of one substance, as hereafter in process of our history
we will declare more at large. At y^ same time Eusebius commonly called
Pa^philus bishop of Caesarea in Palaestina, when in y^ same counsel he had a
while staggered, and advisedly pondered with him self whether it were his part
to admit y^ plattforme and definition of faith* at length approved it together
with the other bishops and subscribed thereunto, and sent the same form of
faith in writing unto y^ people whose charge he had, expounding the clause of
One substance, lest y^ any thenceforth should suspect him to have doubted
thereof at all. The things which he wrote were after this manner. It is very like
(well-beloved) that Eusebius writes thus from the counsel of Nice unto the
church of Caesarea in Palaestina, whereof he was bishop.
the acts concerning the ecclesiastical faith concluded in the great and
famous counsel held at Nice, came heretofore to your knowledge, specially in
that, fame spreads her self abroad faster the^ the truth curiously tried or
handled of us: yet that the truth may not only be embraced of you by hearesay,
I have thought necessary to send unto you in writing first that form of faith
which I exhibited to the council, next, the other published by the bishops,
where they have annexed and added certain things to ours. The form of our
faith which the^ was read in presence of our most holy emperor, and the^
approved for sound and certain, was in this sort, as we have received of the
bishops our predecessors both when we were catechized, as also when we were
signed with the seal of baptism: as we have learned of holy scripture: as we
have believed being priest, and preached being bishop, even so now also beleui^g
we have made manifest our faith unto you which is this. We believe in one God
the father almighty, maker of all things visible and invisible, and in one Lord
Jesus Christ the word of God, God of God, light of light, life of life, the
only The Creed which Eusebius Pa^philus him self made and exhibited unto the
council of Nice, whereunto the bish^ps added the clause, Of one substance.
Man. 28.
begotten son, the first begotten of all creatures, begotten of God the
father before all worlds, by whom all things were made, who for our salvation
was incarnate and co^uersant among men, who suffered and rose the third day, who
ascended unto the father and shall come again to judge both the quick and the
dead* we believe also in one holy Ghost, believing moreover every one of these to
be in essence and substance. the father to be a father in deed, the son to
be a son in deed. the holy ghost to be a holy ghost in deed, cue^ as our
Lord sending his disciples to preach, said: Go therefore teach all nations
baptizi^g the^ in the name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy
ghost. Toutchi^g all which we firmly protest, that we are of this mind, that we
are of this opinion, and have been, and that we mind to persevere in this faith
until death do sever and part asunder body and soul, holding for accursed all
ca^kred heresies the which godless persons have sowe^ in the world* and that
you may fully persuade your selves of us, that we have heretofore believed and
spoken vnf^inedly and from the heart toutching all the premises, presently also
we protest, that we both believe aryght, and speak as we ought of God
almyghtie and our Lord Jesus Christ, and we are able with plain
demonstration to prove, and with reason to persuade that in times past our
faith was alike, that then we preached things correspondent unto the form
of faith already published of us, so that none in this behalf can repyne or
gaynesay us. Moreover our most holy Emperor has testified the same to be
most true, affirming him self to be of the same opinion, he commanded that
all should give their assent unto the same that they should subscribe unto the
particulers, that they should condescende unto the premises, so that this one
only clause, Of one substance, were interlaced. The which he him self
explicated in The Emperor Constantine commands the clause, Of one substance,
to be added unto Eusebius Creed: he expounds him self the meaning thereof.
these words: to be Of one substance, may not be taken according unto
corporal affections, neytherto consist of the Father by division, neither by
incision or parting asunder. It may not be that an immateriall, an
intellectual, and an incorporeall nature should admit or be subject to any
corporal passion, for it behooves us to conceive such mysteries with sacred
and secrett terms. Our most sage and virtuous Emperor reasoned of these
things after this sort. The bishops because of the clause, Of one substance,
published this form of faith: We believe in one God the father almighty maker
of all things visible and invisible, and in one Lord Jesus Christ the son of
God, the only begotten son of the father, that is of the substance of the
father, God of God, light of light, very God of very God, begotten not made,
being of one substance with the father, by whom all things were made, both the
things in heaven and the things in earth. who for us men and for our salvation
came down, and was incarnate, he was made man, he suffered and rose The Creed
laid down by 318. bishops in the cou^ce^ of Nice, the which Eusebius in these
words sends to Caesarea.
the third day, he ascended into the heavens, he shall come to judge both the
quick and the dead. And we believe in the holy Ghost. Therefore they which say
that there was a time when he was not, before he was begotten, or that he had
his beginning of nothing, or that he is of an other substance or essence, or
that affirm the son of God to be made, or to be co^uertible or mutable:
these the Catholic and Apostolic church of God does pronounce for accursed*
when they had prescribed this form of faith, we ceased not diligently to
demand of the^ how they understood that sentence, To be of the substance of
the father. and that: to be of one substance with the father. wherevpo^ there
rose obiectio^s and resolutio^s, so that the right sense of the foresaid
sentences was curiously Of the substance.
sought out. They said that, to be Of one substance, signified nothing else
the^ to be of the father, yet not to be as a part of the father. This seemed
unto us very well to agree with the exposition of that blessed doctrine which
teaches the son to be of the father, yet not to be part of his substance.
Wherefore we accorded with this sentence, neither rejected we the clause Of
one substance, because that peace was placed before our eyes as a mark to
behold, and moreover we had special care not to fall from the faith. In like
manner we approved Begotten, not made. For Made Begotten not made.
they counted a common word with other creatures which were made by the
son, that the son had nothing in him which resembled or was like unto
them, and for that cause he was not a creature like unto those which were
made by him, but of a far more excellent substance the^ any creature is
framed, the which holy scripture declares to be begotten of the father:
inasmuch as no mortal nature can either by word express, or by thought
comprehend or attain unto the manner of his generation. In like sort also that
clause: The son to be of one substance with the The son to be of one
substance with the father.
father, was sifted and allowed, to be understood after no corporal manner,
neither to have any likelihoode with mortal living things, neither to be by
division of substance neither by section or parting asunder, neither by
mutation of the fathers essence and power, that the unbegotten nature of the
father was far from al these things. And that To be of one substance with
the father, signified no other thing, then that the son of God was in
nothing like the rest of the creatures, but altogether like unto the father
alone which begat him, neither begotten of any oother then of the fathers
substance and essence, unto the which thing thus set forth, right and reason
required that we should condescende. For we have known for suertie diverse
ancient Before Arius time the clause of one substance was known.
bishops and vvriters of great learning and renown to have mentioned this
clause, Of one substance in setting forth of the divinity of the father and
the son. so far of the faith published in the council of Nice. whereunto
we all condescended not rashly and unadvisedly but according unto the
sentences set forth in the presence of the most godly Emperor, which were
discussed, and by common assent approved for the causes before alleged. And
withal we thought good to ratify the form of curse published after the
exposition of the faith, because that it forbids that no man do acquaint him
self with forreyne speeches and unwritten languages, whereby in manner all
confusion and discord is drawn and crept into the church, when as the sacred
scripture makes mention no where of any such sentences, to vvete: That the
son of God had his beginning of nothing, and that there was a time when he
was not. And such like sentences it seemed not agreeable with reason either in
words to talk of them, or in deed to teach them. Unto which notable
decree we have subscribed, although heretofore we never accustomed neither
acquainted our selves with such speeches. These things (well-beloved) we have
necessarily sent unto you, not only to certify you of the censure concluded
of us after our curious sifting and assent, but also to let you understand
that while at the first the diversity of reports written unto you offended us
not a little, we persisted in one and the same mind (as it was most meet) even
to the last hour. But afterward with small ado, we embraced without any
disquietnes at all such things as were not offensive, when as we with tractable
mind sought out the sense and understanding of the words which were then in
controversy, and found them altogether agreeable with the things contained in
the form of faith published by us our self. These things did Eusebius
Pamphilus send in writing unto Caesarea in Palaestina.

CAP. VI.
The Epistle of the Synod containing their decrees, and the expulsion of Arius
Cap. 9. in the Greek.
with his accomplices, sundry epistles of Costantine the Emperor.

THe council it self by general consent wrote these things which follow
unto the church of Alexandria, and unto the inhabitants of Egypt, Lybia, and
Pentapolis.

Unto the holy (through the grace of God) and the renowned church of
Alexandria, and to the beloved brethren throughout Egypt, Lybia, and
Pentapolis, the bishops assembled at Nice, and summoned to the great and
sacred senate send greeting in the Lord.
When as by the grace of God and the commandment of the most virtuous
Emperor The synodi^all epistle of ^he council ^f Nice.
Constantine, who gathered us together from diverse cities and provinces, the
great^ and sacred council of Nice is summoned: it seemed expedient that
letters from the whole sacred assembly should be sent unto you, whereby you
might be certified as well of the things called into question and exquisitely
decided: as also of the canons therein confirmed. First of all the things which
did concern the impious and perverse opinion of Arius and his accomplices, were
fully handled in the presence of the most godly Emperor Constantine, whereupon
it pleased the council by common consent of all, to pronounce his wicked
opinion to be held for accursed, and the execrable words and blasphemous
sentences he used, ^aying: that the son of God had his beginning of The
blasphemous opinions of Arius that cursed heretic, toutchinge the blessed
son of God.
nothing: that there was a time when he was not: That the son of God was
of free will inclined to virtue and to vice: that he was a creature, and that
he was made, all which the holy council did accurse, nay it may not be
permitted that his impious opinion, his insolent madness, his blasphemous
words should come within hearing. Moreover you have heard or at leastvvise
ye shall hear of us toutchinge him and his end, lest that we seem rashly
and without cause to insulte and inueye against a man which received dew for
his desert. His impiety grew to that pass, and so prevailed, that he lead
Theonas bishop of Marmarica, and Secundus of Ptolemais, together with him into
perdition. for they were partakers of the same punishment with him. After
that the grace of God had delivered us from that perverse opinion, from that
impiety and blasphemy, and from such people as presumed to sow discord and
debate in the midst of such as lead a peaceable and quiet life: there
remained as yet toutching the co^tumacie of Meletius, and such as he had
advanced unto ecclesiastical orders to be determined of us, and what the
council decreed toutchinge him thus understand well-beloved brethren. The
council being bent to deal with more clemency toward Meletius then he
deserved, This Meletius as Socrates said before cap. 3. in time of persecution
denied the faith, and sacrificed to idols: therefore he was excommunicated, and
being in this taking he took part with the Arians: who for company together
with A^^^s in this council is co^demne^
(for by just judgment he was worthy of no pardon) decreed that he should
remain in his proper city, that he should have no authority to make
ministers, no authority to aduau^ce any unto the ecclesiastical function,
neither to appear or present him self in any other region or in any other
city for that purpose, but only to retain the bare name and title of his
office and dignity: they decreed farther toutching such as were entered into
holy orders by his laying on of hands, that they after confirmation with more
mystical laying on of hands should be admitted into the fellowship of the
church, with this condition: that they should enjoy their dignity and degree
of the ministry, yet that they be inferior unto all the pastors throughout
every province and church, the which the most honorable man and our college
Alexander has ordained. Moreover that they have no authority to elect the
ministers approved by their censures, no not so much as to nominate the^ which
are to execute the ecclesiastical function, nor to intermedle with any thing
toutching the^ that are within Alexanders jurisdiction, without the consent of
the bishop of the catholic church. But they who through the grace of God and
the means of your prayers were found no maintayners of schism, but contained
the^ selves within the bounds of the Catholic and Apostolic church, void
of all erroneous blemishe, let these have authority to consecrate ministers,
to nominate such as shall be thought vvorthie of the clergy, and in fine freely
to do all according unto the rule and canon of the church. If in case that one
of them which presently enjoy the ecclesiastical dignity, chance to finishe
his mortal race, the^ one of them lately admitted into the church (so that he
be found worthy, and the people chose him, so that the bishop of Alexandria
consent thereunto and confirm his election) may succeed in the place of the
deseased. our will is also that, that liberty be granted unto all others. But
of Meletius namely it is otherwise decreede, to wete, that both for his
insolent boldness, wherewith heretofore he molested the quiet estate of the
church, and also for his temeritie and wilful ignorance openly showed, he
should have neither power, neither authority given him, for in that he is a
man, he may again vex the church with the like disorder. And these decrees
properly and severally do concern Egypt, and the most holy church of
Alexandria. But if any other thing besides this be decreed and concluded upon
vvhylest that the most honorable lord our fellow minister and brother
Alexander is present with us, he being both president and priuye to our
doings, will in presence of you all more exactly recite the whole unto you.
We send you glad tydinges of the uniform consent and agreement toutching
the celebration of the most The question of Easter concluded upon in the
council of Nice
sacred feast of Easter, that by the means of your prayers the stir raised
in that behalf was quietly appeased. so that all the brethren which inhabit
the East, obseruinge heretofore the manner of the Jews, now with uniform
consent do follow the Romans, and us, and you, which of old time have
retained with us the self same order and manner of celebration. Wherefore
rejoice partly because of these prosperous affairs, and partly for the peace
and uniform agreement of all, and partly also that all heresies are aba^doned
and plucked up by the roots, and embrace with greater honor and more fervent
love our fellow minister Alexander, but your bishop. whose presence was a great
pleasure unto us, who in those years took great pains and labored
exceedingly to reduce the affairs of your church unto a quiet and peaceable
state. power unto God hearty prayers for us all, that the things rightly
decreede and established may continewe for firm and inviolable through God the
father almighty, and our Lord Jesus Christ together with the holy ghost, to
whom be glory for ever and ever, Amen.


It is evident by this Synodicall epistle, that they accursed not only Arius
and his accomplices, but also the sentences of his perverse opinion, moreover
that they agreed among the^ selves toutching y^ celebration of Easter: that
they received y^ grau^d heretic Meletius, grau^ting him license to retain
his episcopal dignity, yet Why the Meletians are severed from the church.
The wanton book which Arius wrote and entitled Thalia.
depriving him of all authority to execute the function as a bishop uses. for
which cause I suppose the Meletians in Egypt unto this day to have been
severed from the church, because that the council took away from Meletius all
authority. We have moreover to understand, that Arius wrote a book of his
opinion, the which he entitled Thalia, the style and phrase of the book is
both wanton and dissolute, resembling in all points the bawdy ballets and rymes
of the wanton poet Sotades. the which book also the council then did
condemn. Neither was the council only careful by writing to certify of
the peace established, but the Emperor also signified the same by his letters
unto the church of Alexandria.

Constantinus the Emperor unto the Catholic church of Alexandria.
We wish you health in the Lord well-beloved brethren. A great and a singular
benefit of the Co^stantinus Magnus unto the church of Alexandria.
divine providence of God is conferred on us, in that all error and deceate
being quite put to slight, we acknowledge one and the self same faith. For
henceforth there remains no refuge for the sleyghts of the devil intended
against us, whatsoever through fraud he pretended, the same is wholy taken
away. The bright beams of the truth according unto the commandment of
Christ, overcame those dissentions, schisms, those tumults (and as I may so
term it) that deadly poison of discord. one God therefore all we both in name
do adore, and in faith do believe to be. And to the end the same through the
forewarning of god might be brought to pass, I have called together a great
company of bishops unto the city of Nice, with whom I also being one of your
n^ber, and most willingly addicti^g my self wholly together with you unto the
same business, have endeavored that the truth then in co^trouersy might
thoroughly be tried out. wherefore all things that seemed to breed occasion of
discord or dissension, were narrovvly sifted and sought out. How great and
what horrible blasphemies (God of his goodness be merciful unto us) have some
irreverently uttered against our great savior, against our hope and life, and
impude^tly not only blased things contrary unto the scriptures inspired from
above and the sacred faith, but also affirmed they believed the same? For when
as three hundredth bishops and above, men of great fame both for modesty of
mind and sharpness of wit, had confirmed one and the same faith, which was
found to be a true faith by the truth it self, and plain testimonies of
holy scripture sought out for the purpose: Arius alone was found (being
overcome with the power and fraud of the devil) to fall from the same: and
being prone thereunto through the peruersitie of his mind, scattered and
sowed first of all amongst you, afterward amongst us, this poisoned
error of perdition. Wherefore let us embrace that doctrine which almighty
God, the father of heaven has delivered unto us: let us return unto our
dearly beloved brethren whom the wicked and impudent minister of Satan has
severed asunder: let us with might and main, and (as commonly we say) with
all the veins in our heart, go home again unto the general society and body
of the church, and unto our own natural members. This above all other things
behooves your wisdom, your faith and holiness, after the remoui^g from your
minds the ca^kred poyso^ of the adversary, who set him self opposite against
the truth: that without all delay ye have recourse unto the grace and goodness
of almighty God. For that which seemed good unto the three hundred bishops, is
no otherwise to be taken then for the sentence of God, specially in as much as
the holy Ghost was resiant in the minds of so vvorthie and so notable men,
inspiring them with the divine will of God him self. Wherefore let none of
you stagger at the matter, let none of you make any delay at all, but all
jointly with most vvillinge minds return unto the most perfect way of
truth: that as soon as I my self come amongst you, I may together with you
render dew thanks unto the god whose eye nothing does escape: because that he
has not only revealed unto us the true and sincere faith, but also given unto
us most graciously the love and charity which was to be wished of us all.
God keep and preserve you well-beloved brethren.


This the Emperor wrote unto the people of Alexandria; signifying in plain
words that the final conclusion and definitive sentence of the faith was not
laid down unadvisedly, neither came to pass by hap hazard: but after great
labor and industry, after diligent searching and sifting out of the truth,
to have been published by the council: and not some things to have been
handled, some other things to have been omitted: but all whatsoever seemed
necessary to be entreated of, toutching the confirmation of y^ doctrine of
faith, to have been sufficiently discoursed: neither to have been first
unadvisedly decreed, before all were curiously handled, in so much that all
what so ever seemed to breed occasion of controversy or discord, was quite
plucked up by the roots. But (that I may utter all in one word) Constantine
calls the censure of the whole assembly, the sentence of God him self,
neither doubted he but that so great a company of bishops was united and linked
together in one mind and in one opinion by y^ motion and instinct of the holy
ghost. Yet for all this, Sabinus who is the ringleader of the Macedonian
heresy, wilfully and of set purpose impugneth these things: yea moreover he
terms such as met at Nice, unlearned and doultishe idiots: neither is he
ashamed to charge Eusebius bishop of Caesarea with the reprochefull spot and
blemishe of ignorance, neither weyeth he this with him self, that such as were
present at the counsel, though they were unlearned men (as he reports) yet
being inspired from above, and endued with the grace of the spirit of God,
could in no wise straye from the truth. But let us hear what the Emperor
laid down in other letters against the opinions of Arius and his accomplices,
the which also he sent abroad unto the bishops and congregations throughout
christendom.

An other Epistle of Constantine.
COnstantinus the puyssa^t, the mighty and noble Emperor unto the bishops,
pastors, and people Co^stantinus unto the bishops and people, etc.
whersoeuer. Inasmuch as Arius traceth the stepps of detestable and impious
persons: it is requisite that he be partaker with them of the self same
infamy and reproach. For as Porphyrius the sworn adversary and deadly foe
of divine service, who lately published lewd commentaries, in the
co^futation and defiance of Christian religion, was revvarded according unto
his desert, and so reco^penced that within the compass of these few years he
was not only grieved with great reproach, and blemished with the shameful spot
of infamy, but also his impious and blasphemous works, perished and utterly
were abolished: even so now it seemed good unto us to call Arius and his
accomplices, the wicked brood of Porphyrius, that look whose manners they have
imitated, they may enjoy also the privilege of their name. Moreover we
thought good, that if there can be found extant any work or book compiled by
Arius, the same should be burned to ashes, so that not only his damnable
doctrine may thereby he wholy rooted out: but also that no relic thereof
may remain unto the posterity. This also we straightly command and charge,
that if any man be found to hyde or conceal any book made by Arius, and not
immediately bring forth the said book, and deliver it up to be burned, that the
said offender for so doing, shall die the death. For as soon as he is taken,
our pleasure is that his head be stricken of from his shoulders. God keep you
in his tuition.


An other epistle of Constantine.
COnstantinus the Emperor unto the churches throughout christendom sends
greeting. Co^stantinus the Emperor unto the churches, etc
When as I perceived by the flourishing and prosperous estate of the public
weal, how greatly we are beholding unto the goodness of almighty God conferred
upon us: I deemed that above all things it behooved me of duty to foresee, that
in the most holy and sacred assemblies of the Catholic church under heaven,
there should one faith, sincere love and charity, uniform consent and
agreement toutching the religion and service of almighty God, vnuiolably be
retained. But sithence that the same could by no other way or means be
compassed, neither in any other sure or certain place be settled, unless that
either all the bishops, or at lestvvise the greater part of them assembled
together, and laid down their several censures concerning the most holy
religion and service of God: therefore when the greatest company that could be
got, met together, I my self as one of your number, was present with
them. Neither took I in scorn (vvhereat now I greatly rejoice) that I
coupled my self with you in those affairs. We proceeded so far in the
premises, and handled all things so exquisitely, until the sentence which
seemed grateful and acceptable unto God the ouerseer of all things, for the
concord and consent in religion was openly pronounced, so that there remained
nothing hereafter to be concluded upon, which seemed to tend or grovve
either unto discord or disagreement toutchinge the faith. When as there at
that time we reasoned of the most sacred solemnity and feast of Easter, it
seemed good by uniform consent of all, that all men, in all places should
celebrate it, upon one and the self same day. for what was there more
auaylable? what could there be more glorious, then that this feast (whereby
we retain and hold fast the firm hope of immortality) should, after one
and the same order, and after the same manifest trade, without novelty or
alteration be observed? and first of all it seemed altogether contrary to
order, that in the celebration of the said most sacred feast, we should imitate
the rites and manner of the Jews, who in as much as they have defiled their
hands with an heinous offense, reason it is as impure persons their minds
should be held snared in blindness. It remains therefore that we lay aside
their custom, and publishe for a remembrance unto the posterity in time to
come the celebration of this feast after a truer and more sincere institution,
the which unto this present time from the first day of the passion we have
observed. Wherefore let us have nothing common, with that most odious brood of
the Jews, for we are taught by our savior to tread an other way the which we
must cleave unto. there is laid down a race and a limite both dece^t and
lawful for our most sacred religion. let us jointly retain this with uniform
consent (most honorable brethren) and withdraw our selves from that despitefull
nation. For in very deed it is the greatest absurdity that can be, for them
arrogantly to vaunt that we can in no wise observe these things without the
aid and help of their discipline. What is it whereof they are able to savor
aright, who after they had put the Lord Jesus to death, having removed the
right sense of their mind out of his quiet seat, were carried not with the
vveyght of reason, but with an intolerable vvilfulnesse of rash enterprises,
vvhither so ever the frenzy and madness that was ingraffed in their minds
did lead them? And in this point it is apparent they see not the manifest
truth, (no marvel then they err in many things) in that they besides the
appointed time for the celebration of this fest, within the compass of the
self same year do celebrate a second Easter. What cause then shall move us
to imitate these men, whom we see thus manifestly infected with the
grieuons malady of error? we will in no wise permit the same feast in one
and the same year the second time to be solemnized. If that I had been
careless and busyed my self herein nothing at all, it had been your part
and duty to have employed both your diligence, and also with earnest and
continewall prayer to have craved that the right rule and synceritie of your
minds should in no wise participate, neither in any thing have fellowship with
the wicked vvayes of lewd persons. Besides all this, we may easily perceive
how shameful and detestable a thing it is to dissent and disagree about so
vveyghtie a matter, and about so high and so religious a feast. One festival
day of purchased freedom, to vvete, of the most blessed passion and
bloodsheding has our savior commended unto us, one catholic church he
would have to be collected of all, whose members though they be many and in
sundry places dispersed under heaven: yet do they knit and close together in
one spirit, that is in the will and pleasure of almighty god. I would that of
your wisdom and holiness, you deeply weyed with your selves how disordered and
indecent a thing it is, upon the self same days, for some religiously to
fast, and for some others ryotously to feast it out: and after Easter
holidayes, for some to feast, and yield them selves to fulness of pleasure,
for others to abstain, and observe the prescribed days of fasting.
Wherefore this is to be reformed, and reduced unto one manner and custom, this
(as I am sure you do all, know very well) is the pleasure of God him self.
And in as much as the same is ryghtly to be redressed, that we have nothing
common with murderers of fathers, and such as have putt their Lord and
master to death: In as much as again that orderly, and comely manner retained
of all the churches throughout the world, inhabiting either the West, the
South, or the North, and in sundry places also of the East, was to be
observed of us: therefore it is that presently all have thought right well
thereof. I my self also have taken upon mine own person, your tractable
vvisdome, that look what custom soever with uniform consent, is of force
in the city of Rome, in Italy, and Aphtick, in all Egypt, Spain, France
and Bryttaine, Libya and all Greece, in the province of Asia, Pontus, and
Cilicia: the same also with vvilling and grateful minds, should be ratified
and approved of you all. Considering of this carefully with your selves, that
not only the greater number of congregations lies in the places before
mentioned: but also that it is a most godly purpose for all men jointly with
one heart and voice, to desire that established, which right and reason
requires to be done, which also has no fellowship with the damnable perjury
of the despiteful Jews. but that I may utter the whole in few words, it
seemed good by common assent of the whole assembly, that the most sacred feast
of Easter, should be celebrated upon one, and the self same day. for it may
not be that variance and dissension should raygne about the celebration of so
holy, and so high a feast, yea moreover it is very commendable to condescend
unto this sentence, which is far from all error that does prejudice the
faith, and from all fellowship with shameful sin. Wherefore the matter
being brought to this pass, embrace this decre with willing minds as an
heavenly and most godly commandment. for whatsoever is decreeed in the holy
councels of Bishops, the same is to be attributed to the will of God.
Wherefore when you have certified al our well-beloved brethren, of the canons of
this council, the sentence already laid down, and the manner of celebrating the
most holy feast, it is your part to approve the same, and duly to observe it:
that as soon as I can perceive the right disposition of you all, the which of
long time I have desired, I may upon one, and the self same day, together
with you all, solemnize this most sacred feast, and joy for your sakes: the
which shall come to pass, if that I may understand, that not only the
spite and outrageous dealing of the devil, through your well doing, aided
from above, is wholy put to flight and abandoned from amongst you: but that
also our faith by reason of peace, and concord, does every where notably
florishe. God preserve you well-beloved brethren.


An other Epistle unto Eusebius.
COnstantinus the puysant, the mighty, and noble Emperor, unto Eusebius
sends greeting. The epistle of Constantine unto Eusebius Pamphilus.
Even as (well-beloved brother) I have learned of a truth, and am fully
persuaded, that all Churches from the fundations, are either through negligence
gone to decay, or through fear of the danger that was like to ensue have been
less repaired then they should have been, yea unto this present day, by
reason of the grievous maladye of spite, and great tyranny exercised upon the
Saints of God, and the servants of our Savior Jesus Christ: so now liberty
being restored unto all men, and that dragon, and persecutor Licinnius being
foiled, and the direction of ecclesiastical affairs removed from the
disposition of the vulgar sort, by the providence of Almighty God and the
vigilant labor of our ministry, I suppose that the power and might of God is
made manifest unto all men, and that they which fell by reason of fear, or
incredulity, or other infirmity whatsoever, in as much as now they
acknowledge the true God in deed, will repent and return unto the true and
right way. Wherefore what Churches so ever thou do govern, or other
places, where other Bishops, Priests and Deacons, of thy acquaintance, do
ouerse, our will is, that thou admonish them all, that with watchful eye, the
buildings of the churches be looked unto: to the end that such as stand may
be repaired, and also be enlarged, or else where necessity so constrayneth,
they may be erected all new from the foundation. Look what things are
necessarily required for buildinge, see that either thou thy self, or some
other in thy name, demand them of the Lieuetenants, or rulers of our
provinces. for we have signified unto them by our letters, that with all
celeritie and promptnes of mind they shall supplye the want of such things
as thine holiness does prescribe. and thus well-beloved brother I committ thee to
the tuition of Almighty God.


These things the Emperor wrote for the buylding of the Churches, unto the
Bishops of every province, and what severally he wrote unto Eusebius Bishop of
Caesarea in Palaestina for the coppying of holy Scripture it may easily be
gathered by these letters of his as follows. Constantinus the puysant, the
mighty, and noble Emperor, unto The epistle of Constantine unto Eusebius.
Eusebius Bishop of Caesarea, sends greeting. In so much that in the After
the name of Co^stantinus Bizantium was called Constantinople.
city, which is called after our name, there inhabiteth a great multitude of
men (our Savior Jesus, and God the father, of his providence sending increase
thereunto) which embraces the most holy Church, to the end all the
Ecclesiastical affairs, may in the same place daily increase more and more,
we have thought good, that more Churches should be erected, and builded
there. Wherefore accept with loving heart, what our will and pleasure is.
We have thought good to signify unto thy wisdom, that thou should
prepare fyftye volumes, or coppies of holy Scripture, written in parchment,
which shall be both legible, ha^dsome, and portable, and that thou command
moreover, that they be written of skillful scriueners, exercised in the art of
penning. our will is, that the volumes comprise those books of holy Scripture,
whose penning, and use, thou thy self shall think most necessarily to avail
for the edifying of the Church. Our highness has sent letters unto our head
treasurer, that he should minister all necessaries for the provision of these
books. It is thy part then, to ouersee with speed, that these written
coppies be made ready. Moreover by virtue of these our letters (as right
requires) we give thee liberty to take up two common wagon, for the
conueying of them thither, for so the written coppies shall the sooner be
brought unto us, and so much the better if one of thy Deacons, be put in trust
therewith. who when as he comes in place, shall find the proof of our
liberality. God keep thee in health well-beloved brother.

An other epistle unto Macarius.
COnstantinus the puysant, the mighty, and noble Emperor, unto Macarius Bishop
of The epistle of Constantine unto Macarius, concerning the sepulcher of our
Savior feu^d there, and the buylding of a Church in that place.
Jerusalem, sends greeting. So bountifully was the goodness of our Savior,
shevved toward us, that no tongue is able for the worthiness thereof,
sufficiently to express this present miracle: that the pleadge or monument of
his most blessed passion, which of late lay hidd in the bovvells of the earth
the space of so many years, should at length be revealed unto the servants of
God being set at liberty, after conquering of the common and general enemy:
it far exceeds all humane sense, and capacity of man's wit. For if all
the sages, and vvisest sort of men throughout the world, assembled them
selves together, and purposed to reason and entreat hereof, without doubt they
could not, for the worthiness thereof, satisfy with any circumstance, no, not
the least point thereof the faith annexed unto this miracle is of such force,
and so far exceeds the sense and capacity of man's nature: as celestial,
and divine things, do pass humane and worldly affairs. Wherefore this is
always my principal and only mark to shoot at, that even as the true faith
reuealeth her self daily, by new and straung miracles: so all our minds with
all modesty, and uniform readiness, should be fixed, and more prone, to the
observation of the most holy and blessed Gospel. besides this, that also (the
which I think every man knovveth full well) I vvoulde have thee fully
assured to be my chief care, that the said holy place, (the which by the
commandment of God, we have purged from the foul weight of the filthy Idols,
ouerlayed therevvith as it were with a most grievous burden: the which
place also we know to have been recounted holy in manner from the beginning of
the world, and afterward also to have yielded more evident proofs of
holiness, by sturring up again the faith of the passion of our Savior, as it
were from out of darkness into light) be bevvtified with goodly and gorgeous
buylding. It is requisite that thy wisdom do cast with thy self, and set
in order this work^, and carefully provide necessaries for all circumstances to
the end that not only the sanctuary may excel for bevvtie, all the rest
wheresoever: but that also the other parts thereof may be such, as shall
far pass in excellency of buylding, all the principal Churches throughout
every city. I certify thee moreover, that toutching the making up of the
vvalls, and the curious vvorkemanship thereof, I have charged our friend
Dracillianus (who governs diverse other coasts) and also the ruler of that
province, our grace has charged them, that what artificers, what workmen,
what other things soever shall seem expedient for the buylding, they should
learn of thy wisdom, and forthwith be sent thither for the provision
thereof. Concerning the pillars, and other parts of the temple to be made of
marble, look what thou supposest fittest, both for the majesty of the
workmanship, and continewance of the buylding, taking with thy self good
aduisement therein, that thou certify us thereof by thy letters, to the end
that we understanding by thy letters what you have need of, may from every
where convey the same thither unto you for it behooves us to garnishe, and
sete forth with great majesty, the head, and chief place of the whole
world. our will is besides, that thou certify us, what thine opinion is,
whether it were better to have the roof of the sanctuary embovved vautvvise,
or wrought after some other kind of artificious cunning* if embovved
vautvvise, then may it finely be gylded all over. It rests then that thy
holiness, unto whose prudent consideration (as it is premised) we have referred
the whole, do certify us with all speed, what workmen, what artificers,
what provision ye shall have need of: and also that thou signify unto us thy
mind, toutching the marble, and pillars to be made thereof, and the embovved
roof, if that kind of work please thee best. God keep thee in health
well-beloved brother.


The Emperor wrote also solemn and large epistles against Arius, and his
accomplices, the which he caused every where, and in every city, to be blased
abroad: taunting him bitterly for his follye, and skoffing wise grieuing him to
the gutts. besides he wrote letters unto the Nicomedians, where he inueyed
against Eusebius, and Theognis. He charged Eusebius with subtle treachery
Eusebius ^. of Nicomedia and Theognis were Arians.
and lewd behavior: and not only that he had infected him self with the
noisome filth of Ariamse, but also in the Lic^^^us.
tyrants behalf, wrought treason against him, and after the manner of a rebel
resisted his enterprises. Wherefore he exhorted them to choose an other Bishop
in his rowme. The which Epistles of his, because that they are somewhat long,
I thought good presently not to trouble the Reader withal, in so much as, such
as are desirous thereof, may easily, and at pleasure, both find, and peruse
them. And of these things thus much.

CAP. VII. Cap. 10. in the Greek.

How that the Emperor Constantine, called Acesius, a Nouatian Bishop, unto
the council of Nice.

THe Emperors care and industry, moves me to mention an other act of that
council, wherein he applied him self, to the maintenance of peace. And
because he greatly respected the unity, and concord in Ecclesiastical
affairs, he summoned Acesius Bishop of the Nouatian sect, to the council.
After that the determination of the council, toutching the faith was both
laid down in writing, and ratified with the scuerall subscriptions of all
their hands: the Emperor demands of Acesius, whether he would assent unto
the same faith, and also unto the canon concluded upon, toutching the
observation of the feast of Easter. who made answer: the council (O Emperor)
has concluded, and decreed no new thing* for I have learned of old, that
even from the beginning, and the Apostolic times them selves, the self same
faith was retained, and the self same time, for the celebration of the feast
of Easter was observed. Again, when the Emperor demanded of him, the cause
why he severed him self from the communion of the faithful: he alleged for
him self, such things as had happened under the raygne of Decius, and about
the persecution of that time, and also he brought forth the precise
observation, of a certain severe Canon, to were: A Canon toutching such as in
persecution had denied Christ.
that such as after baptism, through frayltie of the flesh, had fallen vi^o
that kind of sin, the which holy Scripture terms, the sin unto death,
should not be partakers of the holy mysteries, but exhorted unto repentance:
and that they should wait for remission of sin to proceed, not of the
Priests, but of God him self, who both can, and is of power sufficient to
remitt sin. The which when Acesius had uttered, the Emperor said unto him
again: Peter Martyr. in 2. Sam. cap. 24. notes, how that Constantine in
these words ^kof^eth at Acesius, for his intolerable pride, and singularity,
in that he along with his sect would be i^ heaven.
Provide thee a ladder (O Acesius) and clyme alone into heaven. These things
did neither Eusebius Pamphilus, neither any other writer once make mention of,
but I my self learned it, The reporter was Au^anon a Nouatian, as it cap. 9.
following.
of one that was of no small creditt, of great years, and such a one as
rehearsed the things he saw done in the council. whereby I conjecture the
self same to have happened unto such, as herein have been silent, the which
thing diverse Historiographers have practiced* for these men ouerskipp many
things, either because they favor some one side, or flatter some kind of
men. And so much of Acesius.

CAP. VIII.
Of Paphriutius Bishop of a certain place in the upper Thebais, and Spyridion
Bishop of Trimithous a city of Cyprus.

IN so much as heretofore we have promised to speak of Paphnutius and
Spyridion, now fit opportunity is offered to perform the same. This
Paphnutius was Bishop of a certain city in the upper Thebais, so virtuous,
and so holy a man, that straung miracles were wrought by him. He had one of his
eyes pulled out, in the time of persecution. Wherefore the Emperor had him in
very great reverence, and sent for him at sundry times, to come unto his
sumptuous palace. The emptye place of the banished eye, he was wont to kiss.
So great a reverence and honor, did the Emperor Constantine owe unto
ancient, and holy fathers. And this Cap. 11. in the greek. Paphnutiu^*
is one thing which I had to say of Paphnutius. An other thing also I will
report which came to pass, through his advise, both profitable for the
Church, and honorable for ecclesiastical persons. The Bishops thought good, to
bring a new law into the Church, to were: that they which were of the
Clergy (I mean Bishops, Priests, and Deacons) should thenceforth, not
company with their wives, the which they had coopled unto them being lay men.
When as they went about to reason hereof, Paphnutius a single man yet a fauorer
of priests mariadges in the counsel of Nice. Hebr. 13.
to consult among them selves, toutching this matter: * Paphnutius stood up in
the midst of the assembly of Bishops, and brake out into loud speeches, and
language, that the necks of clergy men, and such as were entered into holy
orders, were not to be pressed down with an heavy yoke, and grievous burden,
saying: * that marriage was honorable, and the bed undefiled: that it was their
part to foresee, lest that with toe severe a censure, they should greatly
injury, and offend the Church of God: that all, possibly could not away
with so austere a discipline, to be void of all perturbation, and frayltie of
the flesh: and that peradventure likewise every of their wives, could not
brook so rare a rule of continency, prescribed unto them. He termed the
company of man and wife, lawfully coopled together, chastity: and that to seem
sufficient enough, for such as had entered into holy orders, being single men,
thenceforth (according unto the old ecclesiastical tradition) to live a single
life: and not to separate any man asunder from his wife, the which he had
married being a lay man. such speeches used Paphnutius, when he him self had
never been married, and (as I may justly auoutch) never knew what woman's
company meant. for of a child he ledd a straict life, in the company of the
religious worshipers, and excelled all others in fame (if then there was any
such in the world) for continency of mind, and chaste behavior. to conclude,
the whole council then assembled of ecclesiastical persons, yielded unto the
sentence of Paphnutius, wholly ending all controversy, that might rise in this
behalf, and permitting liberty unto every man at his own pleasure, to
refrain as him listed the company of the married wife. so far of Paphnutius.
Cap. 12. in the Greek. Spyridion.
And that I may say some thing of Spyridion, he was so holy, and so virtuous
a sheepeheard of cattle, that he seemed worthy to be appointed the sheepeheard
of men. He was Bishop of Trimithous, a city of Cyprus, who when as there he
executed the function of a Bishop, yet for his singular modesty, he kept also
a flock of sheep* and although many notable things are reported of him, yet
lest that we seem to digress toe far from the purpose, we will content our
selves with the relation of one, or two of his famous Acts. Thieves on a
certain time, about midnight, brake into his sheepecote, and by stelth went
about to convey away, some of his sheep, but God who kept the sheepeheard,
saved also the sheep. for the thieves with a certain invisible kind of
force, were held fast bound unto the sheepecote. At the dawning of the day
Spyridion came to his fold, and seeing the hands of the thieves tied behind
them, forthwith understood the circumstance, and by prayer which he made unto
God loosed their hands, and exhorted them earnestly to get their living, not
with the spoil of other men's substance, but with the sweat of their own
brows. yet in the end he gave to them a fatt wether, bidding them farewell in
this sorce: I give you this, lest it repent you that ye have labored all night
in vain. one of his doings was this. the other in this sorce. He had to his
daughter a virgin, endued with her fathers piety ^^^ne the daughter of
Spyridion.
and holiness, her name was Irene, in whose custody, a dear and familiar
friend, left a precious jewel, she weying the charge of this jewel, hidd it
in the ground, and in a while after departed this life. then came the owner,
and seeing that the maid was dead, he went about to entangle the father,
sometimes charging, and threatening him with foul means, some other times
entreating him with fair words. the old man weying the loss of his friend,
as much as his own, got him unto the sepulcher of his daughter, praying unto
God, that now before the time he will voutchsafe to show unto him the promised
resurrection, the which hope of his, failed him nothing at all. for the maid
revived, and came to the presence of her father, which also, as soon as she
had revealed unto him the place where the jewel lay hidd, vanished away out
of his sight. such men there flourished, in many of the Churches of God, in the
time of Constantinus the Emperor. These things I both heard with mine ears,
many of the Isle of Cyprus reporting to be true: and also I read it in a
certain book of Ruffinus a Priest, written in the latin tongue, whence I
have borrowed uffinus hist. ^. 1. cap. 5.
these and sundry other things, the which I will hereafter allege.

CAP. IX. ap. 13. in ^ Greek. Eutychianus though he was a nouatian, yet was he
a rare man, both for life, and learning. Auxanon a nouatian heretic.

Of Eutychianus the Monk. The dissoluing of the council of Nice. The time
thereof, and the chief men then present.

I Have learned also that Eutychianus, a man of sincere religion, flourished at
that time, who though he were of the Nouatian sect, yet did he many strange
things, nothing inferior unto the acts mentioned a little before. I will reveal
him, y^ reported unto me his doings, neither will I cloak or conceal that, at
all, though therefore I may incur the danger of suspicion or the
reprehensiu^ of diverse persons. It was Auxanon, a priest of y^ Nouatian church,
who having lived many years went, being a very young man unto the council of
Nice, together with Acesius: that told me all the things which happened unto
Acesius, of whom I spoke before. It was even he yt lengthened his days, and
continewed his years, from that time, unto the reign of Theodosius the
younger, and rehearsed unto me being a very young man, all the famous acts of
Eutychianus. And though he ran over many gifts of the grace of God, bestowed
upon him, yet reported he of him, one notable thing which happened in the
raygne of Constantine the emperor, which was thus. One of the guard whom the
emperor calls ordinary, as soon as he was ones suspected of traitorous
conspiracy, fled away. The emperor being thoroughly moved with indignation
against him, gave straicte charge, and commandment, that wheresoever he were
taken, there immediately he should be executed. He was found about Olympus in
Bithynia, and fettered with cruel, and grievous bonds in the parts of Olympus,
then clapped in prison. In those parts Eutychianus had his abode, leading a
solitary lif, curing many of their grievous maladies, both outwardly in body,
and inwardly in their mind. with him this Auxanon had his conversation, being
as then a young stripling, which afterward lived many years, and learned under
him y^ monastical trad of living. They flock about Eutychianus, that he would
release yt prisoner, and entreat the emperor for him (for the miracles wrought
by Eutychianus were famous, and being bruted abroad, they came to y^ ears of
y^ emperor) he eftsoon with a willing, and prompt mind, promises that he
will take his journey to y^ emperor, in his behalf. But whilst y^ y^ prisoner
endured extreme torments, by reason of y^ intolerable fetters, wherewith he
was fastened: y^ solicitors of his cause informed Eutychianus, y^ death,
because of his bitter punishment, would prevent both y^ execution enjoined by
y^ emperor, and y^ supplication y^ was to be made for him. Eutychianus then,
sent unto the kepers of y^ iayle, requestinge the^ to loose y^ man. And when
they had answered, that the deliverance of the prisoner, would be the great
danger of their lives: Eutychianus together with Auxanon, went straight way unto
y^ prison. When as y^ kepers being entreated, would not open y^ prison: y^ gift
of God enclosed in the breast of Eutychianus, revealed it self with greater
brightness in the world. For the gates of y^ prison, voluntarily set themselves
wide open yea when y^ keys were absent, and tied to y^ keepers girdle.
Moreover when Eutychianus and Auxano^ entered in, and all y^ beholders were now
astonished, the fetters of their own accord, fell of y^ prisoners feet.
These things being done, Eutychianus and Auxanon take their journey together,
toward the city which of old was called Byzantiu^ afterward Constantinople.
Eutychianus forthwith, got him unto y^ emperors court, and purchaced pardon,
for y^ prisoner. For the emperor without delay (for y^ great reverence he owed
unto Eutychianus) granted him his request with a willing mind. This was done
in a while after. At y^ time y^ bishops, which met together at y^ council of
Nice as soon as they had dispatched, both other things, and also laid down in
writing y^ decrees (which also they call canons) already concluded upon, every
one returns unto his own city. I think it very expedient to lay down in
this place, not only the names of the bishops, assembled at Nice, which among
all y^ rest were most famous (I mean such as I cold learn by records) but
also the province, and place where every one governed, together with y^ time of
their assembly. There was Osius. Viton. Vincentius. Alexander. Eustathius.
Macarius. Harpocratio Cynon.
present at this council: Osius bishop of Corduba: Viton, and Vincentius
priests: Alexander bishop of Egypt: Eustathius bishop of great Antioch:
Macarius bishop of Jerusalem: Harpocratio, Cynon, with others: whose names are
severally, and exquisitly cited by Athanasius bishop of Alexandria, in his
book entitled Synodicus. Anno 32^ some say 326. some (...) the^ 328. Cap. 14.
in. the Greek.
Toutching the time when this council was summoned, as it appears by
cronicles of record, it was in the consulship of Paulinus and Iulianus, the
eleue^th kalends of June, to we^e: the XX. day of May, the three hundredth
thirtye, and sixth year after the raygne of Alexander king of Macedonia. Thus
was the council broken up, which being done we have to learn that the
emperor departed into the Eastern parts.

CAP. X.
How that Eusebius bishop of Nicomedia, and Theognis bishop of Nice, being
exiled for Arianisme, after they had given up a book of their recantation and
repentance were restored to their former dignities

EVsebius and Theognis, sent a little book unto the chief bishops, wherein
they showed their penitent minds, for their wilful folly: wherefore by the
emperors commandment they were not only called home from banishment, but
also restored to the government of their churches: removing from their
dignities, such as were substituted in their rowmes, to wete: Amphion removed
by Eusebius, and Chraestus by Theognis. The copy of the recantation we have
here laid down as follows: Although it was our part heretofore being
condemned by your holiness, not to have muttered, but quietly to have borne
whatsoever your wisdoms both godly, The rec^tation of Eusebius bishop of
Nicomedia and Theognis bishop of Nice which were A^^an heretics, exhibited
unto the chief bishops.
and religiously had decreed: yet because it seemed a shameful thing, that
with our silence, we should cause others, to conceive an ill opinion of us,
and so to condemn us for deuisers of falshoode: therefore have we signified
unto you, our assent, toutching the determination of the faith: and having
diligently vveyed, and examined with our selves, the force, and signification
of the cause, Of one substance, we wholy adict our selves, to the embracinge
of peace, and unity, never henceforth to inta^gle our selves, in the snares of
error. And partly to the end we might provide for the peaceable security of the
church of God, we have laid vvide open before you, the secrets of our mind:
partly also that they, which to man's seeminge, should yield to our censure,
and judgment, might in this behalf setle, and confirm themselves, we have
subscribed to the form of faith, which the holy assembly has laid down. we
protest unto you moreover, in that heretofore, we subscribed not, to the
condemnation, or accursinge of Arius, it was not because we misliked with
that form of faith, but because we could not be fully persuaded, that he
was such a kind of felovve, as report went of him: specialy when as by such
things, as privately past by epistles between us, and also by his own
protestation, pronounced with his own lips, in our presence, we were fully
persuaded, that he was far from that kind of disposition. If that then,
that sacred senate, and holy assembly will give any creditt unto our words,
we have fully purposed, and determined with our selves, not to impugn by
gainesaying, but by assentinge, and prompt minds, to ratify those canons,
which your sincere, and religious piety has already concluded. And by this
our book of submission, we do seal our consent therein, not for that we are
grieved with exile, and banishment: but that most willingly we would not
only abandone heresy, but also avoid, yea the suspicion thereof. And if that
you will voutchsafe us your presence, you shall find in deed, as you read by
word, that we will subscribe unto your decrees. For as much as it pleased
your wonted goodness, to call before you, and courteously to entreat, the
ringleader of this sect: it seems far out of order, when as he being gilty
was sent for, and ansvvered for himself, that we with silence, should
condemn our selves. let it not grieve you then, as it becomes your reverend
fatherhood, to put our most religious emperor in remembrance of us, to present
our humble suit unto him, and speedely to determine what your discreet
wisdom thinks best, toutching this our estate. This was the recantation of
Eusebius, and Theognis. by which circunstances I do conjecture, though they
subscribed unto the form of faith, decreed by the council, yet that they
would not condescend, to the renouncing of Arius: and that Arius before this
time, was sent for. And for all that it was so, yet was it straictly
commanded, that Arius should not tread within Alexandria. The which plainly
appears, by the subtle treachery he found out, for to return unto the
church, and to the city of Alexandria, through false and fained show of
repentance. But of this hereafter.

CAP. XI.
After the dissoluinge of the council when Alexander had departed this life,
Cap. 15. after the greek.
Athanasius was chosen bishop of Alexandria.

NOt long after, Alexander bishop of Alexandria, having run the race of his
mortal Athanasius bishop of Alexandria. Ruffinus lib. ^hist. ca. 14.
life, died, and Athanasius is appointed to govern the church in his place.
Ruffinus reports of him, that being a child of tender years, he played a part
in an holy play together with his coaged companions. The play was nothing
else but animitation, or resemblance of priesthood, and of the whole
ecclesiastical order, in the which, Athanasius played the bishop, of the rest
of the children, some played y^ priests, some other the deacons. Thus played y^
children on that day, in the which the church of Alexandria accustometh to
celebrat the memorial of Peter, there bishop and martyred. At that time (as it
fell out) Alexander bishop of Alexandria, passinge bye, beheld the whole
order, and discourse of the play. He sent for the childrene to come unto him,
and demanded of them, what part every one handled in the play, gatheringe
hereby something to be foreshewed, and prognosticated unto them all. Which
being done, he charged they should be brought Alexander b. of Alexandria made
Athanasius deacon. Athanasius being deaco^ was at the council of Nice. Cap.
16. after the greek.
up in the church, and nurtured in good learning, but above all Athanasius.
Whom when he came to any ripenes of years, he made deacon, and brought him in
his company to the council of Nice, for to aid him in disputation. These
things has Ruffinus written in his histortes, of Athanasius. neither is it
unlike but that these circumstances might be, for it is most true, that many
such things have oftentimes heretofore, come to pass. This much by the way of
Athanasius.

CAP. XII.
How that Constantine the Emperor, enlarging the city which of old was
called Byzantium, termed it after his own name Constantinople.

THe emperor, after the ending of the counsel, lived in great tra^quility.
And as soon as (after the wonted guise) he had celebrated the twe^tyth year
of his raygne, without all delay, or tariance, he turned himself wholly to the
buylding of churches, the which he brought to pass, as well in other cities,
as in that city the which he called after his name, but of old bore the name
of Byzantium. This he enlarged exceedingly, he environed with great and goodly
walls, he bewtified with glorious building, and made her nothing inferior to
the princely city of Rome calling her after his name Constantinople. He made
moreover a law that she should be called Constantinople called New Rome but
of old Byzantium.
the Second Rome. The which law is engraven in a stony pillar, and reserved in
the public pretory, nigh the emperors knightly picture. In this city he
erected from the foundation, two churches, calling y^ one, of peace, the other,
of the Apostles. He increased not only (as I said before) christian affairs,
but altogether rooted out the rites of the Gentiles. He carried away the images
out of the Idol groves, and to the end they might set out the city of
Constantinople, they were to be seen abroad in y^ open market place. He
environed about in the open aer, the threefooted trestle (upon y^ which the
priest of Apollo in Delphos, was wont to receive his oracle) with a grate.
Peradventure some men will count the recital of these things altogether
impertinent, specialy in as much as of late in manner all men, have either seen
them with their eyes, or heard of them with their ears. At that time y^
christian religion spredd it self, far and nigh. For under the raygne of the
emperor Costantine, besides the prosperous affairs of many other things, the
providence of God so provided, that the faith in Christ, should take great
increase. And although Eusebius Phamphilus has set forth the praises of this
emperor, with a large, and lofty style: yet in my opinion, I shall nothing
offend, if that after my simple manner, I say something to his commendation.

CAP. XIII.
How that Helene the emperors mother, leauinge Jerusalem sought out the
cross Cap. 17. in the greek.
of Christ and found it, afterward built there a Church.

HElene the emperors mother (which of the village Drepane made a cyty, the
which afterward Helen the mother of Constantine was the daughter of Coel king
of England Helenopolis Psalm. 78. The Idol o^ Venus set v^ where Christ was
buried.
the emperor called Helenopolis) being warned by a vision in her sleep took
her journey to Jerusalem. And when as she found that ancient Jerusalem,
lyinge all wast, in a heap of stones, (as it is in the prophet) she searched
diligently for the sepulcher of Christ, in the which he was laid, and out of
the which he rose again and at length, although with much ado, through the
help of God, she found it. And why it was so hard a matter to find, I will
declare in few words. even as they which embraced the faith of Christ highly
esteemed of that sepulcher, and monument after his passion: so of the contrary,
such as abhorred christian religion, heaped in that place much earth, and
raised great hilloks, and builded there the temple of Venus, and having
suppressed the remembrance of the place, they set up her Idol. This have we
learned of old to be true. But when as the emperors mother was made priueye
hereunto she threw down the Idol: she dug up the place: she caused the
great heap of earth to be hurled aside, and the filth to be removed: she
finds three crosses in the grave, one, I mean that blessed, upon the which
Christ suffered: other two, on the which the two thieves ended their lives.
Together with which crosses the table of Pilate was found, whereupon he had
written with sundry tongues, and signified unto the world, that Christ
crucified was the King of the Jews. Yet because there rose some doubt
whether of these three, should be the cross of Christ, for the which they had
made this search, the emperors mother was not a little pensive. The which
sorowefull heaviness of hers, Macarius bishop of Jerusalem, not long after,
assuaged. For he made manifest by his faith, that which before was doubtful,
and ambiguous. He desired of God a sign, and obtained his suit. The sign was
this: there was a certain woman of that coast, which by reason of her long,
and grievous disease, lay at the poincte of death. As she was yeldinge up of the
ghost, the bishop laid every one of the crosses upon her, being fully
persuaded, that she should recover her former health, if that she toutched the
reverent cross of our Savior, which in deed failed him not. For when as both
the crosses, which belonged not unto the Lord, were laid to the woman, she
continewed nevertheless at the poinct of death: but as soon as the third
(which in very deed was the cross of Christ) was laid unto her, although she
seemed presently to leave this world, yet leaped she up, and was restored to
her former health. After this The cross of Christ was found out by a miracle.
New Jerusalem.
sort was the cross of Christ found out. The emperors mother builded over
the sepulcher, a goodly and gorgeous church, calling it Nevve Jerusalem,
right over against that old, and wast Jerusalem. The one half of the cross
she locked up in a silver chest, and left there to be seen, of such as were
desirous to behold such momuments, the other half she sent to the emperor.
The which when he had received, supposinge that city, to be in great safety,
where in it were kept, compassed it with his own picture which was set up in
the market place at Constantinople (so called of Constantinus) over a mighty
pillar of redd marble. Although I commit this to writing, which I have only
learned by hearesay, yet in manner all they which inhabit Constantinople,
affirm it to be most true. Moreover when Constantinus had received the nails,
wherewith the naked The nails were found.
hands of Christ were fastened to the tree (for his mother had found these
also in the sepulcher of Christ, and sent them unto him) he caused bitts for
bridles, helmets and headpeeces, to be made thereof the which he wore in
battle. The emperor furthermore made provision for all such necessaries, as
were required to the buyldinge of the churches, and wrote unto Macarius the
bishop, The good deeds the virtuous life, and godly end of Helene.
that with all diligence he should further the buyldinge. The emperors mother
as soon as she had finished the church, which she called Nevve Jerusalem,
builded a second, nothing inferior to the first, at Bethleem, in the hollow
rock, where Christ was borne according unto the flesh, also a third, upon
the mount, where Christ ascended unto y^ father. Besides, she was so virtuous,
and so meek that she would fall down to her prayers, in the midst of the
vulgar sort of women: that she would inuit to her table, virgins, which
were consecrated to holy life according unto the canon of the church: that she
would bring in meat, and serve them her self. Many things she gave to
churches, and to poor people, she lived godly, and religiously, and departed
this life, being fourscore year old, her body was brought to Constantinople,
called Nevve Rome and buried there with princely funeral.

CAP. XIIII.
How the emperor Constantine, destroying the Idol groves of the Gentiles
erected Cap. 18 in the greek.
in sundry places, many notable Churches.

THe emperor after this, went about to promote christian religion, with
greater care and industry, to banish the rites and ceremonies of the ethnicks,
to restrain the lewd combats of fencers and sword players, and to set up
his own image in their Idolatricall temples. Serapis had (...) his temple
(...) elle, or fa^^ome, signi^inge the ^easure of ^e water in ^epth which ^as
thought (...) his power (...) ouerflowe ^he Barbarians being ^^ercome in
^^^aill recea^d the faith Christ.
And when as the Ethnicks affirmed, that the God Serapis, was he which made the
river Nilus to ouerflowe, and to water the country of Egypt, because that a
certain elle was brought into the temple of Serapis: the emperor commanded,
that elle to be conveyed into the church of Alexandria. When that it was
noysed, that Nilus would no longer ouerflowe, because the God Serapis took
great indignation, that he was thus abused: the year followinge, the river
did not only ouerflowe (after his wonted manner) and from that time forth kept
his course, but also thereby declared unto the world, that Nilus was
accustomed to ouerflowe, not after their superstitious opinion, but by the
secret determination of the divine providence. Although the Sarmatians,
Barbarians, and Gotths, at the same time, assailed the right of the Romayne
empire: yet for all that, the emperors care and industry for the buyldinge of
churches, was not slacked, but diligently with great advise, did he provide for
both. For he valiantly overcame these nations, under the banner of the cross,
which is the peculiar cognizance of christian profession, so that not only he
deprived them of the tribute, which the emperors of old, were wont to pay
unto the Barbarians: but also they being astonished at this strange victory,
yielded themselves then, first of all, wholly to embrace christian religion, by
the means of the which, Constantine had preserved himself. Constantinus
again applied himself to the buyldinge of other churches, and one he erected
Gens. 18.
in the okegroue of Mambre where holy scripture reports, the Angels to have
been harbored by Abraham. When that he was certified, that altars were erected
at that oak, and that the Ethnicks offered sacrifice and incense in that place,
to their feigned Gods, he sharply rebuked Eusebius bishope of Caesarea, by his
letters, because that through his slackenes in executinge his office, that
wickedness was committed. He commands therefore the altars to be turned
vpside down, and a church hard by the oak, to be builded. He commands an
other church to be builded in Heliopolis of Phoenicia, and that for this cause.
What law maker the Heliopolits had of old, I am not able to say, but the
laws, and customs of the city do manifestly declare, what kind of man he
was. By the custom of their country, they have all women in common, and
therefore Consta^tinus abrogated the most filthy laws of the Heliopolits and
brought the^ to the christian faith.
of the children, there can no certainty be had. Among them there is no
difference, either of father or son. They give their virgins to strangers,
which come amongst them, to be defloured. The emperor endeavored wholly to
abrogat this old and rotten custom of theirs. For when he had taken away this
brutishe, and beastly kind of behavior, he made a sacred, and a severe law:
that kindreds, and families should be known amongst the^, and severed one
from the other. To be short, when he had builded churches among them, he
hastened to consecrate them a bishop, and to ordain the holy company of clergy
men. Thus the state of the Heliopolits, after the removing of their former
filth, was reformed into modeste behavior. In like manner he ouerthrewe the The
temple of Venus overthrown.
temple of Venus in Aphaca, standing at the foot of mount Libanus, and rooted
out all the wicked rites, and ceremonies which were wont to be done there both
impudently, and irreverently. What shall I speak of the familiar deuell, and
the spirit of divination the which he foiled in Cilicia, and The deuell was
feign to fly out of the Idol. The tente of Constantine like the tabernacle of
Moses. Exodus 33.
commanded the Idol in whose closettes, he had craftily hid himself, to be
destroyed? furthermore he was so fervent in promoting christian religion that
when he should have warred against the Persians he made him a tente much like
the tabernacle of Moses in the desert, in form and figure, resembling the
church of God, and the same of a chau^geable colored veil, the which he
carried about with him, that in the waste wilderness, and deserte places, he
might always find ready an holy Church, to singe hymns, and devoutly to
serve the living God. But the same battle went not forewardes, the Persians
feared the power of the Emperor, and so all injuries were put up, and
peaceably ended. That the Emperor also employed great labor, and travel;
in buyldinge towns, and Cities, and that of diverse peltinge villages, he made
princely Cities, (for example Drepane after his mothers name, and Constantia in
Palaestina, after the name of his sister Constantia) I think it presently, not
needful to commit in wrytinge, for the posterity. For it is not our drifte
to declare the other famous acts of the Emperor, but only those which
appertain unto christian religion, and specially the estate of the churches.
Wherefore in as much as the famous acts of the Emperor, tend to an other
purpose, and require a proper and a peculiar kind of handlinge; I leave them
for others, which both know, and can sufficiently discourse thereof. I of
mine own part, would never have laid pen to paper, if the Church had
been at unity and concord within it self. For where there is no matter
ministered to write there the writer seems to be fond, and his travel
frustrat. But in as much as the subtletye of sophisters, fond quirckes, and
fallacies of Satan, depraved in those days the Apostolic, and sincere
Character of Christian religion, severed also, and as it were unjointed the
members of Christ: I thought good to say something of them, whereby the
ecclestastical affayrs, may not fall into the dust of oblivion. For the
knoweledge thereof is much set by, among most men, and settleth for
experience, the mind of such a one, as is well seen therein. For when any
vain controversy rises about the signification of a word, it teaches him
to have a stayed head.

CAP. XV. Cap. 19. in the greek.

How that in the time of Constantine, the middle Indians embraced the faith of
Christ by the means of Aedesius and Frumentius: for Athanasius Bishop, of
Alexandria created Frumentius bishop, and sent him to preach unto the Indians.

Now it remains that we declare how, and by what means, christian religion
enlarged The increase of christian religion under Constantine.
and spredd it self, under the raygne of this Emperor. For the nations which
inhabited the middle India, and Iberia. then first of all, received the faith
of Christ, and why I have joined thereunto the middle India, I will declare in
few words. When the Apostles by lot, had sorted them selves to travel unto
certain nations, Thomas chose Partnia, there to execute the function of an
Apostle: Mathewe, Aethiopia: Bartholomewe chose India, which The middle
Indians were not christened asore the raygne of Constantine that is 300. and
odd years after Christ.
adioyneth hereunto. But the middle India, inhabited of many barbarous nations,
varying among themselves also in language: was not lightened with the word of
God, and the faith of Christ before the raygne of Constantine. And what drowe
them to embrace the faith I am now about to declare. Meropius a certain
Philosopher, borne in Tyrus, longed to see, and was very destrous to travel
into the Indian country, as I am persuaded, he was allured thereunto by y^
example of Metrodorus the philosopher, who aforetime, had thoroughly traueled
that country. Meropius the^, taking with him two young me^, that were his
cosins, which also were skillful in the Greek tongue, took ship, and sailed to
the same country. And when as he had enjoyed his full desire, and now again
longed to be at home, being pinched with want of necessary food, he arrived
at a place, where there was a sure and a safe haven. It fell out, at the very
same time, that the leage concluded between the Romans and the Indians was
broken. The Indians then, laid hands upon the Philosopher, and such as sailed
with him, and slew them all, the Philosophers two young cosins only excepted.
The children they pitied, because of their tender years, and being saved, they
are given for a present unto the King of India. The King liking very well of
their young cou^tenances, made the one whose name was Aedesius his cuppbearer,
to attend upon his cupp at the table: and the other whose name was Frumentius,
he made master of the Kings rolls. not long after, the King died, leaving
behind him a son, that was very young, and the scepter of his kingdom unto
his wife, manumising also Aedesius and Frume^tius. The queen being very
careful over this young prince, requested them both, to take y^ guard and
government of him, until he came to lawefull years, and man's estat. These
young men, according unto her request, diligently apply themselves, about the
princes affairs, but specially Frumentius, who was in chiefest authority. This
Frumentius enquired earnestly of the Roman merchants, which did traffic in
y^ country, whether there was any christian in there company. When he had
found certain, and signified unto them his companio^s estate, and his own, he
prayed them to choose unto themselves several places, where after the manner of
the christians, they might pour out prayers unto the living God. In process
of time, Frumentius builded a church for prayer. And those christians join
unto them certain Indians, whom they instructed in y^ principles of the
^aith. when as the kings son came to full years, Frumentius and Aedesius
resign up, unto him his kingdom y^ which they had prude^tly governed, and
crave license of him for them to depart unto their native country. But when as
the king, and his mother earnestlye entreated them to tarry and cold not
prevail, being very destrous to visit their native soil, they take their
leave, and bid farewell. Aedesius went to Tyrus, for to see his parents and
kinsfokes. Frumentius got him to Alexandria, and opened the whole matter, and
all the circumstances unto Athanasius, who a few days before, was there
stalled Bishop. He told him what happened in his journey that there was good
hope, that the Indians would receive the faith of Christ. He prays him to
send thither a Bishop, and withal other clergy men, and that he should not
make light account of such as might easily be brought to save their souls.
Athanasius pondering with himself, what preparation was Frumentius was
consecrated Bishop by Athanasius and sent to convert the Indians. Ruffinus
eccl^ist. li. 1. ca. 9. Cap. 20 in ^he Greek.
fittest for this voyage, made Frume^tius himself Bishop, and said, that he
knew none fitter for this function, then himself. And the matter was thus
concluded. Frumentius being consecrated. Bishop, went back again into the
Indian country, preached the faith of Christ, builded many churches, through
the power of God wrought many miracles, and cured many both outwardly in body
and inwardly in mind. These things Ruffinus reports himself to have heard
with his ears, even of Aedesius himself, who after that was made priest at
Tyrus.

CAP. XVI.
How the nation inhabitinge Iberia, was converted into the faith of Christ:

Now am I constrained, for the time so requires, that I make relation how
the Iberians The seae Eukinus deui^leth Europe ^om Asia.
at that time received the christian faith. There was a certain godly and
devout woman, taken captive of the Iberians. These Iberians dwell nigh the seae
Euxinus, a people they are, having their original of the Iberians, which
inhabit Spain. This woman being a captive, and having her conversation with
Barbarians, gave her self wholly to godliness. For she exercised very much the
discipline of continencye, she used a severe kind of abstinence, and always
aplied her self to fervent prayer. The which thing when the Barbarians
perceived they wondered at the straungenes of the Act. It fell out that the
kings son, of very tender years, fell into a dangerous disease. The queen
(after that country manner) sent the child unto other women for physic, to
try if experience had taught them any medicene that might cure that malady.
When as the nurce had carried about the child unto every woman, and could
purchase remedy of none, at length he is brought unto the woman that was
captive. She in the presence of many women although she laid thereunto no
salve, or remedy in the world (for of truth she knew none) yet took she
the child, laid her sackecloth upon him, and said only these words: Christ
which healed many, will also heal this infant. When she had uttered these
The king of the Iberians child is cured
words, and prayed unto God for aid and assistance the child forthwith
recovered, and thenceforth enjoyed perfect health. The fame of this act was
bruted abroad, among all the Barbarian wives, and came at length unto the
queens ear, so that her name was famous, and the captive woman much spoken
of. In a while after, the queen her self fell sick, and this simple woman
was sent for. She refused to go, lest that peradventure some violence,
contrary to the modestye of her nature, were offered unto her. The Queen then
is conveyed unto her. She practices the like, as she had done before unto the
child. Forthwith the Queen is ridd The queen of the Iberia^s is healed
of her disease, she thanketh the woman. But the woman answered: it is not my
doing, but Christ's, the son of God, and the maker of heaven and earth. She
exhorts the Queen to call upon him, and to acknowledge him for the true God.
The king maruelinge that this malady, which raygned among the Iberians, was
so some cured, made inquisition who healed his wife, and commanded the captive
woman should be bountifully rewarded. Which made answer: that she wanted no
riches, but esteemed godlynes, as great treasure: and that the king should
receive a precious Jewel, if that he would acknowledge that God, whom she
professed. With these words she sent back the rewards. The king laid up
these sayings in his breast. The next day after, as the king went a hunting,
such a thing happened. The hills, and forest, where his game lay, were
ouercast with dark clouds and thick mist, the game was uncertain and
doubtful, the way stopped and intricate, the king being at his wits end not
knowinge what was best in this case to be done, called earnestly upon the Gods
which he accustomed to serve. But when his calling upon them, stood him in no
steed, it came to his mind, to think upon the God of the captive woman, unto
him then he turns, and cries for help. As soon then as he had prayed unto
him the cloud was dissolved, the miste scattered it self, and vanished away.
The King wondered, returned whom ioyfullye and told his wife all that had
happened. Immediately he sendes for the captive woman, when she came, he
demanded of her what God it was whom she served? She so instructed the
Iberian King, that he published The king of the Iberians was converted unto
the ^ayth.
abroad the praises of Christ. By the means of this devout woman, he embraced
the ^ayth of Christ, he made proclamation that all his subjects should come
together. To them he rehearsed the manner of his sons curinge, the healinge
of his wife, and what happened unto him as he went a huntinge. He exhorted
them to serve the God of the captive woman. They preach Christ to both sex,
the King to men, and the Queen to women. As soon as he had learned of the
captive woman the form and fashion of Churches which the Romans used, he
caused a Church to be builded, and gave charge, that with all speed, provision
should be made for buyldinge. To be short the house of prayer is erected. As
soon as they went about to lift up the pillours, the wisdom of God even
in the work it self, settled the minds of the people, and drew them to
Christ. It fell out that one of the pillours remained immovable, and cold by
no devise be removed, the ropes break, and the engines crack in pieces. The
workmen despair, and return every man to his home. Then the faith of the
captive woman made it self manifest. For in the night season, when no man
perceived, she came unto the place, and continewed in prayer all night long,
by the divine providence of God the pilloure is winded up in the air, over the
foundation, and there hangs level wise, without either proppe or butresse. At
the breakinge of the day, the King being a careful man, not forgetful of
his business, came to see the buylding, and behouldeth the pillour hanginge in
the aer, level over his place. He wondereth at the sight, and all that saw
it were astonished. In a little space after, before their faces, the pilloure
came down, and fastened it self in his proper place. Whereupon they all
showted, the kings faith is held for true, and the God of the captive woman
was extolled with praises. Thenceforth they stagger not at all, but with
cheerful minds they raise the rest of the pilloures, and in a while after
they finishe the buyldinge. After this they send Ambassadors unto Constantine,
requestinge league thenceforthe to be concluded between them and the Romans,
they crave a Byshope, and Clergy men to instruct them, they protest their
sincere and unfeigned belief in Christ. Ruffinus reports that he learned
these things of ^acurius, who sometime governed the Iberians, afterward
coming unto the Romans was made captain over their soldiers in
Palaestina, In his later days he stood the Emperor Theodosius in great
steed, in the battle which he gave to Maximus the tyrants Thus did the
Iberians receive the christian faith in the days of Constantine the Emperor.

CAP. XVII. Cap. 21. in the greek.

Of Antonie the monk, and Manes the heretic, and his original.

THe same time lived Antonie the monk, in the deserts of Aegypte. But in as
much as Antony the e^emite.
Athanasius Byshope of Alexandria, has lately set forth in a several
volume, entitled of his life, his manners and conversation, how openly he
buckled with deuells, how he ouerreached their sleyghtes, and subtle combats,
and wroughte many marvelous, and strange miracles: I think it superfluous of
my part to entreat thereof. The days of Constantine have yielded great
plenty of rare, and singular men, Cap. 22. in the Greek. The manichees blased
their heresy a little before the raygne of Constantine. Anno. 281. Eusebius. lib.
7. cap. 30. The original and authors of the heresy of the Manichees.
but among the good wheat tares are accustomed to grow, and the spite of
Satan, is the sworn enemy of prosperous affairs. For a little before the
raygne of Constantine, a counterfette religion, no other in show, then the
service of paganes, mingled it self with the true and christian religion, no
otherwise then false prophets are wont to rise among the true prophets of God,
and false Apostles among the zealous Apostles of Christ. Then went Manichaeus
about, covertly to convey into the Church of God, the doctrine of Empedocles,
the heathen philosopher, of whom Eusebius Pamphilus made mention in the 7.
book of his ecclesiastical history, yet not exquisitely handlinge his
doings. Wherefore look what he omitted, that I suppose necessary to be
supplied of us, for so we shall soon learn both who and what this Manichaeus
was, and also by what means he presumed, to practice such lewd enterprises.
A certain Saracen of Scythia had to his wife a captive, borne in the upper
Thebais, for whose sake he settled him self to dwell in Aegypte. And being
well seen in the discipline of the Egyptians, he endeavored to sow among the
doctrine of Christ, the opinions of Empedocles, and Pythagoras. That there were
two natures (as Empedocles dreamed) one, good: an other, bad: the bad, enmytie:
the good unity. This Scythian had to his disciple, one Buddas, who before that
Buddas otherwise Terebynthus an heretic d^eth miserably.
time was called Terebynthus, which went to the coasts of Babylon, inhabited
of Persians, and there published of himself, many false wonders: that he was
borne of a virgin, that he was bred, and brought up in the montaynes, after
this he wrote four books: one of Mysteries: the second he entitled The
Gospel: The third, Thesaurus: The fourth A summarye. He feigned on a time,
that he would work certain feats, and offer sacrifice, but he being an
high, the deuell threw him down, so that he brake his neck, and dyed
miserablye. His hoastesse buried him, took all that he had, and boughte
therewith a ladde of seven years old, whose name was Cubricus. This woman
after that she had made him a free denzion, and trained him up in learning,
not long after dies, and gave him by legacy, all the goods of Terebynthus,
the books also which he had written, being the Scythians disciple. Which
things when this free denized Cubricus, had gotten, he conveyed him self
forthewith Manes the heretic and his detestable opinions.
into Persia. He changes his name, and in steed of Cubricus, he calls him
self Manes. The books of Buddas otherwise called Terebynthus, he sets
abroad, as his own doeinges unto such as were snared with his follye. The
titles of the books ^arelye gave a show or color of christian religion, but
in truth it self the doctrine tasted and sauored of paganisine. For Manes as
he was in deed a wicked man, taught the world to serve many gods: he
commanded the son to be worshipped, he was a fauorer of fatal desteny and
denied free will in man. He said plainly the souls went from one body into an
other, following herein the fond opinions of Empedocles, Pythagoras and the
Egyptians. He would not confess that Christ was borne, but said that he
had the form or figure of a man. He rejected the law and prophets, and
called himself the comforter, all which things are far from the true and
right faith of the church of God. In his epistles he was not ashamed to
intitule him self, an Apostle. But his Iewde and shameless leasinges were
recompensed with dew punishment, and that for this cause. The ^inge of Persia
his son, fell into a dangerous disease, the father used all means possible
to ^^^^or^ his son to his former health. Being told of Manes, and persuaded
that his ^eates were ^a^^e ^^om falshoode and ^eiurdemayne, sent for him by the
name of an Apostle, hopinge with himself, that by his means his son should
recover. Being come, he takes the kings son in ^^^es with sor^^tis and
wi^^^^cast^ the king seeing his son already gone, and departed vnde^ his
hands, commanded the ^or^e^er should be clapped in prison, and provided
execution for him, but he brake prison, fled into Mesopotamia, and so shifted
for him The miserable death of the heretic Manes.
self. The king hearing that he was in those coasts, made him to be
apprehended, flayde him al^^e, took his skin, filled it full of chafe, and
hanged it at the gates of the city. These things we report to de most true
and faithfully alleged by us, out of the book entitled, The disputation of
Archelaus bishop of Cascharum, a city in Mesopotamia. This Archelaus reports
that he disputed with him face to face, and there lays down all that we
wrote before, of his life and conversation. Thus (as I said before) it falls
out in all ages, that the spyte of ^a^^n will not suffer godliness to have
good success, but sendes such lewd varletts to entrappe the simple people.
But what is the reason thereof, why our loving and merciful God permitts such
lewdness, whether it be to try and sift the true doctrine of his church, and
to cut of the vain conceats and opinions which many have of religion: or
whether it be for some other cause whatsoever, as it is hard to determine
thereof, so, few words will not suffice, neither is presently fit opportunity
and occasion ministered to discourse of that matter. It is not verily the mark
we shoot at, exquisitely to entreat^ of diverse and variable opinions, and
sentences of men, neither to search out the secret and hid mysteries of the
providence and wisdom of God, but truly, as much as i^ us lies, to set forth
the ecclesiastical history. And because we have reported after what sort the
cursed opinion of the Maniches sprange up a little before the raygne of
Constantine: now let us return to discourse of the times, incident to this
our purposed history.

CAP. XVIII. Cap. 23. in the Greek.

How that Eusebius bishop of Nicomedia, and Theognis bishop of Nice,
remembering them selves after their recantation, wrought all the spite they
could to overthrow the faith established in the Council of Nice, and sought
means to mischief At hanasius. Of the Council summoned at Antioche, which
deposed Eustathius, about whom there rose such a sedition in Antioche, which
destroyed in manner the whole city.

EVsebius and Theognis returning from exile, received their former dignities,
removing (as I said before) such as were placed in their seaes. They were in
great reverence and estimation with the emperor, and enjoyed great liberty,
for that they had forsaken the cursed and Hatred and heresy joined togeth^^.
^ankred opinion of Arius, and given themselves to the true and right faith.
But these men for all that, abused their liberty, and made more stir in the
world then ever was before. Two things drove them thereunto: the detestable
heresy of Arius, which held their minds of a long time, and the deadly
hatred they bare unto Athanasius. Because he valiantly withstoode them as they
disputed in the Council of Nice, first of spite they challenge his degree and
vocation, saying: he was no fit man for the rowme of a bishop, next that he
was elected by unlawful persons. But for all that he cleared him self of
those opprobrious and sclaunderous reports (his vpryght conversation was such,
he could not be removed from the bishops seae of Alexandria) and contended
earnestly for the faith decreed by the Council of Nice: Eusebius bishop of
Nicomedia, endeavored with might and main, through wiles and subtletie to
depose Athanasius, and to bring Arius into Alexandria. For by this means he
thought best, to root out of the church the faith of Homousion, to wete: of
One substance, ratified by the council, and to plant the pestilent doctrine of
Arius. And as at some times he entreated him by letters, and ^aire words: so
of the contrary, at other times he went about to terrify him with threats.
But when as Athanasius would in no wise yield, he sought to persuade the
Emperor that of his wonted clemency, he would give Arius the hearing, and
pardon him, that he might return unto Alexandria. But what treachery he
practiced to bring this his purpose to effect, I will show in an other place.
Before that these things were fully come to an end^, there rose an other
hurlyburlye in the church. For the members them selves, brake asunder the
peaceable and quiets bond^ of the church. Eusebius Pamphilus reports, that
immediately after the breakinge up of the Council, a civil dissension rose
throughout all Egypt, the cause be has concealed, whereby he was of diverse
suspected of double dealinge. He was thought with silence to have ouershipped
the causes, for that he had determined with him self not to subscribe unto the
decrees of the Nicene Council. But as we have learned manifestly by diverse
epistles the which, bishops wrote privately one to an other after the Council:
the clause of One substance, troubled exceedingly their minds, and whylest
that they sifted, and searched out the ^ense, and understanding thereof, even
unto the nuycke, they raised civil discord among them selves, so that their
conclusions seemed nothing else, but combats in the night and darkness, or
blynofolded bablinge. It seemed that nere another side understood well, the
cause that made them to reuyle each other. For such as rejected the clause of
One substance, (thinkinge verylie that they which received it, went about to
establishe again the heresy of Sabellius and Montanus) called the true
professors, blasphemo^s persons, as if they had gone about to take away the
substance of the son of God. Such as of the contrary cleaued unto the canon
of One substance, thought their adversaries brought in the service of many
goods, and abhored them as furtherers of Paganism. Moreover Eustathius bishop
of Antioche, sharply rebuked Eusebius Pamphilus, as though he had gone about
to corrupt the Nicene Creed: but Eusebius Pamphilus both cleared Eusebius
P^philus was no Arian.
him self of that sclaunder, and also charged Eustathius with the heresy of
Sabellius. And so all the bishops wrote inuectiues one against the other, as
if they had been deadly foes. When as both parts said, that the son of God
had his being together with the father, and was in the father, and confessed
the unity to be in Trinity: yet (I wo^^ not why, nor wherefore) they could
not agree among them selves, nor set their hearts at rest. Cap. 24. in the
Greek. The council of Antioche where Eustathius was deposed.
Wherefore there was a Council summoned at Antioche, where Eustathius, for
fauouringe the heresy of Sabellius, more then furtheringe the Canons of the
Nicene Council, was deposed, ^ut diverse do report that there were other
matters of no small importance, and less honesty, laid to his charge and
causes of his deprivation, yet do they not openly rehearse them. For it is the
manner among bishops, to accuse them that are deposed, to pronounce them for
wicked persons, yet to conceal the particular faults. Georgius bishop of
Laodicea in Syria, one of them that rejected the clause of One substance, in
his book of the praise of Eusebius Emisenus, writes him self to have
reported, that the bishops deposed Eustathius the Sabellian heretic, Cyrus
bishop of Berrhaea, being his accuser. But of this Eusebius Emisenus we mind
to speak in an other place. Georgius writes, that Eustathius the Sabellian,
accused by Cyrus: and again Cyrus him self, convicted of the same heresy, to
have been both removed out of their byshoprickes. But how can it be that
Cyrus, being him self infected with the foul heresy of Sabellius, should
accuse Eustathius of the same? Therefore it seems, that Eustathius was
deposed for some other cause. After this there was kindled in Antioche such a
fierye flame of sedition, that in manner the whole city was therewith turned
vpside down. The faction was twofold* the one went about to translate Eusebius
Pamphilus bishop of Caesarea in Palaestina, to Antioche: the other would
needs bring again Eustathius. ^usebius Pa^^hilus re^u^th to be ^ishop of
^ntioch, for ^e which ^e Empe^ur Co^stan^e did high ^ commend ^m. ^^phronius
Arian, yet ^^^hop of ^^tioch.
The common sort of people, some cleaued to this side, some to that side. The
whole garrison and band of soldiers was so divided, and set one against the
other, that if God, and the allegiance they owed unto the good Emperor, had
not been called to remembrance: they would lamentably have murdered each
other. For the Emperor by his letters appeased the tumult and sedition that
was raised amongst them. But Eusebius refused to be their bishop, and
therefore the Emperor did highly commend him. The Emperor wrote unto him of
that matter, he prayseth his mind, and pronounces him happy, for that by the
report of all men, he was worthy to be bishop, not of one city, but of the
whole world. The seae of Antioche is said to have wanted a bishop, the space
of eight years together. but at length, by the means of such as endeavored to
overthrow the Nicene Creed: Euphronius was made bishop. And thus much shall
suffice toutching the Council held at Antioch, for the deposition of
Eustathius.

CAP. XIX.
Of the means that were wrought to call Arius home, and how Arius delivered
unto the Emperor his recantation in writing, craftily subscribing unto the
Nicene Creed.

Immediately after, Eusebius, who a little before had left the byshopricke of
Berytus, and at that present was bishop of Nicomedia, stri^ed with might and
maine, together with his confederats, to bring again Arius into Alexandria.
But how, and after what sort they brought their purpose pass, and the means
they used to persuade the Emperor to call before him Arius and Euzoius* now I
think best to declare. Cap. 25. in the Greek.
The Emperor had to his sister one Constantia, she was the wife of Licinnius,
who sometime was fellow Emperor with Constantine, but afterward for his
tyranny was put to death. This Constantia had great acquaintance and
familiarity with a certain priest of the Arian sect, whom she made very much
of who through the persuasion of Eusebius, and others his familier and dear
friends, made suit unto her, in the behalf of Arius, signifyinge that the
synod had done him injury, and that he was not of the opinion he was reported
to be. Constantia hearing this, believed the priest, but durst not make the
Emperor priuye thereunto. It fell out that Constantia was visited with great
sickness, so that the Emperor came very often to see her. When the woman
perceived her self to be daungerously sick, and waited for no other then
present death, she commendes unto the Emperor this priest, she prayseth his
industry, his godliness, his good will and loyalitie unto the imperial
scepter. In a short while after, she departs this life. The priest is in
great authority with the Emperor. And creepinge every day more and more into
better estimation, breaks the same matter unto the Emperor, as before unto
his sister* that Arius was of no other opinion, then the council had decreed:
and if he would voutchsafe him his presence, that he would s^bscribe unto the
canons: and that he was falsely accused. This report that the priest made of
Arius, seemed very strange unto the Emperor, who gave again this answer:
If (says he) Arius he of that mind, and (as you say) agrees with the faith
confirmed by the Council: I will not only give him the hearing my self, but
also send him with honor to Alexandria. When he had thus spoken, immediately he
wrote unto him as follows.

The epistle of Constantine the Emperor unto the heretic Arius.
Constantine the puyssant, the myghtie and noble Emperor. Notice was given,
now a good Constantine was informe^ of Arius his recantation when he wrote this.
while ago, unto thy wisdom, that thou should repair unto our ca^pe, to
the end thou might enjoy our presence, wherefore I ca^ not but marvel, why
thou came not with speed, according unto our will. Now therefore take one of
the common waggo^s, and make have to our ca^pe, that understanding our
clemency, and the care we have over thee, thou may return to thy native
country God keep thee well-beloved. written the. 5. of the kalends of December.


This was the epistle which the Emperor wrote unto Arius. I can not verily but
wonder at y^ marvelous endeuer and entire love the Emperor bare unto piety,
and thristian profession. For it appears by y^ epistle, that y^ Emperor
admonished Arius oftentimes to recant, and therefore now does he reprehend him,
for y^ he being often allured by his letters, made no speedy reformation of him
self. Arius in a while after the receate of the Emperors letters came to
Constantinople, there accompanied him Euzoius, who had been a deacon, whom
Alexander deposed the self same time together with the other Arians. The
Emperor bydds them welcome, and demands of them, whether they would
subscribe unto the Nicene Creed: they answer the Emperor that they would do
it with a good will. The Emperor bidds them quickly lay down in writing their
creed. Cap. 26. in the Greek* The reca^ta^tio^ of Arius and Euzoi^ given up
vn^ the Emperor, together with t^ form of their faith, where they disse^ble
bo^ with God man, wri^i^ one thing, meaning a^ other, as it appears the
chapt^^ following.
They frame their recantation, and offer it up unto the Emperor, in this
form. Unto the most virtuous, and our most godly lord and Emperor
Constantine: Arius and Euzoius. We have laid down in writing (noble
Emperor) the form of our faith, even as your godly and singular zeal has
given us in charge: we do protest that both we our selves, and all they that
be of our side, do believe as follovveth: We believe in one God, the father
almyghtie, and in his son our Lord Jesus Christ, begotten of him before all
worlds, God the word, by whom all things were made, both in heaven and
earth: who came down from heaven, and was made man, who suffered, rose
again, and ascended into heaven, and shall come again to judge both the
quick and the dead. And we believe in the holy ghost, the resurrection of the
flesh, the life of the world to come, the kingdom of heaven, the one
Catholic church of God scattered far and vvide, over the face of the
whole earth. This faith have we learned of the most holy Evangelists, where
the Lord him self said unto his disciples: Go teach all nations, baptizing
the^ Mat. 28.
in the name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy ghost: even as
the whole Catholic church, and the scriptures do teach, all which we
faithfully believe. God is ou^ Judge, presently to the hour of death, and at
the day of doom. Wherefore (most holy Emperor) we humbly crave of your
godly highness, in as much as we are ^^eargi^ men, and retain the faith, and
affection, both of the church, and also of holy scripture, that of your wonted
zeal, whervvith you provide for unity, and the right honor of God (all
controversies, and quarells, and cauillations, and subtle quircks whatsoever
laid aside) you will couple^^ with our mother the church: that both we, and
the church of God, among our selves, may live quietly, and jointly with one
heart and voice, power unto God the accustomed prayers, for the peaceable and
prosperous estate of your empire, and for all mankind.

CAP. XX. Cap. 27. in the Greek.

How Arius by the commandment of the Emperor returned to Alexandria, whom
Athanasius would in no wise admit, against Athanasius Eusebius and his
confederats patched diverse crimes, and presented them unto the Emperor, so
that in the end a synod was summoned at Tyrus, to pacify these quarells.

WHen that Arius had persuaded the Emperor in such sort as we said before,
he returns to Alexandria, but yet he could not with all his wiles tread down
the truth, Athanasius would not receive Arius into the church of Alexandria.
the which he had so egregiously dissembled. Athanasius would not receive him
into the church of Alexandria after his return, for he detested him as a
monster of the world. Arius nevertheless whilst that he privily sowed his
pestilent opinion, goes about to set the whole city on an uproar. At what
time Eusebius both him self wrote unto Athanasius, and procured also the
Emperor to command him by his letters, to condescende unto the admission of
Arius and his co^plices. Athanasius for all that, would not receive them into
the church, but wrote back again unto the Emperor: that it was not lawful
for such as had made shipwreck of their faith, and had been held for accursed
of the church* after their return and conversion, to receive their former
dignities. The Emperor was in a great chafe, and conceived great displeasure
against Athanasius Constantine ^^rote this to Athanasius. b. ^f Alex^dria (...)
the behalf ^f Arius the ^ereticke, ^ho decea^ed the^ both
for this answer, threatninge him by his letters as follows: In as much as
thou art made privy to our will and pleasure, see that thou make the door
vvide open to all that desire to enter into the church. For if I understand,
that any one (which desired to be made a member of the church) has by any
means through thee been hindered, or his entrance stopped: I will forthwith
send one of mine officers, who by authority from me, shall both depose thee of
thy bishopric, and also place an other in thy rovvme. This the Emperor wrote
respecting the commodity of the church, and the unity of the council, lest
that through variance it were dissolved. Eusebius then, who hated Athanasius
with deadly enmity, thought no time fitter the^ that, to bring his purpose to
effect (for he had the Emperor incensed against him, which was meat and
drink for Eusebius) and therefore he raised all that troublesome stir, to
the end he might cause Athanasius to be deposed of his bishopric. For he
thought verylie, that if Athanasius were once removed, Arianisme then should
bear away the bell. Wherefore there conspired against him at once: Eusebius
bishop of Nicomedia: Theognis bishop of Nice: Maris bishop of Chalcedon:
Vrsacius bishop of Singidon a city of the upper Pannonia: and Valens bishop of
Murson, a city also in Pannonia. These men hired certain of the Meletian
sent, and caused diverse crimes to be laid unto Athanasius charge. And first of
all, by the depositions of Eusion, Eudaemon, and Callinicus, that were Meletian
^hanasius is ^^ely (...) of extor^n.
heretics, they charge Athanasius, that he had enjoined the Egyptians, to
pay for a yearly tribute unto the church of Alexandria, a lynen garment. But
Alypius and Macarius, priests of the church of Alexandria (who then as it
chanced were at Nicomedia) confuted this sclannderous report that was laid
against Athanasius, and persuaded the Emperor, that all their malicious
tales, were manifest untruths. Wherefore the Emperor wrote unto his
adversaries, and rebuked them sharply, but Athanasius he requesteth to repair
unto him. yet again Eusebius together with his accomplices, before his coming
patched an other crime, far more ^anasius ^alsely accused of treason.
heinous then the former: that Athanasius went about traitorously to defeat
the Emperoures edicts, in sending to one Philumenus a kas^et or forsar, full of
gold. The Emperor then being at Psamathia, a manor without the walls of
Nicomedia, by sifting out of this matter, found. Athanasius to be giltlesse
and sent him away with honor, writing also to the Church of Alexandria, that
their bishop was falsely accused before him. But I think best, and with more
honesty a great deal, to pass over with silence, the sundry kinds of
sclaunders, Eusebius together with his adherents, invented afterward against
Athanasius, lest that the Church of God be blemished, and sclaundered of them,
which have their minds far estraynged from the religion and faith in Christ
Jesus. for the things committed to writing* are wont to be known of all, and
therefore it was our part, to comprise in few words, such things as required a
several trac^. but nevertheless I think it my duty in few words to
declare out of what fountain, these false accusations ishued, and whence such
as forged them had their original. Mareotes is a country of Alexandria, in it
there are many villages, and the same well peopled: within the same also, there
are many Churches, yea of great fame, all which are under the Bishop of
Alexandria, within the jurisdiction of his seae and bishopric. In this
Mareotes, one Ischyras (for so they called him) practiced privily such a
Ischyras a false minister forging orders unto him self.
kind of offense, as deserved a hundredth kinds of death, for when as he had
never taken orders, he called him self a minister, and presumed to execute the
function of a priest. Who when he was taken with the manner, fledd away privily,
and got him straight to Nicomedia, to the faction of Eusebius as a sure and
safe refuge. They, for hatred they owed unto Athanasius entertained him for a
priest, and promised to make him Bishop, if he would accuse Athanasius, so that
hereby I mean by the false reports of Ischyras, they took occasion to
sclaunder Athanasius. for Ischyras blased abroad, Athanasius is falsely charged
with the misdemeanure of his clergy.
that upon a sudden they brake in upon him, and dealt with him very
contumeliously: that Macarius beat the altar with his heels, ouerthrewe the
Lords table, brake the holy cup, and burned the blessed bible. They promised
him for these his malicious accusations (as I said before) a bishopric, for
they were fully persuaded, that the crime laid to Macarius charge, was of force
sufficient, not only to displace Macarius, that was accused: but also to
remove Athanasius who had sent him thither. This sclaunder was compassed
against him in a while after. Before that time, the accomplices of Eusebius, had
forged against him an other accusation, full of spite and cankered malice:
whereof I will presently entreat. They got I wott not where, a man's hand:
whether they Athanasius is falsely accused of mu^th^r and magic.
slew a man, and stroke of his hand, or cut^ of the hand of a dead man, God
knows alone, and the authors of this treachery: this hand the Bishops of
Meletius sect bring forth, in the name of Arsenius, and protest that it was his
hand: the hand they bring forth, but Arsenius they hidd at home. They say
moreover, that Athanasius used this hand to magic, and sorcery. And although
this was the chiefest thing, that was laid to Athanasius charg: yet as it
falls out in such kind of dealing, other men charged him with other things.
for they which spited him unto the death, went then about to work all means
possible, to mischieue him. When these things were told the Emperor, he wrote
unto Dalmatius the Censor, who was his sisters son, and then abode at Antioch
in Syria: that he should call such as were accused before the bar: that he
should hear the matter, and execute the offenders. He sent thither Eusebius,
and also Theognis, that Athanasius might be tried in their presence. Athanasius
being cited to appear before the Censor, sent into Egypt, to seek out
Arsenius, for he understood that he hidd him self. but he could not take him,
because that he fledd from place to place. In the mean while, the Emperor
cut of the hearing of Athanasius matter before the Censor, for this cause.
Cap. 28. a^ ter the g^e^
He called a synod of Bishops for to consecrate the temple which he had
builded at Jerusalem. The Emperor had willed the Bishops assembled at Tyrus,
to debate together with other matters the contention raised about Athanasius,
to the end (all quarells being removed) they might cheerfully solemnize the
consecration of the Church, and dedicate the same unto God. Constantine went
now on the thirtieth year of his reign. The Bishops that met from every
where at Tyrus, being cited by Dio^ysius the Senator, were in number three
score. Macarius the Priest of Alexandria, being fast bound with fetters, and
bolts of iron, was Macarius ^ minister b^ing falsely ^cused by (...) Arian and
Meletian her^ tikes is the shameful dealt wi^^ Cap. 29. after the Greek.
brought thither by the soldiers. Athanasius would not come to Tyrus, not
disinayed so much with the sclaunderous reports that were laid to his charge
(for his conscience accused him of nothing) as he feared greatly, lest that
they would bring in some innovation, prejudicial to the decrees of the Nicene
council. but because that the angry lines and threatening letters of the
Emperor, moved him not a little (for he had written unto him, that if he came
not of his own accord, he should be brought thither with a vengeance) he came
of necessity unto the council.

CAP. XXI.
How Arsenius (whose hand they said had been cut of) was found out, and
brought before the bar, to the confusion of Athanasius accusers, which then
fledd away for shame: and how that Athanasius being otherwise parcially dealt
withal of the council, appealed unto the Emperor.

THe divine providence of God brought to pass, that Arsenius also came to
Tyrus. For he quite forgetting the lessons given him by those false accusers,
that bribed him for the purpose, came thither as it were by stelth, to know
what news there were in those coasts. It fell out that the servants of
Archelaus a Senator, heard say in a certain tipplinghouse, that Arsenius
whom they reported to have been slain, was there and hidd him self in a
certain house of the town. When they heard these things, and eyed well the
authors of this report, they reveal the whole matter unto their lord and
master. He forthwith laying all delays aside, sought out the man, being
sought found him, being found he laid him fast by the heels, and biddes
Athanasius be of good cheer: that Arsenius was come thither alive. Arsenius
being in hold, denies him self to be the man. But Paulus Bishop of Tyrus,
who knew him of old, affirmed plainly that he was Arsenius in deed. These
things being thus rightly disposed by the wisdom and providence of God:
Athanasius not long after is called before the council, in whose presence, the
accusers bring forth the hand, and charge him with the heinous offense. He
behaueth him self wisely and circumspectly, and demands first of them all
that were present, and also of his accusers: whether any of them did ever know
Arsenius. When that diverse of them had answered, that they knew him very well,
he caused Arsenius to be brought before them, with his hands covered under his
cloak, and then again demands of them: Is this fellow that Arsenius which
lost his hand? at the sight of the fellow, some of them that were present
(except them that knew whence the hand came) were astonished: some others thought
verily that Arsenius wanted a hand, and gave diligent ear, to see what other
shift Athanasius had to save him self. But he turning up the one side of
Arsenius his cloak, showed them one of his hands. Again when some did surmise
that his other hand was cut of: Athanasius at the first paused a while and
in so doing brought their minds into a great doubt: but in the end without
any more ado he casts up upon his shoulder, the other side of his cloak, and
shows them the second hand, saying unto all that beheld it: you see that
Arsenius has two hands, now let mine accusers show unto you, the place where
the third hand was cut of. Cap. 30. in ^e greek* ^he accuser ^ Athanas(...)
ran a^ay for sha^e.
This treachery of theirs toutching Arsenius, being thus come to light, the
dealing was so shameful, that the accusers could find no where as much as
visards to cover their faces. Achaab otherwise called Iannes, the accuser of
Athanasius, crept by stelth from the bar, thrust him self among the throng,
and privily ran away. Thus did Athanasius clear him self of this sclaunder,
using exception against no man. for he doubted not at all, but that the very
presence of Arsenius would astonish the sclaunderers, to their utter shame and
overthrow. * But for the wiping away Cap. 31. in ^^e Greek.
of the crimes laid to Macarius charge, he took the benefitt of the law,
vsinge such exceptions as were lawefully prescribed for the defendant. And
first of all he excepteth against Eusebius and his adherents, as open enemies,
saying: by law it was not permitted for the enemies to be judges. Secondarily
he requires that they show unto him, whether Ischyaas the accuser, had
lawfully received orders and priesthood, for so it was laid down in the bill
of enditement. But the judges considered nothing of these circumstances, the
law proceeds against Macarius. When the accusers were to seek for proof,
the suit is delayed upon this consideration, that certain chosen men should
go in commission to Mareotes, and there sit upon this matter. When that
Athanasius perceived, such as he had excepted against, to have been pricked in
the commission (for Theognis Maris, Theodorus, Macedonius, Valens, and Vrsacius
were sent) he exclaymed, that there was deceat, and double dealing in the
handling thereof. He pronounced that it was open wrong, for to keep Macarius
the Priest in fetters and close prison, and to suffer his accuser, to accompany
such judges as were known to be his professed enemies. He said moreover, that
it was for no other end, but that records, and the doings of the one side
might be known, the other unknown: the one quitted, the other condenmed. When
that Athanasius had sounded out these and the like sentences: when that he had
both called the whole assembly to witness, and also opened this lamentable
plight before Dionysius the Senator, and no man pityed the case: he pryuily
conveyed him away. Such as were sent into Mareotes recorded only the Acts of
one side, and look what the accuser reported, the same was judged to be most
true. Cap. 32. in the Greek.
As soon as, Athanasius was gone and straight way taken his journey to the
Emperor: he was first of all condenmed by the council, the party being
absent, and the cause unknown. Next, when as the dealings in Mareotes were
joined with these, they agree upon his deposition: many sclaunders are
contumeliously fathered upon him, at the recital of the causes, which moved
them to depose him: but not a word of the sclaunderers, for they run them
over with silence that of malice falsely accused him, and were shamefully
foiled them selves, Arsenius who before was reported to have been slain, is
now entertained of them. And he who before time was counted a Bishop of the
Meletian sect, even then subscribed to the deposition of Athanasius, and called
him self Bishop of Hypsepolis. And that which seems incredible, he that was
said to have died under the hands of Athanasius, is now alive, and deposes
Athanasius.

CAP. XXII. Cap. 33. in the greek.

How that the council assembled at Tyrus removed to Jerusalem, and celebrated
the dedication of the new Jerusalem, at what time the Arians were admitted to
the communion. And how that the Emperor by his letters caused the council
summoned at Tyrus, to meet at Constantinople, that in his presence the truth
toutching Athanasius cause, might the more narrowely be sifted out.

Immediately after these things, the Emperors letters came to the councels
hands, signifying that with all speed, his will was they should repair to
Jerusalem. Therefore the bishops laying all other matters aside, do leave
Tyrus, and take their journey to Jerusalem. A solemn feast is there held, for
the consecration of those places: Arius with his confederats is admitted into
the Church. for the bishops said, that in that behalf, they would satisfy the
Emperors letters, whereby he had signified unto them, that he allowed very well
of the says of Arius, and Enzoius. The bishops The council held at Tytus being
most of Arians, do depose Athanasius, and co^me^d in their letters to the
Church of Alexandria, the heretic Arius.
also wrote unto the Church of Alexandria, that they should banishe from
among them, all rankor, spite, and malice, and setle their Ecclesiastical
affairs at peace and quietness. They signified moreover by their letters, that
Arius had repented him of his heresy: that he had acknowledged the truth:
that thenceforth he would cleave unto the Church: and that therefore they had
not without good cause received him, and by the consent of them all, exiled
Athanasius. Of the self same things likewise, they wrote unto the Emperor.
While these things were in handling, there came eftsoon other letters from the
Emperor unto the council, signifying that Athanasius was fledd unto the
Emperor him self, and that of necessity they must meet at Constantinople
about his matters. The letters sent from the Emperor were written as follows:

Constantinus the puysant, the mighty and noble Emperor, unto the Bishope
assembled Cap. 34. in the greek.
at Tyrus, sends greeting.
VErily I know not what matters your assembly, through tumult and troublesome
stir The epistle of Constantine unto the Bishops assembled at the council of
Tyrus.
has decreed: me thinks the truth it self you have in manner subverted, by
means of your hurlyburly and kindled heat of contention. for whilst that you
prosecute your priucy spire and hatred, one toward an other, the which you will
leave in no wisovnpractised; you seem to neglect the service of God, and the
furtherance of his truteh. But I trust the divine prouide^co of God will^g^o
pass, that after the proof of this pestilent contention; it may wholly be
banished that we may also perceive whether your counsel, and assembly, has had
any care of the truth, and also whether you have decided of the matters called
into question, and given sentence, without parcial favor, and poisoned malice.
Wherefore my will is that with speed you all repair unto me, to the end you
your selves, by no other then your selves, may yield an exquisite account. The
cause that moved me to writ this unto you, and to su^mone you hither by my
letters, you may learn by that which follows. As I rode in my wagon unto a
certain place within the city, and that happy soil, called after thy name
Constantinople Athanasius the bishop together with certain other priests in
his company, me^^ me in the midst of the street upon a sodame, and unlooked
for, which amazed me not a little* I take God to witness who sees al things,
that I could not have known him (...) the first fight, had not some of my
train (when that I gave diligent ear thereunto, as reason did require) both
told me, who he was, and what injury he had done unto him. I truly did
neither talk with him at that time, neither reason of any circumstance. And
when he entreated, that I would give him the hearing, I was so far from it,
that with the denial, I had almost caused him to be sent packing, with rough
entertainment. His suit was nothing else, but that all you might be brought
thither, to the end he might in our presence expostulate face to face with
you, the injury he suffered ne cessity driving him thereunto. The which suit of
his seeminge very reasonable unto me, and the season also requiring the same:
made me very willing to write this unto you, that all you being already
assembled at Tyrus, should forthwith hasten unto my camp: and justify in my
presence (whom you will not deny to be the right servant of God) your right,
and sincere judgment, and sentence in this behalf. For peace reigns every
where through my religious worshipping of God: And the name of God is devoutly,
and reverently extolled of the Barbarians them selves, who unto this day were
ignorant of the truth. every man knows that he which is ignorant of the
truth, is also ignorant of God. But the Barbaria^s through my industry, that
(as I said before) am a right vvorshiper of God: came to the knowledge of God,
and learned to serve him in holiness, whom they perceive in all things, with
the careful eye of his divine providence, to defend me. This thing moved them
at the first, to taste of the truth in Christ, whom also for the awe, and
loyalty they owe unto our imperial scepter, they serve uprightly: but we,
which would seem (I will not say to observe) nay to maintain the sacred and
holy mysteries of his Church, do practice nothing else but that which breeds
discord, and discention, and to be short, that which tends to the utter
overthrow, and destruction of mankind. But see that you come unto us (as I
said) with speed, persuading your selves of this, that our mind is, as much as
in us lies, first of all, to maintain soundly, without corruption all that is
contained in holy Scripture: so that no blemish of sclaunder or infamy may
redounde thereunto: abandoning, vvearing away, and rooting out, all the rotten
adversaries of christian religion, who under color of Christian profession
have crept in and sowed in the Church of God sundry blasphemous sects and
heretical schisms.


CAP. XXIII. Cap. 35. in the Greek.

When as all the synod came not unto the Emperor, Eusebius together with
that crew, framed a new accusation against Athanasius: that he should report
he would stay the carrying of corn from Alexandria to Constantinople. whereat
the Emperor being moved, banished Athanasius into France.

THe aforesaid letters of the Emperor, set the whole council together by the
ears, so that diverse of them returned home to their cities. but Eusebius,
Theognis, Maris, Patrophilus, Vrsacius, and Valens got them to Constantinople,
they reason no longer of the broken cup, or the table that was overthrown, or
of Arsenius that was said to be murdered: but they frame them selves, to forge
out an other accusation. They inform the Emperor, that Athanasius threatened
Athanasius is accused by the Arians.
he would cause, that no corn should be conveyed from Alexandria (as they
then used) to Constantinople: and that Adamantius, Annubyon, Arbathion and
Peter that were Bishops, heard it out of Athanasius his own mouth. but then
truly the accusation is like to be heard, when the accuser carries creditt
with his person. The Emperor was wonderfully moved at this, and took great
indignation against Athanasius, exiled him, and commanded that he should abide
in France. some report that the Emperor did it for this policy, Socrat. li.
2. cap. 2. in the epistle of Co^ sta^tinus says so.
to see whether with his absen^e, he could reduce the Church to unity and
concord. for Athanasius was the man that would in no wise communicate with
the Arians, being exiled he ledd his life at Triuere a city in France.

CAP. XXIIII. Cap. 36. in the greek.

Of Marcellus Bishop of Ancyra, and Asterius professor of humanity.

THe Bishops then being assembled at Constantinople, deposed also Marcellus,
Bishop of Asterius an arian heretic.
the lesser Galatia, for this cause. There was one Asterius in Cappadocia, that
professed humanity, and leaving that, embraced the faith in Christ: wrote
books thereof, which unto this day are extant. The pestilent doctrine of Arius
is proved out of them, to were: that Christ is no other wise the power of God,
then the locusts and flies, are said in Moses to proceed from the handie work
of God, and other such lewd reasons. This Asterius kept company with Bishops,
and specially of the damnable sect of Arius. He frequented unto their
assemblies, for he longed after some bishoprike or other. But because that in
the time of persecution, he had sacrificed unto Idols: he was not admitted to
execute the function of a Priest. He wandreth and rogeth throughout Syria,
showing the books he had written. Marcellus understanding of this, going about
to set him The error of Marcellus.
self against Asterius, fell him self into the contrary heresy. for he was
not afraid (even as Paulus Samosatenus said before) to affirm that Christ was
but a bare and naked man. The Bishops that met at Jerusalem hearing of this,
made no account of Asterius, because he was a lay man: but Marcellus who was
of the clergy they call to an account, for the book he had written. When they
perceived that he maintained the opinion of Paulus Samosatenus: they charge him
to recante. He with shame enough promises to burn the book. But when as the
council was dissolved in haste (for the Emperor had called the Bishops to
Constantinople) again they reason of Marcellus, at Constantinople, before
Eusebius, and the other Bishops then present. As soon as Marcellus refused to
perform his former promise, that is to fire the book which he had unadvisedly
framed: the Bishops then present, depose him of his bishoprike, and sent
Basilius in his rowme to be Bishop of Ancyra. Eusebius moreover wrote three
books, against his pamflett, and confuted his wicked opinion. Marcellus after
that, recovered his bishoprike again in the council held at Sardice, where
he said: they understood not his book, and therefore suspected him, that he
had sauored of the opinion of Paulus Samosatenus. but what opinion we may
conceive of this man, we will declare in an other place.

CAP. XXV. Cap. 37. in the greek.

How that Arius being called from Alexandria to Constantinople after the exile
of Athanasius, for to render an account before the Emperor of the tumult he
made at Alexandria: raised a great stir against Alexander Bishop of
Constantinople, In the end died miserably.

WHile these things were a doing. the thirtieth year of Constantinus raygne
was expyred. Arius raises sedition in Alexandria.
Arius with his company returning to Alexandria, set the whole city on an
uproar. The citizens of Alexandria, took very grievously, that not only Arius
with his confederats was restored: but also that Athanasius their Bishop was
condemned to banishment. When the Emperor understood of the perverse mind,
and corrupted purpose of Arius, he sendes for him again to Constantinople,
there to render an account of the tumult, and sedition he had raised afresh. At
that time Alexander who a little before succeeded Metrophanes in the bishoprike
of Constantinople, governed that Church. This Alexander proved him self a
religious, a godly, and a devout man, in the quarrel then between him and Arius.
for when Arius came, and the people was divided into two parts, and a great
tumult raised in the city* whilst that some maintained the Nicene Creed, and
the same to remain firm and stable, others affirmed the opinion of Arius to
be lawful, and agreeable with y^ truth, Alexander came forth into this great
heat of disputation: specially because that Eusebius bishop of Nicomedia, had
given out great threats, that without all peradventure he would work his
deprivation, unless he would admit Arius, and his company, to y^ communion.
but Alexander feared not the deposition so much, as the abrogation of the
Nicene Creed, which they endeavored with all might possible to overthrow. for
when he took upon him the patronship of that councels decrees: he supposed it
was his bounden duty to foresee, lest the canons and decrees of that council
should any kind of way be impaired. Wherefore being now busied with this
controversy, he laid aside the quirks of logic, and fledd for aid, and
asistance unto Almighty God: he gave him self to continewal fasting, and left
no prayer vnrepeated. such a kind of service and devotion he solemply embraced.
He got him into the Church of Peace (for so they called the Church) he locked
in him self, and finished such kind of service as pleased him best: he got
him to the Altar, and down he fell on his bare knees, before the communion
table, praying unto God with tears that trickled down his cheeks: in which
kind of order he continewed many days and many nights. He called for help at
the hands of God, and his petition was granted. His prayer was thus: Grant I
beseech thee o Lord (says he) that if the opinion of Arius be true, I my self
may The prayer of Alexander Bishop of c^stantinople.
never see the end of this set disputation: but if the faith which I hold be
true, that Arius the author of all this mischief, may receive due punishment
for his impious deserte. This was the zealous prayer of Alexander. Cap. 38. in
the greek.
The Emperor being desirous to know the mind and disposition of Arius, sent
for him to his palace, demaundes of him, whether he would subscribe unto the
Canons of the Nicene council. He without any more ado very cheerfully putts
to his hand. When as for all that, he dalyed both craftily and lewdely, with
the decrees of that council. The Emperor maruelling at this, put him to his
oath: he falsely and faynedly swear also. The crafty ^uglinge which he used to
bleare their eyes in subscribing as I have heard was this. Arius The craft of
Arius in swea ring before the Emperor.
wrote his opinion in a piece of paper of his own, the same he caryeth under
his arm: coming to the book, he takes his oath, that he verily believed as
he had written. This which I write of him, I have heard to be most true. But
I gather plainly that he swear after his subscription, out of the Emperors
letters. The Emperor believing verily that he dealt plainly, commaundes
Alexander Bishop of Constantinople, to receive him to the communion. It was
upon a saturday, the day after, Arius looked to be received into the Church,
and communion of the faithful* but v^ngeance lighted forthwith upon his lewd,
and bold enterprises. When he had taken his leave, and departed out of the
Emperors hall: he passed through the mids of the city with great pomp and
pontificality, compassed with the faction and train of Eusebius Bishop of
Nicomedia, that waited upon him. As soon as he came nigh Constantines market
(for so was The miserable end of Arius the he retike.
the place called) where there stood a pillar of redd marble: sudden fear of
the heinous faules he had committed, took Arius, and withal he felt a great
laske: Syrs (says Arius) is there any draught or iakes nigh: when they told
him that there was one in the back side of Constantines market, he got him
thither straight. The man's heart was in his heels, he looked pitiously:
together with his excrements, he voydeth his gutts: a great stream of blood
follows after: the sclender and small bowels slide out: blood together with
the spleen, and liver, gusheth out* immediately he dies like a dog. Those
iakes are to be seen unto this day at Constantinople, behind (as I said
before) Constantines markett and the porch shambles. All passengers as many (I
say) as go by, are wont to point at the place with the finger, to the end
they may call to remembrance, and in no wise forgett, the miserable end of
Arius, that died in those iakes. This being done, terror and astonishment
amazed the minds of Eusebius his confederats that followed him. The report
thereof was bruted abroad, not only throughout the whole city, but in manner
(as I may say) throughout the whole world. The Emperor by this means, cleaued
the more unto christian religion, and said that the Nicene Creed was ratified,
and confirmed to be true, by the testimony of God him self: and rejoiced
exceedingly at the things which then came to pass. His The sons of
Constantinus magnus. 1. Constantinus. 2. Constantius. 3. Constans.
three sons he made Caesar's, severally one after an other every tenth year
of his raygne. His eldest son whom after his own name he called Constantine,
the tenth year of his raygne, he made Emperor over the western parts of the
empire: the second son whom after his graundfathers name he called
Constantius, the twentieth year of his raygne, he made Emperor over the
Eastern parts of the empire: The third and youngest of all, called Constans,
he consecrated Emperor, the thirtieth year of his raygne.

CAP. XXVI. Cap. 39. in the Greek.

The sickness, the Baptism, the death and funeral of Constantinus magnus.

THe year after, Constantine the Emperor being threescore and five year
old, fell sick, and leaving Constantinople, sailed to Helenopolis, using for
his health, the hott baths that were nighe the town. When that he sickned
more and more, he differred bayning of him self, left Helenopolis, and got
him straight to Nicomedia* Abiding there in a certain manor without the town
walls, he was baptized in the faith of Christ. In the which baptism he greatly
rejoiced: made his last will and testament: appointed his three sons heirs
of the empire: distributed to the^ their several inheritances, as he had in
his healths time: he bequetheth to Rome, and to Constantinople, many famous
monuments: he puts the Priest (by whose means Arius was called from exile,
of whom we spoke a little before) in trust with his testament, charging him to
deliver it to no man's hand, save to his son Constantius, whom he had made
Emperor of the The death ^f Constan^^nus magnus. ^nno Dom. 40. ^ap. 40. in
(...) Greek.
East. His will being made, and his life lasting a few days after, he died.
At his death there was none of his sons present. Wherefore there was a Post
sent into the East, for to signify unto his son Constantius the death of
his father. * The Emperors corpse, his familiares and dearest friends chested
in a coffin of gold, and carried it to Constantinople, there they set it in
an high lodging of the palace, doing thereunto great honor, and solemnity,
until that one of his sons was come. When that Constantius was now come from
the East, they set forth the corpse, with a princely funeral, and buried it in
the Apostles Church (for so was it called) the which Church Constantine
builded, lest that the Emperors and Priests should be bereued of the
Apostles relics. The Emperor Constantine lived threescore and five years,
he raygned 31. and died the two and twentieth day of May, Felicianus and
Tatianus being Consuls, the second year of the two hundredth seventy and eight
Olympiade. This book compriseth the history of one and thirty years.

The end of the first book of Socrates.
THE SECOND BOOK OF THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORYE OF SOCRATES SCHOLASTICVS.
CAP. I.
The proeme where he lays down the cause that moved him to repeat at large
such things as before time he had briefly written in his first and second book.

RVffinus who wrote the Ecclesiastical historye in the latin tongue, was very
much The second book of Socrates compriseth the history of 25. years, being
the full reign of Constantius ending Anno Dom. 365.
deceived The error of Ruffinus.
in the times, for he thought that the peril and dangers which Athanasius
stood in, happened unto him after the death of the emperor Constantine. He
was ignorant of his banishment into France, and of many other miseryes that
happened unto him. But we imitating his opinion, and censure, in discourse of
the Ecclesiastical affairs: have written the first and second book of our
historye* from the third unto the seventh book, by borowing some out of
Ruffinus: by picking and culling other some out of sundry other writers: also
by laying down some thing, we learned of others who as yet be alive: we have
set forth the historye in a most absolute and perfect manner. But after that by
meare chance, the works of Athanasius came to our hands, where both he
complayneth of the misery he endured, and also declares after what sort he
was exiled, through the sclaunderous faction of Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia:
we thought far better to attribute more credit unto him, who suffered these
things, and to others, who saw them with their eyes, then to such as
conjecture and guess at them, and so plunge them selves in the pit of error.
Moreover by searching diligently the epistles of sundry men, who lived at that
time, we have sifted out (as much as in us lay) the truth it self. Wherefore
we have been constrained to repeat again, such things as we mentioned in the
first and second book of our historye, and have annexed thereunto out of
Ruffinus, such histories as were agreeable unto the truth. Not only that, but
this also is to be understood, By this we gather that there be two editions of
Socrates history, the first (as he says him self) imperfect: the second and
the last which is this, very perfect and absolute.
how that in the first edition of these our books, we laid down neither the
deprivation of Arius: neither the Emperors epistles: but explicated in few
words, without figures of Rhetoric, the matter we took in hand, lest the
tediousnes of our long historye, should tire the loving Reader. When as for
the cause above mentioned, it behooved us so to do ( Theodorus most holy
Priest of God) yet now (to the end the epistles may be known in form and
fashion, as the Emperors wrote them selves: and the things also which Bishops
in sundry counsels have published unto the world, whylest that they labored
daily to set for the more exquisite decrees and constitutions to the
furtherance of Christian religion) we have diligently added to this our latter
edition such things as we thought fit for the purpose* that truly we have
performed in the first book and in the second now in hand we mind to do
no less* but now to the historye.

CAP. II.
How that Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, endeavored again to establishe the
doctrine of Arius, so that tumults were raised in the Church afreshe and how
that Athanasius by virtue of Constantine the yongers letters, returned to
Alexandria.

AFter the death of the Emperor Constantine, Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, and
The^g^is Bishop of Nice: supposing now they had gotten a fit time: endeavored
with all might possible, to wipe out of the Church of God, the creed,
containing the clause of one substance, and to setle in the rowme thereof, the
detestable heresy of Arius. But this they knew full well, they could not
bring to pass, if Athanasius came again to Alexandria. They went about to
compass their drift very craftily, using the Priest (by whose means we said
before Arius returned from exile) as an instrument to their purpose. But the
manner of the handling thereof, I think very needful to be laid down. This
Priest presented unto Constantius the Emperors son, the last will and
testament and the bequeathed legacies of the Emperor deseased. He perceauing
yt to have been laid down in his fathers will, which greatly he desired (for
byy^ will, he was emperor of the Eastern parts) made very much of the priest,
granted him great liberty, charged him to use his palace, freely and boldly
at his pleasure. After this liberty was granted him by the Emperor: he
forthwith acquainted him self with the empress, with the Eunuchs and
chamberlaynes. At the same time there was an eunuch, by name Eusebius, chief
of the emperors One rotten sheep infecteth an other.
chamber, who through persuasion of this lewd Priest, became an Arian, and
infected also the other eunuchs of his company. And not only these, but the
Empress also, through the entisement of the Eunuchs, and the advice of the
Priest, fell into the pestilent heresy of Arius. In a while after, the
Emperor him self called the same opinion into controversy, and so by a little
and a little, it was spredd every where. And first the Emperors guard took it
up, next it occupied the minds of the multitude, throughout the city. The
Emperors chamberlaynes even in the very palace it self, contended with women
about the opinion, in every house and family throughout the city they brawled
and went together by the ears. This infection spread it self quickly, over
other contries and regions: and the controversy much like a sparcle of fire,
rising of small heat or scattered embers kindled the minds of the hearers
with the fiery flame of discord and dissension. For every one that desired to
know why they made such a tumulte, by and by, had an occasion given him to
reason, and every one was not satisfied with questioning, but contentiously
would argue thereof* thus the heat of contention turned all vpside down, and
troubled the quiet estate of the Church. This stir and sedition prevailed
only in the cities throughout the East: for Illyrium and other Illyrium is
now called Sclauonia.
contryes of the West, enjoyed peace and quietness* for they could in no wise
permit the canons of the Nicene council, to be abrogated, and set at naught.
After that the heat of contention was blown abroad, and burned every day more
and more: the faction of Eusebius took this tumult, to be a furtherance to
their purpose: for so they hoped it would come to pass, that some Bishop or
other would be chosen of Alexandria, which would maintain the same opinion
with them. But at the very same time, Athanasius by the means of Constantine
the yongers letters, who was one of the Caesar's, and so called after his
fathers name: returned to Alexandria, the letters were written by the Emperor
unto the people of Alexandria from Triuere a city of France, in form as
follows: Cap. 3. in the Greek. The epistle of Constantinus the younger unto
the Church of Alexandria, for the admission of Athanasius their Bishop.
Constantinus Caesar to the people of the Catholic Church of Alexandria,
sends greeting. I hope it is not unknown unto your discreet wisdom, that
Athanasius the professor of sacred divinity, was for a time banished into
France: lest that through the mischievous dealing of lewd men (for
bloodesuckers and cruel beasts, sought to bereue him of his life) his
innocent person should of necessity be constrained, to take his deaths
wound. Wherefore to the end he might avoid the malice of these dispitefull
men, he was taken as it were out of their jaws which menaced him, and
commanded to live under my dominion, where (though his excellent virtue,
ministered unto him from above, wey nothing at all the grievous casualties of
adversity) even as in the city he lived before, he may have plenty, and want no
necessaryes, for the maintenance of his port. Therefore when as our Lord, and
my father of famous memory. Constantine the Emperor had purposed in his mind
to have restored him a Bishop, to his own s^ae and proper seat, the which he
enjoyed among you, that are known to bear great zeal to godliness: and being
prevented with death (as it fares with mankind) before he could accomplish
his desire: I thought it verily my part and duty, to execute the intent of so
godly an Emperor. With what estimation and reverence I have entertained the
man, he shall report with his own mouth, after his return unto you. Neither
is it to be marvelled at all, that I showed him such courtesy. For me thinks I
saw in him the great longing ye had for him, and I beheld also the fatherly
reverence and gravity of the man himself, all which, moved me not a little
thereunto, nay thoroughly persuaded me. God of his goodness (well-beloved brethren)
have you in his tuition. Athanasius with the confidence he had in these
letters, returns to Alexandria, whom the people of Alexandria do receive,
with most willing minds. But such as in that city were infected with the
leprosy of Arianisme, conspired against him, so that many skirmishes and
tumultes were raised, which ministered occcasion unto the confederats of
Eusebius, falsely to accuse Athanasius before the Emperor: that of his own
doing, without the general consent of the assembly of Bishops, he had settled
him self in that church. The accusation was so odious, that the Emperor
being therewith incensed against Athanasius, drove him out of Alexandria. But
how this was compassed, I will show hereafter in an other place.

CAP. III. Cap. 4. in the greek.

How that after the death of Eusebius Pamphilus, Acacius was chosen Bishop of
Caesarea, and of the death of Constantinus the younger.

ABout that time Eusebius whose surname was Pamphilus, Bishop of Caesarea in
Palaestina, Eusebius Pamphilus dies. Acarius bishop of Caesarea.
departed this life: and Acacius his scholar, succeeded him in the Bishopric.
Who besides sundry other works of his industry, wrote a book of the life of
his master Eusebius. Cap. 5. in the Greek.
Not long after, Constantinus the younger, so called after his fathers name,
brother to y^ Emperor Constantius, inuading by force certain countries under
Constans his younger brothers dominion, by fighting hand to hand with the
soldiers, was slain, Acindinus and Proclus being Consuls.

CAP. IIII.
How that Alexander Bishop of Constantinople departinge this life: nominated
two men, Paulus and Macedonius, that they should choose one Cap. 6. in the
Greek.
of them to succeed him in the Bishoprike.

AT that time there ensued immediately the ^edicions mentioned before, an other
tumulte in Alexander bishop of Constantinople dyed beingfourescore and eightene
years old
the city of Constantinople, and that for this cause. Alexander the Bishop of
that church, who valiantly encountered with Arius having continewed Bishop
there the space of three and twenty years, and lived fourscore and eighteen:
departed this life. He consecrated none to succeed him, but charged the
electors to choose one of two, whom he would nominat unto them. And following
his advise, if they would place in the rowme a man sit for to instruct y^
people, of an upright conscience, of good lise and godly conversation: they
should take Paulus whom he had made priest: who though he were young and of
green years, yet in learning old and of great wisdom. But in case they
would have him whom the etymology of noble prowess did highly commend, they
should prefer Macedonius to the dignity* who latly had been deacon of the
same Macedonius signifies excellency.
church, and then was far stricken in years. Wherefore about the election of
a Bishop, there was greater stir the^ heretofore, and the church was more
grievously turmoyled. The people were divided into two parts: the one was
egerly set with the heresy of Arius, the other cleaued very constantly, to the
decrees of the Nicene Council. And whilst that Alexander lived, they which
embraced the creed, comprising the clause of One substance, had the upper hand
over the Arians, which daily striued, and contended very stiffly in the
maintenance of their heretical doctrine. But as soon as he departed this life,
the contention among the people was diverse, and variable. For such as favored
the clause of One substance, chose Paulus to be their Bishop: such as of the
contrary cleaued unto Arianisme, endeavored with all might to place Macedonius.
Wherefore in the Templum pacis. Templum Sophiae. Cap. 7. in the grecke.
temple of God called the church of peace, next unto the great church then
called great, but now bearing the name of wisdom, Paulus was chosen Bishop:
in which election the voice of the desseased did prevail.

CAP. V.
How that Constatinus the Emperor displaced Paulus that was chosen byshope
of Constantinople, and translated to that seae Eusebius bishop of Nicomedia.
And how that Eusebius caused an other Synod to be summoned at Antioch in
Syria, where there was an other form of faith laid down.

Shortly after the election of Paulus moved the Emperor not a little, at his
coming to Constantinople. For summoning together an assembly of Bishops, which
sauored of the filthy sink of Aruis, he procured the deposition of Paulus:
and causing Eusebius of Nicomedia to be ^^anslated thither, he proclaimed him
Bishop of Constantinople. These things being done the Emperor got him to
Antioch. Cap. 8. in the G^^el. e. A council of Arians summon^d at Antioch.
Anno Dom. 344. Maximus b. of Jerusalem Iultus b. of Rome.
Yet Eusebius for all this, cold not set his heart at rest, but rolled (as
commonely we say) every stone to bring his wicked purpose to pass. He
summoneth a council at Antioch in Syria, pretending the dedicatio^ of the
church (whose foundations, Constantine the father of these Emperors had laid:
after whose death Constantius his son ten years after the laying of the
first stone finished the buylding) and as I may boldly say the truth, to the
overthrow and subversion of the faith Of one substance. Unto this synod there
came out of diverse provinces, Bishops to the number of fourscore and ten. But
Maximus bishop of Jerusalem who succeeded Macarius, would not come thither,
supposinge verily that if he came he should be constrained to subscribe unto
the deprivation of Athanasius. Neither did Julius Bishop of Rome show him
self there, neither sent he any to supply his rowme: when as the
ecclesiastical canon forbids that any constitution be thrust into the
Church, without the censure of the Bishope of Rome. To be short the council
met at Antioch, in the Consulship of Marcellus and Probinus, where
Constantius the Emperor was present. It was the fifth year after the death of
Constantine father unto these Emperors. Placitus was then bishop of Antioch,
for he succeeded Euphronius. Placitus b. of Antioch.
But the confederacy of Eusebius side, employed their chief labor and
industry, falsely to accuse Athanasius: and first they charge him with the
violating of their canon, to wete: that he thrust Athanasius is sclaundered in
the council of Antioch.
him self again to execut the function of priesthood, without the admission
and consent of a general council. For they complain that after his return
from exile, he rushed into the church upon his own head. Secondly that at his
return when the tumult and schism was raised, many were slain moreover that
he caused some to be scurged: some other to hold their hands at y^ bar, they
allege also such things as were pleaded against Athanasius in the council
held at Tyrus.

CAP. VI.
Of Eusebius Emisenus. Cap 9. in the Greek.


IN the mean space while Athanasius was charged with the aforesaid crimes:
they chose Eusebius Georgius b. of Laodicea.
first called Emisenus, Bishop of Alexandria. Who, and what he was, Georgius
Bishop of Laodicea, who then was present at the council, shows unto us. For
in the book he wrote of his life, he declares that Eusebius came of a noble
family of Edessa in Mesopotamia: from a little one to have been trained up, in
holy scripture: afterward to be instructed in profane literature, by a
professor which then taught at Edessa: last of all to have sucked y^ right
sense, and understanding of holy scripture, at the lips of Eusebius and
Patrophilus, the one bishop of Caesarea; the other bishop of Scythopolis. After
this to have gone to Antioch, where it fell out that Eustathius being accused
of the heresy of Sabellius, by Cyrus bishop of Beroea, was deposed of his
bishoprik. The^ceforth to have accompanied Euphronius, the successor of
Eustathius: and because he would not be priest, to have got him to
Alexandria, and there to have studied philosophy. After that, to have returned
to Antioch, where he acquaynted him self with Placitus, the successor of
Euphronius. Thence to have been called by Eusebius bishop of Constantinople, to
be bishop of Alexandria: but (says Georgius because that Athanasius was
greatly beloved of the people of Alexandria, he went not thither but was sent
into the city Emisa. Where when there was much ado made among the citizens of
Emisa about the election (for he was charged with the study of the
mathematics) he fledd away and came to Laodicea unto Georgius, who reported
many notable stories of him. Georgius brought him to Antioch, and by y^ means
of Placitus and Narcissus, caused him to be conveyed to Emisa, where again he
was accused of the heresy of Sabellius. But of the circumstances of his
election, Georgius discourses more at large: last of all he adds, how that
the Emperor going into Barbary took him thence, and that he knew full well,
many wonders and miracles to have been wrought by him. So far of the things
which Georgius remembered of Eusebius Emisenus.

CAP. VII.
How that the bishops which met at Antioch, after that Eusebius Emisenus had
refused Alexandria, chose Gregorius to be bishop of Alexandria: and endeavored
Cap. 10. in the Greek.
to alter, and so consequentlye to abrogate, the canons of the Nicene, council.

WHen as at that time Eusebius by the council of Antioch, was chosen bishop of
Alexandria, Gregory an Arian bishop of Alexandria.
and feared to go thither, they consecrate Gregory in his rowme, to enjoy
the seae of Alexandria. These things being done, they labor to alter the
faith: who although they cold reprove nothing of the things decided in the
Nicene Council, yet verelye went they about through their often assemblyes,
to peruerte and overthrow the creed contayninge the clause of One substance,
and otherwise to establishe of their own, that by a little and a little they
might soke men, in the filthy sincke of Arius. But of their drifte, and
fetches, in the stories followinge. The epistle contayninge the faith which
they published was after this manner: We are neither the followers of Arius
(for how can it be that we being Bishops, should A form of faith laid
down by the hypocritical Arian bishops which assembled at the council of
Antioch denying that they followed Arius.
give ear unto Arius being but a priest) neither have we received any other
faith then that, which has been published from the beginning: but when as
we examined his faith narrowely, and weyed it deeply, we rather received
Arius returninge unto us, then that our selves should hang upon his opinion.
The which you may easilye perceive by that which follows. For we have
learned from the beginning, to believe in one universal God, the creator and
maker of all things, both visible and invisible, and in one Son, the only
begotten Son of God, who was before all words, and had his being together
with the Father, which begott him: by whom all things, both visible, and
invisible were made. Who in the later days according unto the singular good
will of the father, came down from heaven and took flesh of the virgin mary.
Who fullfilled all his fathers will: who suffered, rose again, ascended into
the heavens and sits at the right hand of the father, and shall come again
to judge the quick and the dead, and continewe king and God for ever. We
believe also in the holy Ghost. And if that you will have us to add more: we
believe the resurrection of the flesh, and the life everlasting. After that
they had written these things in their former epistle, they sent it to the
churches throughout every city. But continewinge at Antioch a while longer,
they in manner condemned the form of faith that went before, and wrote
forthwith a new one, in these words: An other Creed of the Arian bishops
which is to be read waryly.
We believe as the Evangelists and Apostles have delivered unto us, in one God
the Father almighty, the creator and maker of all things, and in one Lord
Jesus Christ, his only begotten son, God by whom all things were made:
begotten of the father before all worlds God of God: whole of whole: alone of
alone: perfect of perfect: king of king: lord of lord: the living word:
the wisdom: the life: the true light: the way of truth: the resurrection:
the shepherd: the door: inconuertible and immutable: the lively image of the
divinity, essence, power, counsel, and glory of the father: the first
begotten of all creatures: who was in the beginning with the father: God the
word, (as it is said in the Gospel) and God was the John. 1.
word: by whom all things were made and in whom all things are. Who in the
later days came down from heaven: was borne of a virgin according unto the
Scripturs: was made man, and the mediator of God and man, the Apostle of our
faith, and the guide to life. And as he says of him self: I came down from
heaven, not to do mine own will, but his will which John. 6.
sent me. Who suffered for us, and rose again the third day for our sakes,
and ascended into heaven, and sits at the right hand of the father, and
shall come again with glory and power, to judge the quick and the dead. And
we believe in the holy Ghost which is given unto the faithful for their
consolation, sanctification and perfection. Even as our Lord Jesus Christ
commanded his disciples, saying: go teach all nations, baptizinge them in
the name of Math. 28.
the father and of the son and of the holy Ghost. That is of the father who
is the father in deed: and of the son who is the son in deed: and of the
holy Ghost who is the holy Ghost in deed. Which names are not
unadvisedly, neither without good consideration laid down of us, for they
plainly set forth the proper person, the order, and the glory of ^^he of
them that are named, that there be three persons, yet in harmoniacall consent,
but one God. Wherefore we retayninge this faith before the majesty of God
the father, and his son Jesus Christ: do hold for accursed all detestable
heresies. If that any shall teach contrary to the right and sound faith,
contained in holy Scripture, that there is, or that there has been a time, or
a world, and made before the son of God, let him be accursed. If that any
shall say, that the son of God is a creature, as one of the creatures: a
budde or spring as one of the buddes, and not as the sacred Scriptures have
delivered every of the aforesaid unto us: or if that any shall preach or
publishe any other, besides that we have received let him be accursed. For
we believe truly and unfeignedly, all whatsoever the holy Scriptures, the
Prophets, and Apostles have delivered unto us, and we follow the same
zealously. Such were the Creedes of the Byshopes which then assembled at
Antioch: whereunto Gregorius although as yet he was not gone to Alexandria,
subscribed intitlinge him self Byshope of Alexandria. The Council after the
finishinge of these things, and the establishinge of other constitutions, was
dissolved. At the very same time the affairs of the common weal fell out to
be very troublesome. For the French nation (so are they termed) invaded the
Romayne possessions, Earthquake.
bordering upon France, then also there were great earthquakes in the East,
but specially at Antioch, where the earth was hoyssed and shaken the space of
one whole year.

CAP. VIII.
How that, when Gregorius was brought to Alexandria, with Cap. 11. in the
greek.
armed souldieres: Athanasius by flyinge away saved his life.

WHen the aforesaid business was brought to this pass, Syrianus the captain,
together with five thousand armed soldiers brought Gregorius to Alexandria.
The Arians that were within the city came to aid them. But I think it
requisite to discourse, how Athanasius that was violently by them thrust out
of the church, escaped their hands. It was then euentide, the people spent
the whole night in vigils, for there was a communion the day followinge. The
captain drew nighe, he set his soldiers in battle array, he besetts the
church. Athanasius understanding of this, called his wits together, and
devised how the people might Athanasius was feign to run away for the
^a^ega^de of his lite.
take no harm for his sake. He commanded his Deacon to read the collects unto
the people. He bidds him singe a psalm. When the psalm was sweetly and
harmoniacally song, all the people went forth at one of the church porches.
While this was adoinge the soldiers made no stir at all: Athanasius through
the midst of the singers, escaped their hands safe and sound. He being
thus ridd out of this peril and danger he stood in, went in all the haste to
Rome. Then Gregori^ took possession of the church. The citizens of Alexandria
not brooking their doings set Saint Denis church afire. So far of that.

CAP. IX. Cap 12. in he Greek.

How that the citizens of Constantinople after the death of Eusebius, chose
Paulus again to be their Byshope: the Arians of the contrary, chose Macedonius.

EVsebius as soon as he had brought his purpose to effect, sent a legate
unto Julius Bishope Eusebius ^ome time ^^shop of Nicomedia ^fterwardes ^^ishop
of ^onstauno^le dies an (...).
of Rome, requestinge him to be judge in Athanasius his cause, and to take upon
him the pronouncinge of the definitive sentence. But the sentence that Julius
gave of Athanasius never came to Eusebius his hearing, for immediately after the
council brake up, breath went out of his body and so he died. Wherefore the
people of Constantinople bring Paulus, again to be their Bishop: the Arians
assemblinge in Saint Paul's church, chose Macedonius. They were authors and
chief doers in that stir, who a little before aided Eusebius, that turned
vpside down the whole state of the church. These were they that could do
some thing at that time: Theognis bishop of Nice, Maris bishop of Chalcedon,
Theodorus bishop of Heraclaea in Thracia, Vrsacius bishop of Singidon in the
higher Mysia, and Valens bishop of Mursa a city in the higher Panonia. But
Vrsacius and Valens repented them afterward, gave up their recantation in
writing unto Julius bishop of Rome, and thenceforth submitted them selves to
the clause of One substance, and The Arians caused great murder and slaughter
in the church.
the communion of the church. At that time, the Arians raised civil wars and
dissension in the church, of the which one was sturred at Constantinople,
through the confederats of Macedonius. And by reason of these domestical
wars of the christians, there were many and often skirmishes, in that city,
at what time many were trodden under foot, and crushed to death.

CAP. X. Cap. 13. in the greek.

The death of Hermogenes the captain, and how that therefore Paulus the
second time was banished Constantinople. The Arians translating Gregorius from
Alexandria, placed Georgius in his rowme.

THe report and fame of the sedition at Constantinople came to the ears of the
Emperor Constantius, who then abode at Antioche, he commanded Hermogenes the
captain, that was taking his journey into the coasts of Thracia, to take
Constantinople in his way, and to thrust Paulus their bishop out of the
church. He coming into the city disquieted the people not a little, while he
went by force about to banishe their bishop. Immediately the multitude of the
people was up, they prepared them selves to aid their bishop. As Hermogenes
proceeded and labored together with his soldiers to set him packinge: the
multitude being on an uproar, rashely and headyly (as it happens in such a
hurlyburly) fell upon him. They fire the house over his head, they pull him
out by the ears, and put him to death. This was done when both the
Emperoures were Consulls, to wete: the third Consulshippe of Constantius, The
Greek measure was 2. fold. one was called Atticus, co^taini^g of our measure
six gallo^s. 1. pottel and 1. quart An other was called Georgicus, of our
measure one bushel, a peck and one pynt.
and the second of Constans. At what time Constans overcame the Frenchemen,
made truse, and concluded a league between them and the Romans. Constantius
the Emperor hearing of the death of Hermogenes, took his horse, left
Antioche, and got him to Constantinople: there he thrusts Paulus out of the
church, he mearced the city: taking from them so many measures of grain,
as their city received above four hundred thousand, the which was his
fathers donation daily given unto them. For unto that time, the city of
Constantinople received, about eight hundred thowsande measures of grain, that
was carried thither from Alexandria. The Emperor differred to nominate
Macedonius their bishop, for he was wonderfully incensed, not only against
him, in that he was chosen without his advise and counsel: but also in that
through the stir and tumult raised between him and Paulus, not only
Hermogenes his captain, but also many others beside, were slain. After he
had given Macedonius license to execute his function in that church only,
where he was chosen bishop: he returns to Antioche. Cap. 14. in the Greek.
In the mean space the Arians translated Gregorius from Alexandria, for that
the people hated him deadly: neither only for that, but also for the fyringe
of the temple, and moreover because he maynetayned their opinion very
sclenderly. They sent for Georgius borne in Cappadocia, one that was nusled in
the opinion they maynetayned.

CAP. XI. Cap. 15. in the greek.

How that Athanasius bishop of Alexandria, and Paulus bishop of
Constantinople, went to Rome, and procured Julius the bishop of Rome his
letters for the recovery of their seaes: the which letters were answered by the
bishops of the East, saying: that the bishop of Rome had nothing to do with
them.

AThanasius as yet was short of his journey into Italy. At ye time Constans
who was ye yo^gest brother of ye three Emperors, after ye death of his brother
Constantine, who (as we said before) was slain by ye soldiers, governed that
western countries. Then also Paulus bishop of Constantinople, Asclepas bishop
of Gaza, Marcellus bishop of Ancyra in Galatia ye lesser, and Lucius bishop of
Adrianopolis being accused one for one thing, and an other for an other thing,
and deprived of their churches, were at ye princely city of Rome: and
certified Julius bishop of Rome of their whole estate, and trouble. Julius then
by reason of the prerogative of the church of Rome, vphelde their side with
his letters, he wrote freely unto the bishops of the east, that every one of
the aforesaid The epistle of Julius unto the bishops of the East and their
answer unto him again, is to be seen in the first ^ome of the Counsels. The
church of Rome has nothing to do with the churches of the East, and so of the
contrary.
bishops should be restored again, sharply rebuking such as procured their
deposition rashly and without aduisement. They leave Rome, and trusting to
bishop Julius his letters, they return every man to his own church, and
convey the letters unto whom they were written. These men, when his letters
came to their hands, took the correction of Julius for a contumely or
sclaunder, they summone a Council at Antioch. There as soon as they had
assembled together, they devise an epistle by uniform consent of them all,
wherein they inuey bitterly against Julius, and signify withal, that if any
were banished the church, and excommunicated by their decree and censure, it
were not his part to intermedle, neither to sit in judgment upon their
sentence. For when as he had removed Nouatus out of the church of Rome, they
neither resisted, neither contraryed his doings. This in effect was that which
the bishops of the East wrote unto Julius bishop of Rome. But in as much as at
the coming of Athanasius into Alexandria, there was great stir and tumultes
raised by Georgius the Arian (for the report goes that by his means there was
much harm, murder, and ma^slaughter committed) and that the Arians charged
Athanasius with the sedition, as if he had been the cause and author of all those
mischiefs: I think it needful with as much brevity as may be, presently to
say somewhat hereof. Although God alone, who is the true judge, knows the
certainty thereof: yet is it not unknown unto wise and discrete men, that
such things most commonly fall out, where the people are at civil discord and
dissension among them selves. Wherefore the accusers of Athanasius did him
wrong, they charged him injuriously. And Sabinus even the great patron of
Macedonius his heresy, if that he had deeply weyed with him Sabinus.
self, how great, and what grievous mischiefs, the Arians went about to
practice against Athanasius, and all such as cleaued steadfastly unto the creed
containing the clause of One substance: or what heinous crimes, and heavy
complaints the Cou^cells assembled about Athanasius his cause, exhibited
against him: or what horrible devises the graunde heretic Macedonius
practiced against all the churches of God: certainly he should have either
run them over with silence, or if This Sabinus ^rot a book ^tituled, the
collection of ^he cou^cells. (Socra. lib. 1. ^ap. 13. lib. 3. ^ap. 21) where ^e
^ayth no^ing of the ^uersaries ^f the truth.
that he had once opened his mouth, he should have uttered such things as
would have tended to the detection of such shameful and reprochefull
dealinges. Now has he winked at all this, and blased abroad the sclaunderous
crimes those beastly men charged Athanasius withal. But he says not a word
of Macedonius the ringleader of those heretics, whilst he endeavors to
co^ceale his horrible practices, and tragical acts. And that which is most of
all to be maruailed at, he reports not ill of the Arians, whom he abhorred.
Moreover he has not once remembered the election of Macedonius, whom he
succeeded. for if he had but once opened his mouth to discourse of him, he must
needs have painted unto the world his deuilishe dealings, and lewd behavior,
even as the circumstances of that election do plainly set forth. But of him so
far.

CAP. XII.
How the Emperor sent Philip the governor, to remove Paulus bishop of
Constantinople ^ap. 16. in (...) Greek.
out of the byshopricke into banishment, and to place Macedonius in his rowme.

AS soon as the Emperor Constantius remaining at Antioche, had understood,
that Paulus yet again was placed in the bishops seae of Constantinople: he
took great displeasure, and was sore incensed against them. He gave out a
commission unto Philip the president, who was of greater authority then all
the other his liuetena^ts, and called the second person in the empire: to
remove Paulus, and to appoint Macedonius in his steed. Philip then, fearinge
the rage and tumult of the multitude, circumuenteth Paulus very subtlely,
covertly he concealeth the Emperors pleasure. He fayneth the cause of his
coming to be for the common affairs of the city, he getts him straight unto
the public bathe called Ze^xippus: he sendes thence one unto Paulus that
should honorably salute him, and will him in any wise to repair unto the
Emperors Liuetenant. As soon as he came, the governor opened unto him his
lord the Emperors commandment. The bishop takes patiently his sentence,
although unjustly decreed against him. But the governor standing in great
fear of the furious rage of the multitude, and such as stood in compass
about him (for many by reason of the suspicious rumor flocked unto the public
bath) gave commandment, that one of the back windows of the bath should be
opened: that Paulus should be let down at the said window into a ship,
readily appointed for the purpose, and thence be conveyed to exile. The
governor had commanded him, that he should sail thence straight to
Thessalonica, the head city of Macedonia (for thence his auncetors came) and
there make his abode: that it was lawful moreover for him, freely and without
danger to frequent y^ cities of Illyrium: but he would in no wise give him
leave to come nigh the countries of the East. To be short, Paulus thinking
little or nothing of all this, is both deprived his church, banished the city,
and forthwith brought to exile. Philip the Emperors debitie got him with
speed from the public bath, into the church. Macedonius accompanied him (for
it was so concluded before) sitting by his side in the wagon, in the face of
the whole multitude: the soldiers guarded them with naked swords, so that the
multitude in compass was amazed thereat, and strocken with sudden fear. All
ran to the church, such as defended the creed containing the clause of One
substance, flocked to the church, as well as the Arian heretics. As soon as
the governor together with Macedonius was now come nygh the church, a
marvelous great fear amazed both the multitude and the soldiers them selves.
There was so great a multitude gathered together, that there was no passage for
the governor to lead Macedonius, the soldiers were feign to thrust the
people of this side, and that side, but the throng was so great, and the rowme
so narowe, that they could not give back, neither recoyle. The soldiers
supposinge the multitude had set them selves against them, and of set purpose
stopped their walk, that the governor might have no passage theraway: drew
their swords, let fly amongst them, and laid on lustyly. The report goes,
that there fell The great slaughter which the Arians caused at Constantinople,
about the placing of Macedonius the heretic
about three thousand, one hundred, and fifty persons, whereof some were
slain by the soldiers, some other styfled in the throng, and crushed to
death. But Macedonius after all these famous acts, as if he had committed no
offense, as if he were innocent, and gyltles toutching all this heinous and
horrible slaughter: is stalled in the bishops seat, more by the censure of the
governor, then the canon of the church. These were the means that Macedonius
and the Arians used to clim^, by slaughter and murder to be magistrates in the
church. About that time the Emperor builded a goodly church, now called The
church of wisdom, and joined it unto the church called by the name of Peace,
the which being of small compass, his father before him had both in bygnes
enlarged, and in beauty set forth and adorned. Now were they both environed
with one wall, and called after one name.

CAP. XIII. Cap. 17. in the Greek.

How Athanasius being terrified with the Emperors threats, fled the second
time to Rome.

ABout that time there was an other sclaunder raised by the Arians against
Athanasius, Athanasius is falsely accused.
which forged out such an accusation against him as follows. Constantinus the
father of these Emperors had given a good while before certain grain for
alms, to the relief of the poor within the church of Alexandria. This they
said that Athanasius had soulde, and turned it to his own lucre and gain.
The Emperor takes their sclaunderous report for truth, and threatens him
with death. Athanasius then understanding of the Emperors high displeasure
against him, fled away, and hidd him self in a secret and obscure place.
Julius bishop of Rome, hearing the molestation and injuries the Arians offered
Athanasius: and now having received the letters of Eusebius, who lately had
departed this life: understanding of the place where Athanasius hydd him
self: sent for him, willinge him to repair to Rome. At the same time he
received letters from the Council assembled at Antioch, and other letters also
sent unto him from the bishops of Egypt, which plainly affirmed, that all
such crimes as Athanasius was charged withal, were mere false. Wherefore
Julius by sendinge of contrary letters, answered at large the bishops which
assembled at Antioche, and first he shows what grief and heaviness he
conceived by their letters: secondly that they had transgressed the canon of
the church, in not calling him to the Council, in so much the canon
commands, that no decree be thrust upon the church without the censure of
the bishop of Rome: moreover that they had covertly corrupted the faith: also
that they concluded by main force, and double dealing, such things as of late
they had lewdely handled at Tyrus, in that they of spyte had procured the
relations of one side duly, to be registered at Mareotes: and that their forged
leasinges of Arsenius were mere sclau^ders, and false reports. These and other
such like things, Julius laid down in his letters unto y^ bishops assembled at
Antioch. we would have laid down here y^ epistles unto Iulio, and his unto
others were it not that the length of their writings, and the tediousness of
their discourse, persuaded us to the contrary. Sabinus the favorer of
Macedonius his fond opinion (of whom we spoke before) though in his book
entitled The collection of Counsels, he omitted not y^ epistle of the bishops
assembled at Antioche unto Julius, yet laid he not down the letters of Julius
unto them again. It was his accustomed manner so to do. for what epistles so
ever were written by any Counsels, either altogether disanullinge, or at lest
wise passing over with silence the clause of One substance, them he carefully
cyted, and collected diligently: look such as were of the contrary, them of
set purpose he ouerskipped.

CAP. XIIII.
How that the Western Emperor requested his brother to send unto him such
as Cap. 18. in the Greek.
were able to justify the depositions of Athanasius and Paulus: and how the
legates brought with them a new form of faith.

NOt long after Paulus leauyng Thessalonica, feigned he would to Corinth, and
got him Paulus. b. of Constantinople got him to Rome.
straight into Italy. there both he and Athanasius jointly do open their
estate unto the Emperor. The Emperor, whose dominions were y^ contries of the
West, esteeming of their injuries, as his own adversity: wrote unto his
brother, requesting him in his letters, to send unto him three men, that might
render before him just causes of the deposition of Paulus and Athanasius. There
were sent unto him Narcissus the Cilician, Theodorus the Thracian, Maris the
Chalcedonian, and Marcus the Syrian. After their coming they would not reason
with Athanasius: but concealing the form of faith decreed at Antioche, the
bishops frame out an other, the which they exhibited unto the Emperor in these
words. We believe in one God the father almighty, creator The Creed of
certain Aria^ bishops exhibited unto Constans the emperor, where they
dissemble egregiously.
and maker of all things, of whom all fatherhoode is called both in heaven
and earth: and in his only begotten son, our Lord Jesus Christ, begotten of
the father before all worlds: God of God, light of light, by whom all
things were made, both in heaven, and in earth, be they visible or invisible:
who is the word, the wisdom, the power, the life, the true light: who in the
later days was incarnate for our sakes: was borne of the holy Virgin: was
crucified: dead: and buried. who rose again the third day from the dead,
ascended into the heavens, sits at the right hand of the father, and shall
come again at the end of the world, to judge the quick and the dead, and to
reward every man according unto his works, whose kingdom shall have no end,
but shall continue forever. For he shall sit at the right hand of the father,
not only while this world lasts: but also in the life to come. And we
believe in the holy Ghost, that is: in the comforter, whom he promised he
would send the Apostles, whom also he sent after his ascension into the
heavens, for to inform and instruct them in all things, by whom their
souls shall be sanctified, which faithfully believe in him. Whosoever then
dare affirm: that the son has his being of nothing: or that he is of any
other substance, then of the fathers: or that there was a time, when he had no
being: these the Catholic church does hold for accursed. When they had
exhibited these few lines unto the Emperor, and showed them to diverse others:
they took their leave, without further reasoninge of any other matter.
Furthermore whilst that as yet both the churches of the East, and also of the
West without any ado communicated together: a new opinion sprang up at
Sirmium a city of Illyrium. Photinus The heresy of Photinus.
who governed the churches there, borne in the lesser Galatia, the disciple of
Marcellus that was deposed of his byshopricke, following his masters steps,
affirmed: that the son of God was but only man. The discourse of these
things we will refer to an other place.

CAP. XV. Cap. 19. after ^he Greek.

A form of faith laid down by the bishops of the East, containing many long
and large circumstances.

THree years after, the bishops of the Eastern churches, summone again an
other council, they frame an other form of faith, and send it to the bishops
of Italy, by Eudoxius bishop of Germanicia, Martyrius, and Macedonius bishop
of Mopsiestia a city in Cilicia. This faith set forth at large, contains
many additions and glosses, besides such as heretofore were published in other
creedes. it begins thus: We believe in one God the father almighty, The
bishops ^f the East summone a council, and send abroad this their Creed,
with long expositions thereof.
creator and maker of all things, of whom all fatherhoode in heaven and in
^arth is called: and in his only begotten son Jesus Christ our Lord,
begotten of the Father before all worlds: God of God, light of light, by whom
all things were made, both in heaven and in earth, be they visible or
invisible: who is the word, the wisdom, the power, the life and true light:
who in the later days was incarnate for our sakes, was borne of the holy
virgin, was crucified, dead and buried: who rose again the third day from the
dead, ascended into heaven, and sits at the right hand of the father: who
shall come in the end of the world, to judge the quick and the dead, to reward
every man according unto his works whose kingdom shall have no end, but shall
continevve for ever. For he shall sit at the right hand of the Father, not
only while this world lasts, but also in the life to come. We believe
also in the holy Ghost, that is in the Comforter, whom Christ promised to
send his Apostles after his ascension into heaven, whom also he sent for to
teach, and lead them in all things, by whose means, the souls of them
which faithfully believe in him, are sanctified. whosoever therefore dare
presume to affirm: that the son had his beginning of nothing: or of any
other substance then the Fathers: or that there was a time, or a world,
when he was not: these the holy and Catholic church does hold for
accursed. In like manner such as say that there are three gods: or that Christ
was not God from the beginning: or that he is neither Christ, neither the
son of God: or that there is neither Father, neither Son, neither holy
Ghost: or that the son is unbegotten: or that the Father begatt not the son
of his own will and purpose: these the holy and Catholic church does
hold for accursed. Neither can it be uttered without blasphemy, that the
son had his being of nothing, in so much there can no such thing be found
of him in holy scripture. Neither do we learn that he had his being of any
other preexistent substance, besides the fathers, but that he was truly
begotten of God the father alone. The holy scripture teaches us that the
father of Christ is and was one unbegotten, and without beginning. Neither
may we safely affirm without testimony of the sacred scripture, that there
was a time when he was not, as though we should imagine or forethinke in
him, any temporal space: but we have to conceive and comprehend in our
minds, God alone, with begatt him without time. For times and worlds
were made by him. Neither can ere other, the father or the son properly be
said, jointly to be without beginning, and jointly without begettinge: but
as we know the father alone to be without beginning, incomprehensble, and
to have begotten the son, after an incomprehensible, and an intelligible
manner: so we understand the form, to have been begotten before all worlds,
and not to be unbegotten after the same manner with the father, but to have had
a beginning, the father 1. Corinthians. 11.
which begatt him, for the hea^^^ of Christ, is God. When we confess three
things, and three persons according unto the scriptures, to vvete: of the
father* of the son, and of the holy Ghost, we do not therein allow of
three gods. For we acknovvledge one only God, perfect and absolute of him
self, unbegotten, without beginning, invisible, the father of the only
begotten son, who alone of him self has his being, who also alone
ministers abundantly unto all other things their being. And when as we
affirm one God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, to be only unbegotten,
we do not therefore deny Christ to have been God from everlasting, as the
followers of Paulus Samosatenus did, which affirmed that The heresy of
Paulus Samosatenus.
by nature he was but only and bare man, after his in^^mation by profiting^
and forvvardnes to have been made God. We know though ^e be subject to the
father and to God, that he is God of God begotten according unto nature, that
he is both a perfect and true God, and not made God afterward of (...): but
that according unto the will of God the father he was incarnate for our
sakes, never afterward lo^inge his di^^niti^. Moreover we detest and The
word of God is no vocal or me^tall word.
abhor, and hold them for accursed, which affirm that the son of God is
the only and naked word of God, without substance, but after a feigned and
imaginatiue sort in an other: and one while do term him the word as
uttered by the mouth an other while as enclosed in the mind of some one or
other: For they confess not that even Christ, who is Lord, the son of God,
the mediator, the image of God was before all worlds: but that he was
Christ and the son of God from that time, since which (now full four
hundred years ago) he took our flesh of the Virgin. They will have the
kingdom of Christ, from that time to have his beginning: and after the
consummation of the world, and the dreadful day of judgment, to have his
endinge. The authors of this abominable heresy are the Marcellians,
Photinians, Ancyrogalatians, who therefore disprove the essence and divinity
Marcellians. Photinians. Ancyrogalatians.
of Christ, which has been before all worlds, and likewise his kingdom
which has no end: because they pretend the establishinge of a monarchy.
But we know him, not for a simple uttered word, or as it were enclosed in
the mind of God the father: but for the living word, God, subsistinge of him
self, the son of God and Christ: and not to have been with his father before
the worlds by only prescience, to have been conversant and ministered unto him
for the framing and finishing of every work of visible or invisible things:
but to have been the word in deed, together with the father, and God of
God* for this is he unto whom the father Genesis 1. 2. Genesis 12. 18. Exodus 19.
20. Hebr. 1.
said: Let us make man after our own image and similitude: who appeared in
his proper person unto the fathers of old: gave them the law: spoke by the
prophets: last of all became man: made manifest his father unto all men, and
raygneth world without end. Neither do we believe that Christ received his
divinity of late, but that he was perfect from all aeternitie, and like unto
the father in all things. Such as confound the father, the son, and the
Sabellians.
holy Ghost. and impiously imagine three names in one thing, and in one
person, not without just cause we forbid them the church, because they
appoint the father, who is incomprehensble, and impatible, by incarnation to
be both comprehensible, and patible. Of which heresy are the Patropassians, so
called of the Romans, but of us Sabellians. We know of certainty the
Patropassia^s.
father, which sent his son to have continewed in the proper nature of his
immutable divinity: the son which was sent to have accomplished the
disposed order of his incarnation. In like manner such as say impiously and
blaspheniously, that Christ was begotten neither by the counsel, neither by
the will of the father, attributinge to God the father a counsel tied to
necessity, and an essence entangled with the want of free will, so that he
begatt the son of co^pulsion: them first of all we hold for accursed
creatures, and far estraynged from the truth in Christ: because they presume
to publishe such doctrine of him, both contrary to the common notions and
understanding we have of God, and also repugnant with the sense and meaning
of the sacred scripture inspired from above. We know that God is of his own
power, and that he enjoys his free will, and we believe godly and reverently
that he begat the son of his own accord, and free will. We believe and that
godly, which is spoken of him: The Lord made me the Proverb. 8.
beginning of his ways, for the acco^plishing of his works, yet we understand
no^ that he was so made as other creatures and other things were framed. For
that is impious and farr^ from the faith of the catholic church, to liken the
creator unto the creatures which he shaped: or to think that he had the like
manner of begetting with other things of different nature. The holy scriptures
do inform us, only of one only begotten son, unfeignedly and truly
begotten. Moreover when as we say that the son has his being of him self,
that he lives and subsisteth in like sort with the father: for all that, we
sever him not from the father, neither do we imagine corporal wise, certain
spaces, and distance between their coherencie. For we believe that they join
together without pause or distance put between, and that they can not be
severed asunder: so that the father compriseth, as it were in his bosom, the
whole son: and the son is joined and fastened to the whole father, and
rests continevvally, only in his fathers lap. We believe furthermore in
the absolute, perfect, and most blessed Trinity: and when we call the father
God, and the son God, in so doing we say not, there be two gods, but one God,
of equal power and divinity, and one perfect conjunction of raygne: and even
as the father bears rule and exercises authority over all things, and over
the son: sovve say that the son is subject unto the father, and that he
governs besides him, immediately and next after him all things which he
made: and that the saints, by the will of the father, receive the grace of
the holy Ghost abundantly poured upon them. Thus the holy scriptures have
instructed us, to direct our talk of the monarchy in Christ. After the
aforesaid brief and co^pendious form of faith, we have been constrained to
explicate and discourse of these things at large: not that we are disposed
vainly and arrogantly to contend: but to remove out of the minds of such men
as know us not, all fond suspicion and surmise conceived of our censure and
opinion, otherwise then truth is: and that moreover all the bishops of the
West, may easily perceive not only the sclaunders of such as maintain the
contrary opinion, but also the ecclesiastical and Christian faith of the
bishops inhabitinge The bishops ^f the West ^hurches ^ere stayed ^ religion.
the East, confirmed out of the manifest and vnvvrested testimonies of holy
scripture, the which the adversaries are wont lewdly to interpret. The
bishops of the west churches affirmed, they would in no wise receive these
things, partly for that they were written in a strange tongue, and therefore
could not understand them: they said moreover that the creed or form of
faith, laid down by the Nicene council was sufficient, and that it was not
for them curiously to search further.

CAP. XVI. Cap. 20. in the Greek.

Of the general Council summoned at Sardice.

WHen as the Emperor had written again, that Paulus and Athanasius should be
restored to their former rowmes and dignities, and his letters had taken no
place by reason of the civil dissension and discord as yet not appeased among
the multitude: Paulus and Athanasius make humble suit, that an other council
might be called together, to the end their cases should be the better known,
and the faith should be decided in a general counsel, for they protested y^
their depositio^ was wrought, to the end y^ faith might be destroyed. Wherefore
by y^ commandment of both y^ Emperors, (the one signifying y^ same by his
letters, the other whose dominions lay in y^ East, willingly co^descending
thereunto) there was proclaimed a general council, that all should The
counsel of Sardice was held An. Dom. 350.
meet at Sardice a city of Illyrium. The eleventh year after y^ desease of
Costantinus, the father of these Emperors, in the consulship of Ruffinus and
Eusebius, the council of Sardice was summoned. There met there (as Athanasius
says) about three hundred bishops of the west churches, and (as Sabinus
declares) only seventy six bishops out of the East, of which number was
Ischyras bishop The Arians were loath to come to the counsel, therefore they
dissemble and feign excuses.
of Mareotes, whom y^ deposers of Athanasius preferred to be bishop of that
place. Some allege for them selves their infirmity of body: some complain
that their warning was to short, and therefore they blame Julius bishop of Rome:
when as since the date of the proclamation, and the leisure of Athanasius
co^tinewing at Rome, and expecting y^ meeting of the council, there rame a
whole year and six months. After that y^ bishops of the east came to Sardice,
they would not come into y^ presence of y^ bishops which inhabited y^ West, but
sent the^ this message, that they would not talk, neither reason with them,
unless co^ditionally they would bar Athanasius and Paulus their company. But
when Protogenes bishop of Sardice, and Osius bishop of Corduba a city (as I
said before) of Spain, could in no wise brook that Paulus and Athanasius
should be absent: the Eastern bishops forthwith depart: and coming to
Philippi a city in Thracia, they assemble a private counsel among the^
selves, and begin thenceforth openly to accurse the creed, co^taining the
claule of One substance: and The Acts of the council of Sardice.
to sow abroad in writing their opinion, that the son was not of one
substance with the father. But the assembly of bishops which co^tinewed at
Sardice, first condemned them which fled from the hearing of their cause: next
deposed from their dignities the accusers of Athanasius: afterward ratified
the creed of the Nicene counsel, and abrogated the heretical opinion which
said, that the son was of a different substance from the father: last of all
set forth more plainly the clause of One substance, for they wrote letters
thereof, and sent them throughout the whole world. Both sides were Paulus bishop
of Constantinople, Athanasius bishop of Alexandria, Marcellus. b. of Ancyra,
are by the council restored to their churches.
pleased with their own doings, and every one seemed to him self, to have
done right well: the bishops of the East, because the Western bishops had
received such as they had deposed: the bishops of the West, because the
Eastern bishops being deposers of others, had departed before y^ hearing of
their cause: the one for that they mayntained the Nicene creed: the other for
that they went about to condemn it. Their bishoprics are restored to Paulus
and Athanasius, likewise to Marcellus bishop of Ancyra in the lesser Galatia,
who a little before (as we said in our first book) was deposed, who also then
endeavored with all might to disprove, and confute the sentence pronounced
against him, saying that the phrase and manner of speech, which he used in his
book, was not understood, and therefore to have been suspected by them, as if
he mayntayned the heresy of Paulus Samosatenus. Yet we may not forget that
Eusebius Pamphilus wrote three books, to the confutation of the book of
Marcellus, where he cites the words of Marcellus, and refuteth them, plainly
declaring that Marcellus no otherwise then Sabellius the Aphrick, and Paulus
Samosatenus, thought that the Lord Jesus was but only man.

CAP. XVII. Cap. 21. in the Greek.

An Apology, or defense in the behalf of Eusebius Pamphilus, that he was no
Arian, as diverse malicious persons wrote of him.

BEcause that diverse have bruted abroad sclaunderous reports of Eusebius
Pamphilus, affirming that in his works he sauoured of the heresy of Arius, I
think it not amiss, presently to lay down in few words, what of truth we
may think of him. First of all he was both present at the Council of Nice,
and subscribed unto the clause of One substance. In his third book of the
life of Constantine, he has these words of that Councelll: The Emperor
Eusebius. de vit. Constantini lib. 3.
dealt so far with them, for the reducinge of them unto concord and unity,
that he left them not, until he had brought them to be of one mind and of
one opinion, toutchinge all that before time was called into controversy, so
that with one voice, they all embraced the faith decided in the Council of
Nice: If Eusebius then, mentioninge the Council summoned at Nice, does say
that all quarells and questions were there ended: and that all were of one
mind, and of one opinion, how is it that some dare presume to charge him with
the spotte of Arianisme? The Arians them selves also are foulie deceived, if
they take him for a favorer of their opinion. But some man peradventure will
say, that he seemed to smell of Arianisme, in that he used often times in his
books this phrase: By Christ. Whom I answer, that not only he, but also
other ecclesiastical writers, yea and the Apostle him self, who was never
once suspected to be the author of any lewd opinion, used this phrase before
them, which wrote such kind of speech, and sundry other sorts of sentences,
for the lively settinge forth and expressinge of the order and manner of our
saviors humanity. But what Eusebius thought, when Arius taught that the lonne
was a creature, and to be accounted as one of the other creatures, now
understand, for in his first book against Marcellus he writes thus: He
alone, and none other, is both called, and is in deed Eusebius. lib. 1. contra
Marcellum.
the only begotten son of God. Wherefore they are worthy of reprehension,
which are not ashamed to call him a creature, and to say that he began of
nothing, as other creatures did. How shall he be the son, or after what
sort may he be called the only begotten of God, when as he has (as they say)
the same nature with other creatures, and is become one of the vulgar sort of
men, to wete: having the like beginning with them, and being made partaker
with them of the creation which is of nothing? But the holy scriptures
(Ivvis) teach us no such things of him. And again a little after he says:
Whosoever then says: that the son was begotten of nothing, or that the
principal creature began of nothing: he attributes unto him unadvisedly the
only name of the son, but in very deed, and in truth he denies him to be
the son. For he that is begotten of nothing, can in no wise be the true
son of God, no more can any other thing that has the like beginning. But
the son of God truly begotten of the father him self, is to be termed the
only begotten, and the well-beloved of the father. and so he shall be God. For
what other thing is the budde or branche of God, then that which resembles
the begetter. The king is said to build or make a city, but not to begette
a city: and so he is said to begette a son, but not to build or make a
son. In respect of the work he wrought, he is not called a Father, but a
cunninge vvorkeman, and in respect of the son he begatte, he is not called a
vvorkeman, but a father. Wherefore the God of all universality, is worthily
to be called the father of the son: yet the framer and maker of the world.
Although it be once found written in a certain place of holy scripture: The
Lord made me the beginning of his ways, for the accomplishing of his works,
Prouer. 8.
yet (as I am minded immediately to interpret) it behooves us to skanne narowly,
and to sift out with diligence, the sense and understanding thereof, and not
after the manner of Marcellus, with one word, to shake the chief principles of
christian religion. These and many other such like reasons, has Eusebius
alleged in his first book against Marcellus, to y^ co^futation of his
opinion. In his third book he has expounded how this word Made or created is
to be understood as follows: These things being after this sort, it remains
that we consider of this sentence: The Lord made Eusebius. lib. 3. contra
Marcellum.
me the beginning of his ways, for the accomplishing of his works, which is no
otherwise to be taken, then the other things we expounded before. For in case
he say that he is made, he says it not, as if he became something, of nothing:
or that he was made after the self same manner with other creatures, of that
which is not (as some have levvdely imagined) but that he had being and
lyuinge, that he was, and subsisted before the foundations of the world
were laid, and therefore appointed by his father, who is Lord of all
things, the prince of all this universality: so that the word Made in this
place is no otherwise to be taken, then Appointed, or Ordained. Peter also the
Apostle calls Princes and Magistrates plain creatures, where he says:
Submitt your selves unto every humane creature, for the Lords sake, whether 1.
Pet. 2.
it be unto the king, as unto the chief head, either unto rulers, as sent of
him. And the Prophet also: prepare thy self (says he) O Jerusalem, to call
upon thy God, for behold he sets the thunder, he shapeth the spirit, and
shows unto men his Christ. he understands not this word shapeth, as if
the spirit were made of that which is not. for God then made no^ the spirit
when he shevved by him, his Christ unto all men (he was not then nevvely
proclaimed under heaven, for he was and subsisted before) but he sent him,
what time the Apostles were assembled together: when the sound in the likeness
of thunder came down from heaven, Act. 2.
as if it had been the coming of a mighty wind, and filled them all with the
holy Ghost: and thus he shevved his Christ unto all men, according unto the
prophecy which said: behold he sets the thunder, he shapeth the spirit,
and shows his Christ unto men, laying down the word shapeth, for sends
or ordains, and the word thunder in an other sense, for the preaching of the
Gospel. David also when he said: Create me a clean heart O God: he said it
not, as Psalm. 50.
though he wa^ted a heart, but he desired a pure heart to be put in him, and made
perfect. In like sense Ephesians. 2.
also is that spoken: that he should create two, into one new man, that is:
he should couple. Se likewise this, whether it may be taken after the same
manner: to put on the new man which is created after God. Again: If there be
any new creature in Christ: and such like phrases the which with diligent
search we may find in the holy Scriptures. Marvel not then if the Scripture
metaphorically do use this kind of speech: the Lord made me the beginning of
his ways, made that is, appointed or ordained. these were the reasons of
Eusebius in his books against Marcellus, and cited of us to this end, that
the mouths of such as unadvisedly do sclaunder him, and contumeliously report
of him, may therewith be stopped. They are not able to prove (although the
words of the order and manner be usually and commonly found throughout his
works) that he assigned unto the son of God, a beginning of essence: for all
that he was a great follower and fauorer of Origens works, where, whosoever
can attain unto the secret and hidd sense of Origens books, he shall find
every where, the son to have been begotten of the father. thus have we used
digression, for to ridd Eusebius out of the sclaunderous mouths of suspicious
heads.

CAP. XVIII. Cap. 22. in the Greek.

When the council of Sardice decreed that Athanasius and Paulus should be
restored to their bishoprikes, and Constantius the Eastern Emperor would not
admit them: The Emperor of the West threatened him with wars, so that
Constantius was therewith affrayde, wrote for Athanasius and sent him to
Alexandria.

AFter that both the Bishops assembled at Sardice, and also the bishops
assembled at Philippi a city of Thracia, in their several counsels had
decreed such things as seemed good unto them selves, they returned every man to
his own home. The East and west churches were The division of the East and
West churches.
now divided, the space or distance seuering their communion asunder, was the
mount between Illyrium and Thracia called Tisueis: for so far every of them
among them selves, though they differed about the faith, yet the quarrel being
laid aside, they communicated together, beyond that, there was no communion
of contrary parts. such a confusion, such a stir, and such a division reigned
then in the church. Immediately after, the Emperor of the West parts of the
world, certified his brother Constantius, of the things decided in the council
of Sardice: and requested him to see Paulus and Athanasius placed in their
bishoprikes. But when Constantius differred from day to day his brothers
desire: the Emperor of the west gave his brother in choice, either to restore
Paulus and Athanasius, and so account of him as his friend: or else to hear
the proclamation of open war, and so find him his deadly foe. The letters he
sent by the ambassador unto his brother were these: There The letters of
Constan^ the Emperor unto his brother Constantius
remain here with me Athanasius and Paulus, who as I am credibly given to
understand, are persecuted for pieties sake. If that thou vvilt promise me to
restore them unto their seaes, and to punish severely such as have iniuried
them, I will send the parties them selves unto thee: but if thou will not
accomplish this my will and pleasure, know for suertie that my self will
come thither and maugre thy berde, restore them to their proper seaes. Cap. 23.
in the greek.
When the Emperor of the East had understood of this, he was wonderful
pensive and sadd, he assembleth together many of the Eastern bishops: lays
before them y^. choice his brother gave him: demands of them what was best
in this case to be do^e. They make answer that it was far better to restore
again Athanasius, then to raise deadly and mortal wars. Wherefore the
Emperor being constrained of necessity, sent for Athanasius unto him. In the
mean while, Constans the Western Emperor had sent Paulus honorably, together
with two Bishops, with his own letters, and with the letters of the council
for the more surety, unto Constantinople. When Athanasius feared and doubted,
whether he were best go or no unto Constantius (for the false reports of
sclaunderous persons troubled him very sore) the Eastern Emperor Constantius
by name, sent for him not once, but the second and the third time, even as
his letters turned out of the latin into the greek do declare, and by
translation as follows.

The epistle of Constantius the Emperor unto the exiled Athanasius.
Constantius the puysant and noble Emperor, unto Athanasius the bishop sends
greeting* our singular and wonted clemency will no longer suffer thy
fatherhoode, to be turmoyled and tossed with the surging waves of the seas*
the piety which we have alvvaies in great price, will no longer permit
thy holiness, now banished out of thy native soil, bereaved of thy substance,
barred of all prosperity, to wander through crooked and cross ways,
through desert and dangerous contries. Although we have lingered now a great
while, from sending our letters, whereby we might signify unto thee the
concealed secretie of our mind, hoping that of thine own accord, thou
would repair unto us, and with humble suit crave remedy and redress of
thine injuries: yet nevertheless (fear peradventure dismaying thee of thy
purpose) we sent presently our gracious letters unto thy gravity, that with
all celeritie thou come unto us: in so doing thou shall satisfy thy longing
desires, thou shall have trial of our wonted clemency, and be restored to
thine own seae and native soil* for to this end I have entreated my Lord
and brother Constans, the puysant and noble Emperor, that he would license
thee to return unto us, vvherby thou might by the means of us both, enjoy
thy contrie, and have this token for trial, of our singular clemency and good
will toward thee.


An other epistle unto the said renowned Athanasius.
Constantius the puysant and noble Emperor unto Athanasius the Bishop sends
greeting. Although by our former letters, we have signified unto thy wisdom
after the plainest manner, that with secure mind and safe conduyte, thou
should come unto our court, because we were fully determined to restore
thee unto thy former dignity: for all that, we have sent these letters also,
unto thy holiness, that thou hire a common vvaggon, and removing all timorous
thoughts from thy mistrustfull mind, thou speedely repair unto us, to the
end thou may the sooner enjoy thy long wished desires.


An other epistle unto the said renowned Athanasius.
Constantius the puysant and noble Emperor unto Athanasius the Bishop sends
greeting. Being of late at Edessa, where there were also of thy priests then
present, it seemed good unto us, to send one of them unto thee, that thou
should hasten unto our court, and after thy coming into our presence,
vvithour delay return into Alexandria. And for as much as it is now a great
while ago, since thou receauedst our letters, and have differred thy journey:
therefore now also we thought good to putt thee in remembrance, that without
delay thou come unto us, and so thou shall possess the liberty of thy
country, and thy long wished ease and quietness. To the end thou might
fully persuade thy self of all the premises, we sent unto thee Achetas the
Deacon, of whom thou shall understand, both what our purpose is, and also
how that thy hearty desires shall prevail. Athanasius bing at Aquileia ( for
he had removed thither from Sardice) received these letters. thence he went in
post to Rome, showed the letters to Bishop Julius: and recreated very much the
Church of Rome. for Constantius the Eastern Emperor seemed to be of the same
faith and opinion with them, when he sent for Athanasius home. Julius certified
the clergy, and layetie of Alexandria in his letters of Athanasius as follows.


The epistle of Julius Bishop of Rome, unto the Priests and people of
Alexandria.
Julius Bishop of Rome unto the priests, deacons and people inhabiting
Alexandria, well-beloved brethren, sends greeting in the Lord. I do greatly
rejoice with you (well beloved brethren) that henceforth you may behold with
your eyes, the fruit of your faith. that truly is to be seen in my brother
and fellow Bishop Athanasius: whom God has restored unto you, partly for his
sincere and godly life, and partly also by the means of your prayers. hereby
it may easily be coniectured what pure and fervent prayers, you have alvvayes
poured unto God. For when you called to remembrance the heavenly promises, and
the entire affection you bear unto them, all which you learned of my foresaid
brother: you understood plainly and through the right faith ingraffed in your
minds, you were fully persuaded, that Athanasius (whom in your godly minds
you beheld present) should not always be absent, and continually be severed
from you. Wherefore I need not use many words unto you, for whatsoever I say,
the same has your faith prevented: and whatsoever commonly you all heartily
desired, the same through the grace of God is now fully come to pass. And that
I may repeat the same again: I do greatly rejoice with you, that you have
continevved so firmly and so steadfastly in the faith, that by no means you
could be vvithdravven from it. Moreover I do no less rejoice at my brother
Athanasius, who, notwithstanding the manifold calamities and sundry miseries
he endured, yet remembered almost every hour, your entire love and great
longing for him. and although for a season he seemed to be absent from you in
body: yet lived he always as if he had been present with you, in the spirit.
I think verily (well-beloved brethren) that all the temptations and pains he
endured, are not void of their praise and commendation. for by this means both
your faith and his, has been known and made manifest unto the whole world.
If he had not been tried with such great and lamentable temptations, who ever
would have thought so stayed a censure to have rested in your minds, or so
fervent love and affection to have fastened your minds upon so notable a
bishop: or that he was the man that excelled in such rare gifts, by the means
whereof he is made partaker of the hope which is laid up for us in heaven.
Wherefore he has attained unto a notable testimony of his faith, not only in
this life but in the life to come. For by the pacient sufferance of much
adversity, by sea and by land, he has trampled and trodd underfoot, all the
malicious treacheries of the Arians. Oftentimes by reason of the adversaries
spite, he stood in great hazard of his life, yet made he no account of death:
but for all that, through the grace of almighty god, and the power of our Lord
Jesus Christ, he escaped their hands: whereby he conceived good hope, that in
the end he should quit him of his adversaries, and be restored to the comfort
of you all, and bear away together with you the victorious garland; of good
works and well doing: in that he is already famous even to the ends of the
world: highly commended for his good life: renowned for his free and constant
perseverance, in the defense of the christian and heavenly faith, and registered
by the censure of you al to immortal memory, for the singular love and
affection he showed toward you. Wherefore he is returned unto you, bedecked
with greater excellency and renowm, the^ before his departure. If the fire
accustomed to try exquisitly the purity of fine and precious metal, as of
gold or silver: what can be spoken of so notable a man, in respect of his
worthiness, who after the que^ching of so many fiery flames of sedition: after
the recovering of so many dangerous perils and grievous downfalls, is now
restored unto you and found innocent not only by our determination, but by the
decree and ce^sure of the whole council? Entertain therefore (well-beloved
brethren) your bishop Athanasius, and also such as have been partakers of his
affliction, with all reverence, joy and gladness. Rejoice in that you have
obtained your desires: in that you have as it were fed, and quenched with your
letters the thurst, of your shepherd, hu^gering and thursting in his absence,
after your godly zeal. for in so doing, during his abode in foraine and far
co^tries, you comforted him not a little: and while he was tossed toe and fro,
with the storms of persecution, and entangled with the snares of his malicious
adversaries, you mitigated his grief and sorrow, by sending unto him tokens, of
your faithful and fervent minds toward him. When that I think with my self,
and cast in my mind the conceived joy of you all, at his return: the flocking
multitude full of religion and godliness: the solemn feast of sage persons
assembled together: what kind of day the return of my brother unto you is like
to be: I can not choose but conceive wonderful joy. specially for that the
schism and discord which reigned heretofore is now plucked up by the roots:
for that his honorable return according unto your own hearts desire, has
replenished you with incredible joy and gladness. so that the joy for the
greatness thereof, has reached unto us, to whom it is given from above, to
have acquaintance and familiarity with so excellent a man. It seems good that
we end our epistle with a prayer* god almighty, and his sone our lord and
Savior Jesus, give you always of his grace, and grant you of his mercy the
reward of so noble a faith, the which you have showed toward your Bishop,
with so worthy a testimony: that both you and yours, may, not only in this
world, but also in the life to come, enjoy far more excellent gifts, which
neither eye has seen, neither 1. Corinthians. 2.
ear has heard, neither the heart of man conceived the things that God
prepared for them which love him, through our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom
with the Almighty God, be glory for ever and ever Amen. God have you in his
tuition well-beloved brethren.


Athanasius having got these letters, came into the East. Constantius the
emperor, although at that time he received him not unwillingly: yet giving
ear unto the crafty sleights of the dispitefull Arians, went about to begile
him, reasoning with him in this sort: For all thou art restored unto thy
bishoprike by the The conference of Constantius and Athanasius.
decree of the council and our own determination: yet because there are in
Adexandria certain people differing in opinion from thine, and seuering them
selves from thy communion, my request is that thou permit them one church for
them selves. Athanasius made answer unto his request very wittely and said: O
Emperor it lies in thee to do as pleases thee best: to command and to
execute the commandment. I also vvil crave of thee an other thing for
recompense, my humble request is that thou grant it me. When the emperor made
answer, that with most willing mind he would condescende thereunto,
Athanasius immediately said: Mine humble suit is that I may obtain that which
thou would have had at my hands, to vvete: that thou vvilt grant one
Church throughout every city, for such as communicate not with the Arians.
The Arians perceauing that the request of Athanasius was not unreasonable, made
answer yt it behooved them to differ that matter unto an other time, and
consider better of it. they hindered not the emperor, but suffered him to do
that which pleased him best. Wherefore the Emperor restored Athanasius,
Paulus, Marcellus, Asclepas bishop of Gaza, and Lucius Bishop of Adrianopolis,
every one to his own bishoprike again. these two hindemost were admitted by
the council of Sardice: Asclepas for that he showed records, whereby it
appeared that both Eusebius Pamphilus and sundry others, understood fully of
his case, and restored him to his dignity: Lucius for y^ his accusers fledd
away. by the emperous edict they all received their own seaes, the cities were
commanded to entertain them with willing and cheerful minds. At Ancyra there
was no small stir, by reason that Basilius was removed and Marcellus restored
in his place, so that the adversaries took thereby occasion, to sclaunder
Marcellus again. The citizens of Gaza received Asclepas willingly. At
Constantinople, Macedonius for a season gave rowme unto Paulus, and had
several meetinge and conuenticles at a certain church of the city. But as
toutching Athanasius, y^ emperor sent letters unto the bishops, unto the
clergy and laytie of Alexandria, that they should receive him both lovingly
and willingly. he commanded moreover by his letters y^ such acts as were
recorded against him in their courts and synods, should be blotted out* his
letters in the behalf of both the aforesaid are these.

The Epistle of Constantius in the behalf of Athanasius the Bishop.
Constantius the puysant, the mighty and noble Emperor, unto the Bishops and
Priests of the catholic church sends greeting. It appears evidently, that
Athanasius the reverend bishop, was not destitute of the grace and goodness of
God. although by the judgment and censure of men he was injuriously dealt
vvithall, and unjustly condemned for a little while: yet the divine providence
of almighty God, the beholder of all things, pronounced of him the just
sentence of innocence, so that by the will of God and our decree, he recovered
both his native soil, and proper church, where the holy Ghost had assigned
him governor. He is to receive at our hands, such things as our clemency,
being led by right and reason shall think convenient for him, so that all
whatsoever has been heretofore decreed against such as communicated with
him, be henceforth quite forgotten: that all suspicion raised of him, be
henceforth removed: and that his clergy (reason so requiring) may enjoy such
liberty, freedom and privilege as they have done in times past. Moreover of
our sovereign benignity toward him, we have thought good to add this also,
that as many as are allotted into the sacred senate of the clergy, may
understand of truth, that we have granted safety and good leave, to as many
as cleave unto him, be they Bishops or what other degree soever of the clergy.
every ons firm and sure consent in this behalf, shall be a sufficient sign or
token of his faithful mind and purpose. We have commanded that such as
embrace his communion, addicting them selves unto the sounder opinion and
better sentence, all alike now, by our permission, as heretofore by the
providence of God may enjoy the benefitts bestovved upon them from above.


Another epistle unto the people of Alexandria.
Constantius the puysant, the mighty and noble Emperor, unto the people of the
Catholic church of Alexandria sends greetinge. In as much as we lay
alvvayes before our eyes your good and politic government, as a mark to
shoot at, or looking glass to behold our own estate, and saying that you
were bereued of your Bishop Athanasius, a man approved both for sound
learning, and honest living: we determined with our selves, to send him unto
you again. Receive him therefore honorably, after your accustomed manner: join
him with you as an helper in your prayers unto God: endeuer always to retain
amongst you concord and peace both fit for your own persons, and grateful
unto us, according unto the sacred decrees of the church. For it is not
requisite that dissentio^ and debate should molest and disquiet the peaceable
estat of these our prosperous days. Our desire is that such a plague be purged
far from amongst you: our request is (well-beloved people of Alexandria) that
in your prayers, where you crave (after your wo^ted custom) the aid and
asistance of the spirit of God, you take Athanasius for chief, or (as I said
before) an helper: to the end, according unto your happy and prosperous
success, the Hethenishe nations as yet snared with the erroneous service of
Idols, may hasten with most willinge minds to embrace the profession of our
most holy faith. We counsel you this also, that you persevere in the things
we rehearsed before: that you entertain willingly your Bishop, sent unto you
by the mighty power of God and our loving pleasure: and that you count him
worthy all courteous salutatio^. For a of surety this is comely for you and
convenient for our highness. We have also charged the judges and governors of
those provinces by our letters, that they should weed all the tares of spite
and contention, out of the minds of malicious persons, and punish severely
seditious and busy bodies. wherefore seeing that you understand all these
circumstances, that our pleasure is agreeable with the will of God: that we have
care over you for the maintenance of concord and unity: that we have assigned
punishmente for troublesome and seditious persons: observe diligently the
things which are correspondent unto the ordinances of the church, and the
service of God, embrace this Athanasius with all honor and reverence, and pour
out prayers unto God the father, who governs all things, both for your
selves and also for the concord and quietenes of the whole world.


An epistle for the abrogating of the things that were decreed against
Athanasius. There is extant also an epistle in the same form unto the
governors of Augustomnica, Thebais, Libya and Licya.
Constantius the puysant and noble Emperor unto Nestorius sends greeting.
If any thing be found decreed and recorded heretofore, to the prejudice,
hurt, or damage of such as comunicate with Athanasius the Bishop, our will is
that the same wholly be abrogated and dissanulled. Our pleasure is moreover
that his clergy shall enjoy the like franchesse and liberty, as in times past:
we will have this commandment put in ure, as that Athanasius the bishop is
restored to his seae: so all the clergy of his communion, may recover and
possess the like liberty, with other ecclesiastical persons, and so being,
live at hearts ease.


CAP. XIX. Ca. 24. in the Greek.

How that Athanasius passinge by Jerusalem into Alexandria, was received of
Maximus into the communion: how he called there a Synod of Bishops and
confirmed the decrees of the Nicene council.

AThanasius the Bishop trustinge to these letters, passed through Syria and
came to Palaestina. The council of Jerusalem Anno Dom. 351. Maximus bishop of
Jerusalem forsook the Arians. Vrsacius and Valens being Arians repe^^ the^ of
there folly.
He got him thence to Jerusalem, and opening unto Maximus both y^ counsel of
Sardice, and also y^ Emperor Constatius agreement and consent therein, he
procured a synod of Bishops to be assembled there. For Maximus without all
delay, cited thither certain Bishops out of Syria and Palaestina. The assembly
being gathered together, he gave Athanasius y^ communion, and assigned unto him
his dignity. The council being dissolved, wrote and signified by their letters,
unto the people of Alexandria, unto y^ bishops of Egypt and Libya, all their
decrees and canons toutching Athanasius, wherefore all y^ adversaries of
Athanasius cried out against Maximus, because y^ asoretime he had subscribed to
his depositio^, now again repenting him of his folly, as if he had not the^
done well, he became of his faith, and awarded him both y^ communion and his
dignity. When Vrsacius and Valens who before time were earnest followers of
Arius, understood of this, they condemned their former doings and got then to
Rome: there they exhibit unto bishop Julius, their recantation and repentance
in writing: they subscribe unto the creed containing the clause of One
substance, and they write unto Athanasius, that thenceforth they will
communicate with him. Vrsacius and Valens being thus won with the prosperous
success of Athanasius his affairs, agreed (as I said before) unto the clause
of One substance. But Athanasius trauelinge by Peleusium, the ready way to
Alexandria, preached in every city where he came, and exhorted them to eschew
the Arians and to embrace such as confessed the faith of One substance. And in
diverse of the churches, also he ordained ministers, which gave occasion unto
the adversaries, for to accuse him again, that he presumed to make ministers
in other men's provinces. So far of the things which happened then unto the
renowned Athanasius.

CAP. XX.
Of Magnentius and Bretanion the tyrants, and of the death of Constans the
Cap. 25. in the Greek.
western Emperor.

IN the mean while the quiet estate of the common weal was not a little out of
square, whereof I will briefly entreat and run over such things as I have
determined with my self to lay down. After the death of Constantine who
builded Constantinople, his three sons (as I have said in my first book)
succeeded him in the Empire. Of which number we have to understand, that
Constantinus, so called after his fathers name, was one, and raygned together
with the rest of the Emperoures, whom the soldiers slew, after he had
raygned a very little while, and as Constantius commanded not he should not be
slain, so again he forbad not the slaughter. But how that Consta^tinus the
younger, breaking out into the borders of his brothers dominions, lost his lif,
whilst that he fought hand to hand with the soldiers, I have often mentioned
before. After whose death there rose wars between the Persians and y^
Romans, where Constantius had but ill favored success. For the camp being
pitched in the night time, about the bounds of the Roman and Persian
dominions, the Persian host seemed then to prevail, and for a time to have
the upper hand. Then also the ecclesiastical affairs went very troublesome,
for there was great contention in the Church about Athanasius, and the clause
of One substance. These things being at this point, Magnentius the tyrant
became a rebel in the West parts of the world, and through treason
Magnentius the tyrant is of Futropius called Maxe^tius. Bretanion a tyrant.
Nepotianus a traitor.
procured the death of Constans the Emperor, which governed the west, and
the^ abode in France. This being wrought there ensued great and grievous
wars. Magnentius the tyrant invaded all Italy, subdued Aphrick and Libya and
took also France. Moreover at Sirmium a city of Illyrium there was an other
tyrant set up by the soldiers, whose name was Bretanion. At Rome also there
was a great stir. For Nepotianus Constantius sisters son, having got
unto him a great troop of fencers and sword pleares aspired unto the
Imperial scepter, but the captains of Magnentius dispatched him. Magnentius
in a little while ouerranne and subdued all the Weste parts of the world.

CAP. XXI.
How that after the death of Constans the Western Emperor, Paulus and Cap.
26. in the Greek.
Athanasius were deposed again, Paulus in his exile was stifled to death:
Athanasius fled and so saved his life.

ALl the aforesaid stir fell out in a very short space, to were in the
fourth year after the Council of Sardice, in the Consulship of Sergius and
Nigrianus. Constantius understanding of the whole circumstance made a title
and challenge, unto all the dominions of his brethren, and being proclaimed
Emperor of the west, makes expedition to wage battle with the tyrants. The
adversaries of Athanasius supposinge now they had gotten fit opportunity,
Athanasius is accused.
forge out afresh heinous offenses against him, before his coming into
Alexandria: they inform the Emperor Constantius that he perverted all Egypt
and Libya. The election of ministers he made in forayne provinces furthered the
matter, and caused the offense to seem very heinous. The council of Alexandria
Paulus Bishop of Constantinople exiled and there stifled ^o death.
Athanasius in the mean while came to Alexandria, and there called together
diverse counsels of the Bishops of Egypt, where they decreed such things as
were agreeable with y^ Canons of the council of Sardice, and also of the
council held at Jerusalem under Maximus. The Emperor who aforetime was
addicted unto the Arian heresy, wrested all the things he had lately decreed,
into the contrary part. And first of all he banisheth Palus Bishop of
Constatinople, whom the messengers or guydes that brought him to exile,
stifled very lewdly at Cucusum a city in Cappadocia. Marcellus is expulsed
Ancyra, and Basilius placed in his rowme. Lucius Bishop of Adrianopolis
Marcellus is deposed. Lucius dies in prison. Theodulus. Olympius.
is clapped in prison, and there choked up with stincke. But the relations that
were made unto the Emperor of Athanasius so incensed him, that he gave forth
a commandment, he should be executed wheresoever he were taken. He charged
moreover that Theodulus and Olympius Bishops of Thracia should be put to death.
Yet Athanasius was not ignorant of the Emperors great rage, but being
quickly made priuey thereunto, fled away and so avoided the Emperors
threats. The Arians backbite him for flying away namely as chief, Narcissus
bishop of Neronias a city of Cilicia, Georgius of Laodicea, and Leontius who
then was Bishop of Antioch. This Leontius being a priest was deposed, because
he (endeuoringe to conceal a foul sclaunder and suspicion raised upon him,
for his familiarity with a woman whose name was Eustolia) gelded himself, to
the end he might thence forth boldly use her company, and comitte nothing
whereof he might justly be accused, the same man was by the advice and council
of the Emperor Constantius chosen Bishop of Antioch after Stephen who
succeeded Placitus. Thus much of him.

CAP. XXII. Cap. 27. in the greek.

How that Macedonius having gotten again the Byshopricke of Constantinople,
vexed such as were of the contrary opinion.

MAcedonius then, after that Paulus had departed this life with the manner above
said, was made Bishop of Constantinople, he had great liberty and access
unto the Emperor, he made wars among y^ christians, nothing inferior to the
tyrannical practices of those times: he persuaded the Emperor to aid him,
when as in very deed he procured the overthrow and destruction of the
churches, and prevailed so much, that whatsoever he lewdly had compassed, the
same forthewith was by a law confirmed. Every city sounded of proclamations.
The soldiers were commanded to see y^ Emperors edicts take place. As many as
cleaued unto y^ Creed containinge y^ clause of one substance, were not only
cut of from y^ churches, but also banished altogether the cities. And first
they join heads and hands together, to bring this to pass. But when this
pestilent infection had spread it self far and nigh, such as had little, or
rather no care at all of y^ ecclesiastical affairs, determined with
themselves, to constrain men to their communion. The violence The persecution
of the christians by the Aria^ heretics.
truly was no less, then y^ of old, practiced toward the christians, when
they were compelled and drawn to sacrifice unto Idols. For many endured sundry
kinds of torment: often racking and dismembring of their joints: confiscating
of their substance: some bereaved of their native soil: other some departed
this life under y^ hands of y^ tormentor: some died in banishment, and never
saw their country again. These were their practices throughout all the
cities of y^ East, but specially at Constantinople. This civil plague and
persecution (before time ^eing not out of measure) Macedonius did greatly
augme^t, as soon as ever he had gotten y^ Bishopric. But the cities of
Greece, of Illyrium, and of y^ other parts tending toward the West, were void
of all these tumults and calamities, because they agreed within themselves and
observed the canons of the Nicene council.

CAP. XXIII.
Athanasius reports what horrible acts were committed at Alexandria by
Georgius the Arian Bishop. And what clemency Constantius the Cap. 28. in the
Greek.
Emperor showed unto Bretanion the tyrant and rebel.

LEt us hear (if ye please) Athanasius himself, making relation of the
horrible practices committed then at Alexandria, by Georgius the Arian, for he
was present and felt himself some part of the lamentable affliction. In the
Apology which he wrote in the defense of his flight he declares the behavior
of the Arians in this sort: There came to Alexandria certain people
Athanasius Apollogie.
which sought us out, to execution, so that the ending was far worse then the
beginning. The soldiers unawares beset the church: in steed of devout service
of God, they take in hand desperate swords. The^ Georgius that was sent by them
from Cappadocia, coming in lent time, added of his own unto the lewd
practices which he learned of them. After that the Easter week was ended, the
virgins began to be clapped in prison: the Bishops were bound and led by bands
of soldiers: the fatherles and widows were dispossessed of their houses: the
families were rifled: the Christians were violently trayled and lugged out of
their houses: their doors were nailed up: the clergy men's brethren were in
great danger of their lives, for their brethernes sake. these things seemed
very grievous, but the afterclaps were far sorer. The week after whitsontide,
the people did fast, they got the^ therefore into the churchyard for to pray
because they all abhorred the communion of Georgius. But when this passing lewd
man understood of it, he stirred up against the^ on Sebastianus a captain, who
also was a Manichee. He forthwith together with Sabastianusa captain, yet a
Manichee and a great blood sucker
a great troop of soldiers, all in armor, having naked swords in their
hands, bows and arrows prepared, ran upon the people as they were a
praying on the sunday. When he found there but a few (for the hour being
past the greater part was gone away) he committed such heinous acts as became
very well his person. He set on fire a great company of fagottes: he made
the virgins to stand nigh the burninge flame* he went about to constrain them
to confess the Arian faith. But when he peceaued they would not yield, and
that they despised the burninge heat of that horrible fire: he stripped them
stark naked: he buffeted them about the head and the face, so that of a
longwhile after, they were scarce known of their own friends. Moreover he
took forty persons, and plagued them with a new kind of torment never heard
of before. Their backs and sides were so scurged and rent with palm twigges
newely plucked of the trees, having on their prickinge knobs. So that diverse
because of the stumpes that stuck in the flesh of their backs, were
constrained often times to repair unto surgions: others some not able to
endure such terrible pain dyed of their wounds. As many of the men, as
remained yet alive, together with the virgins, were exiled, and led by the
soldiers to Oasis. The dead carcasses not yet fully cold, were denied the
friends of the deseased: being thrown here and there and lying unburied (for
that liked them best) the soldiers hid them, as if they had been neither
culpable neither fauty in committinge such horrible crimes. This did they,
having their minds ouershadowed with the furious rage of frentike heresy. And
when as the dear friends and familiars of the dead, rejoiced at the bold
protestation of their faith, yet sorowed because their carcasses were not
covered with earth: the sauadge impiety and beastlye cruelty of these
soldiers, revealed it self with greater shame and infamy. Moreover they
banishe forthwith certain Bishops of Egypt and Libya, namely Ammon, Thmuis,
Gaius, Philon, Hermes, Plinius, Psenosiris, Nilammon, Agathon, Anagamphus,
Marcus, Dracontius, Adelphius, Athenodorus, a second These bishops were sent
to exile by the Aria^s
Ammon, and of the priests they banished Hierax and Dioscorus. These being
bereaved of their native soil, they handled so roughly, that some of them dyed
by the way, some other in exile never returninge again. They put to death
above thirty Bishops. They followed the s^eppes of wicked Achaab, employing all
their care and industry, for the rootinge out of the truth, from of the face
of the earth. These were y^ practices of Georgius at Alexandria, by the report
of Athanasius. The Emperor marched forewardes with his host to Illyrium, for
thither of necessity was he constrained to go, and there it was that Bretanion
was proclaimed Emperor. As soon as he came to Sirmium, truce being made, he
came to parlee with Bretanion. In the mean while he endeavored to win again
the soldiers, which had refused him for their Emperor, after he had so done,
they proclaimed Constantius alone, both their Augustus, their king, and The
cleme^^y of Constantius toward Bretanion.
Emperor. In this their proclamation there was no mention of Bretanion, who
saying himself betrayed, fell down prostrate at the Emperoures feet, and
craved for mercy. Constantius taking from him his princely scepter, and purple
robe, lifted him up by the hand very courteously, and exhorted him, after the
calling of a private man, to lead a quiet and peceable life. He said
moreover, that it was fitter for an old man such as he was, to embrace a
trade of life that were void of all trouble and care, the^ to gape after a
vain title of honor, full of disquietnes and molestatio^. Thus it fared with
Bretanion in the end. The Emperor commanded that all his charges should be
given him of the public tribute, afterward he wrote unto him sundry letters
to Prousa a city in Bithynia, where he made his abode: signifyinge what
singular pleasure he had done unto him, in riddinge him from cares and
troubles, shewinge also what misery, oftentimes befalls to reign and
government: and that of his own part he had dealte unadvisedly in not giving
to him self that which he granted to an other. So far of these things.

CAP. XXIIII.
Of Photinus the heretic.

THe Emperor at that time made Gallus his cosingermaine Caesar, he gave him
his own Gallus Caesar.
title or name, and sent him to Antioch in Syria for to keep those parts of
the Empire, which reached into the East. When he came to Antioch, there
appeared in the East the sign or cognizance of our Savior, for a pillour
resembling the form of a cross, was seen in the The sign of the Cross
seen in the aer.
aer, bringing great admiration to the beholders. He sent his other captains
with great power to wage battle with Magnentius, he himself remained at
Sirmium, harkening to the end. Cap. 29. in the Greek. Photinus the heretic.
The council of Sirmium was held Anno Dom. 355
In the mean while Photinus the superintendent of that church, went about
openly to publish a self opinion, invented of his own brain, and because
there was great tumult and much trouble risen thereof, the Emperor commanded
a council to be summoned at Sirmium. Of the Bshops of the East there came
thither Marcus Bishop of Arethusa, Georgius Bishop of Alexandria, whom the
Arians (after they had deposed Gregorius as I said before) placed there:
Basilius who was Bishop of Ancyra after the deprivation of Marcellus:
Pancratius Bishop of Peleusium, Hypatia^us Bishop of Heraclea. Out of the Weste
there met them Valens Bishop of Mursa and Osius Bishop of Corduba a city of
Spain, who then being of great fame was forced to come unto the council.
These Bishops assembled at Sirmium, after the consulship of Sergius and
Nigrianus, in which year, by reason of the wars and civil dissentions,
there was none that could execute the function of a Consul: they deposed
forthwith the heretic Photinus of his Bishopric, for he maintained the
lewd opinion of Sabellius the Aphricke and Paulus Samosatenus. Which Act of
theirs was approved of all men, both at that present and also in times
followinge, to have been done according unto right and reason.

CAP. XXV. Cap. 30. in the greek.

What forms of faith were laid down at the council of Sirmium, in presence
of Constantius the Emperor.

THese Bishops continewinge a while at Sirmium, decided other things. For they
went about to abrogate their old Creeds, and to establishe new forms of
faith: one was exhibited in the Greek tongue by Marcus Bishop of Arethusa* two
others in the Latin tongue, agreeing neither in word neither in composition,
neither in sense neither in sentence, either with themselves, or with that
which the Bshop of Arethusa wrote in Greek. One of the Latin forms I will
here lay down, immediately after the Greek form of Marcus. The other
afterward rehearsed at Sirmium, I will refer to his proper plate. Yet have
we to understand that both were translated into y^ Greek. The form which
Marcus wrote, was as follows: We believe in one A form of faith exhibited by
Marcus Bishop of Arethusa unto the council of Sirmium.
God, the father almighty creator and maker of all things. Of whom all
fatherhood is named in heaven and in earth. And in his only begotten son,
our Lord Jesus Christ, begotten of the father before all worlds, God of God,
light of light* by whom all things were made, both in heaven and in earth, be
they visible or invisible things* who is the word, the wisdom, the true light
the life: who in the later days was incamate for our sakes, borne of the holy
virgin, crucified, died, rose again the third day from the dead, ascended
into heaven, sits at the right hand of the father, and shall come again at
the end of the world to judge both the quick and the dead, and to reward every
one according unto his works, whose kingdom shall have no end, but
contineweth for ever and ever. For he shall sit at the right hand of the
father, not only while this world lasts, but also in the life to come, And
we believe also in the holy Ghost, that is in the comforter, whom the Lord
promised to send his disciples after his ascension for to teach and lead the^
Act. 2.
in all things, whom also he sent, by whose means the souls of the^ that
faithfuly believe in him are sanctified. They that say that the son of God
has his being of nothing: or that he is of an other substance then the
fathers: or that there was a time or a world when he was not, these the (...)
holy and Catholic church does hold for accursed. Again we say: that
whosoever affirms the Father and the Son to be two Gods, let him be
accursed. If any man, when he calls Christ God, and to have been before all
worlds, confess not also that the son of God ministered unto the father at
the creation of all things, let him be accursed. He that presumes to say that
he is unbegotten, or that part of him was borne of the virgin, let him be
accursed. If any say that the son was borne of Mary according unto
prescience, and not to have been with God, begotten of the father before all
worlds, by whom all things were made, let him be accursed. Whosoever says
that the substance of God can either be more enlarged or less diminished, let
him be held for accursed. whosoever says that the enlarged substance of God
made the son, or calls the son the enlarged substance of God, let him be
accursed. whosoever calls the word of God, the mental word of the father,
or the vocal word, let him be accursed. Whosoever says that the son of
God is but only man, borne of Mary, let him be accursed whosoever when he says
that he was borne, God and man of Mary, understands the unbegotten God, let
him be accursed. whosoever understands this after the Jewish manner: I am the
first God, and I am the second, and besides me there is none other God (which
was spoken to the overthrow of Idols and of them ^ say. 43. 44.
that be no Gods) thereby to take away the only begotten, that was God before
all worlds, let hi^ be accursed whosoever when he hears: The word became
flesh, supposes the word to be turned John. 1.
into flesh, or by conversion to have taken flesh upon him, let him be
accursed whosoever, when he hears the only begotten of God to have been
crucified, thinks that therein he was subject to corruption, torment,
alteration, diminution, or destruction, let him be accursed whosoever
understands this: let us make man, not to have been spoken of the father unto
the son, Genesis 1. 2. Genesis 32. Genesis 19.
but God the father himself to have spoken it to himself, let him be
accursed. whosoever thinks the son not to have wrastled with Jacob as man,
but the unbegotten God, or some portion of him, let him be accursed whosoever
understands this: the lord rained from the lord, not to be taken of the
father and the son, but that the father rained from himself, let him be
accursed. For the son being lord, rained from the father, that was lord
whosoever when he hears: the father lord and the son lord, calls the
father being lord, both lord and son: and when he reads: the lord from the
lord: affirms there be two gods, let him be accursed. For we place not the
son in the same rowme with the father, but subject to the father. Neither
was he incarnate without the will of the father: neither rained he from
himself but from the lord, who has authority of himself, to wit, from the
father: neither sits he at the right hand of himself, but harkeneth unto
the father, saying: sit thou on my right hand whosoever calls the father, the
son, and Psalm. 110.
the holy ghost one person, let him be accursed whosoever when he calls the
holy Ghost the co^forter, tearm^th him the vnbegottte^ God, let him be accursed
whosoever says there is no other John. 15. 16.
comforter beside the son, contrary to the doctrine of the son himself
(for he said: the father whom I will entreat, will send unto you an other
co^forter) let hi^ be accursed whosoever says that the holy Ghost is a piece
or portion of the father, and of the son, let him be accursed whosoever
affirms the father the son and the holy ghost to be three gods, let hi^ be
accursed whosoever says that the son of God was made by the will and
pleasure of the father, as one of the creatures, let him be accursed whosoever
says the son was begotten contrary to the will of the father, or whether the
father would or no, let him be accursed. For the father begatte not the son
against his own will, neither was he constrained by the law of nature, as if he
had been unwilling thereu^to: but of meare good will, without all time, without
passion begat he hi^ of him self* whosoever says that the son had neither
be getting nor beginning, and so consequently affirm that there are two
without beginning, and two without begetting, and so appoint two Gods, let him
be accursed the son is the head and the original of all creatures: and the
head of Christ is God, for so we refer all things reverently by the son,
unto one beginning of the whole vniuer sality, which is with out begening.
Again weyinge deeply with our selves that clause also of christian
profession, we say that whosoever affirms Christ Jesus, the son of God, who
ministered unto the father at the creation of all things, not to have been
before all worlds, but only from the time since the son was borne of Mary,
to have been Christ, and the^ his deity to have begone, This form of faith is
so ^atched together without time or ^aso^, that in many places ^ requires a
^^ry reader, ^e authors ^ereof mis^^ed with it ^^emselues ^ called it in ^gaine
as ap^^areth in ^e end of ^s chapter. ^^m. 3.
as Paulus Samosatenus was persuaded, let him be accursed.

An other form of faith first laid down in Latin, afterward translated
into the Greek.
IN so much it pleased them dil^gently to consider of the faith, all whatsoever
appertained thereunto was exquisitly and curiously handled at Sirmium, and in
presence of Valens, Vrsacius, Germanius with other Bishopps, they agreed, that
there was one God, the father almighty, even as it is taught throughout the
whole world: and one only begotten son of his, Jesus Christ and our Savior,
begotten of him before all worlds* y^ it was not lawful to say there were two
Gods although the Lord himself had said: I go unto my father and unto your
father, unto my God and unto your God. Wherefore he is the God of all, as the
Apostle has taught us: What is he the God of the Jews only? Is not he also
the God of the Gentiles? Yea of the Gentiles toe, for there is but one God
which shall justify the circumcision by faith. All the other things are
corresponde^t neither do they contain any ambiguitie at all. And because
there was great contention about y^ understanding of y^ word which the Latins
call Substantia and the Grecians (...) about y^ equality or as they call it,
the unity of substance: they decreed, y^ thenceforth y^ controversy should
not once be remembered: yt the church of God should no longer be troubled with
y^ interpretation thereof, and y^ for two causes, first because y^ Scriptures
of God made no mention thereof, secondarily because that the interpretation
thereof exceeded the sense and capacity of man, for y^ holy Scriptures
testisted that no man was able to set forth the generation of the son, in
these words: His generation who shall be able to declare? For it is most true
that the father alone knows how he begat the Esaias. 53.
son, again, y^ son alone knows how he was begotten of y^ father. They
said no man doubted but that the father was greater in honor, dignity,
divinity, and fatherly title, and that by the testimony of the son himself
where he says: The father which sent me is greater then I. They said moreover
this was Catholic, neither unknown unto any, that there were two persons,
the father and the son: the father greater, the son subject together with
all other things which the father made subject unto him: the father to be
without beginning, invisible, immortal, impatible: the son to be begotten of
the father, God of God, light of light, and that no man (as I said before) was
able to rehearse his generation save the father alone: the son our lord and
God to become incarnat, to have taken a body upon him, that is man: even as
partly he showed unto the Angels, and partly all the Scriptures do inform us
of him, but especially the Apostle, the preacher of the Gentiles, that Christ
took manhood of the virgin Mary according unto the which he suffered. They
said it was the principle, and ground of our whole faith, always to holdfast
the faith in the trinity, as we read in the Gospel: Go teach all nations,
baptizinge them in the name of Math. 28.
the Father and of the Son and of the holy Ghost. The number of the trinity
is absolute and perfect. The comforter, the holy Ghost sent by the son, came
according unto promise for to sanctify and lead the Apostles and all the
faithful. They go about to persuade Photinus after his depriuatio^, to
condescend and to subscribe unto these things, promising to restore him unto
his Bishopric again, if he would recant and renounce the self opinion, he
had invented of his own brain and thenceforth promise to cleave unto their
doctrine. He refused the conditions, and provoked them to disputation. A
certain day was appointed for conference, the Emperor commands the
Bishops the^ present to be at it, there came thither also at the request of y^
Emperor not a few councellers. The assembly being met, Basilius who the^ was
Bishop of Ancyra, took Photinus in hand: Photinus the heretic was ^oyled in
open disputation.
the notaries penned all they spoke. While they reasoned one with an other, the
disputation waxed hot, and in the end Photinus had the foil and was condemned
to vanishment. From that time forth he lived in exile, and wrote in the Greek
and Latin tongue (for he was well seen in both) a book against all heresies,
endeuoringe therein to publishe his own opinion. So far of Photinus. We have
yet to understand that the Bishops assembled at Sirmium, misliked themselves
with the form of faith, laid down in the Latin tongue, for after the
publishing thereof, they espied contradictories therein. Wherefore they went
about in all the have, to call in all the coppies, and when as diverse were
concealed, the Emperor by his edicte gave charge, that all should be brought
in, and such as hid the^ should be punished. Yet were there no threats or
cruelty that could recover the things once blased abroad, because they had
run through many hands.

CAP. XXVI.
Of Osius Bishop of Corduba. Cap. 31. in the Greek.


WHereas we have made mention a ^itle before of Osius Bishop of Corduba that he
was constrained to show himself at the council of Sirmium, I think it
requisite now to say somewhat of that matter. Although in a while before,
through the lewd practices of the Arians, he had been in exile: yet then, at
the suit and procureme^t of the Bishops which assembled at Sirmium, it tell out
that the Emperor cited him, purposinge with himself to persuade him or by
foul means to constrain him, to be of the same opinion with the assembled
Bishops, and in so doing their faith should seem to carry with it great
force and creditte. To this end he was drawn against his will (as I said
before) unto the council. But when as this old father would in no wise
subscribe unto their faith, they scurged his sides, and set his members upon
the rack. So that in the end by compulsion he gave his assent, and subscribed
unto the forms of faith, which then were published. These were the Ac^es at
Sirmium and thus were they ended.

CAP. XXVII.
Magnentius the tyrant is overcome, and dies miserably, the Jews inhabiting
Cap. 32. in the Greek.
Diocaesarea rebel against the Romans and are soiled. Gallus rebelleth and
is put to death.

COnstantius the Emperor remained at Sirmium, waytinge what end the battle
waged with Magnentius should have. But Magnentius as soon as he took the
princely city of The cruelty of Magnentius.
Rome, he executes many of the Senators: he dispatcheth not a few of the
common multitude. When the captains of Constantius had gathered a great army
of Roman soldiers they marched toward him: he the^ left Rome and got him to
France. There were many skirmishes, one while this side, an other while that
side had the upper hand. At length Magnentius was overcome at the castle of
Mursa in France, in he got him, and kept it a while, where such a strange
thing as follows is reported to have come to pass. Magnentius going about to
animate his soldiers now altogether discouraged with the foil and overthrow
they had taken, got him up into an high seat. The soldiers, after the
accustomed honor done unto the Emperors, mindinge to sound fortunate success
unto Magnentius, by force as it were, their lips wagging before their minds,
they turn their good wishes unto Consta^tius, for they all with one mouth
proclaimed, not Magne^tius, but Constantius, Augustus. Magnentius supposinge
this to be a sign of misfortune, conveyed himself forthwith out of the
castle, and fled into the furthest parts of France. The captains of
Constantius pursued after him earnestly. Again they pitched their ca^pe at a
place called Miltoseleucus, where Magnentius being overthrown, ran away
alone and got him to Lions a city of France three days journey from the
castle of Mursa. Magnentius coming to Lions first of all The miserable death
of Magnentius.
he slew his mother, next his brother whom he had created Caesar, last of all
he became his own murderer. This was done the sixth Consulship of Constantius,
the second of Constantius Gallus the fiftenth day of August. Not long after
Decenius an other brother of Magnentius hanged himself. Decenius hanged
himself. Siluanus the tyrant was no sooner up but he was dispatched.
And although Magnentius the tyrant, had such an end: yet the common wealth
was not without great trouble and tumults. For immediately there stepped up, an
other tyrant whose name was Siluanus and molested the quiet estat of the common
weal in France, but the captains of Constantius dispatched him quickly out
of the way. Cap. 33. in the Greek. The Jews become rebels and are overcome.
when these things were come to an end, there rose other civil wars in the
East, for the Jews inhabiting Diocaesarea in Palaestina, took armor against
the Romans, and invaded the bordering regions. But Gallus called also
Constantius, whom the Emperor Constantius had made Caesar, and sent him into
the East, came thither with great power: over came the Jews in battle: and
made the city Diocaesarea, even with the ground. Cap. 34. in the greek.
Gallus a rebel, being in great trust became a traitor and so lost his head.
This Iuliamus was Emperor after Constantius and became an Apostata. ^uhus
Bishop of Rome 15. years. Liberius Bishope of Rome Anno ^om. 352. ^a. 35. in
the ^^ecke.
When Gallus had brought these things to pass, being swollen and puffed up,
with the pride of good success and prosperous affairs, could no longer
contain himself within his bounds: but forthwith being inflamed with
tyrannical motion turned his mind against Constantius, so that Constantius
not long after, espied him out, and perceived his drift. He had executed of his
own absolute authority, Domitianus who was president of the East, and the
great treasurer, not making the Emperor priuey unto his doings. Wherefore
Constantius was sore incensed against him. He being wonderfully affrayd, yet of
force came unto him. Constantius hearing of his coming, y^ he was now in the
Western parts of his dominions, to wete in the He Flauona, caused his head to
be taken of his shoulders. In a little while after, he appointed Iulianus y^
brother of Gallus, Caesar, and sent him into France against y^ Barbarians.
Gallus whose name was also Constantius, ended his life the seventh Consulship
of Constantius, and the third of his own. Iulianus the year following was
created Caesar* in the Consulship of Arbition and Lollianus, the sixte of
November. But of Iulianus we will discourse in the third book. Constantius
being rid of these present mischiefs, turned himself to wage battle with the
church of God. Remouinge from Sirmium, unto the princely city of Rome* he
called together a council, and commanded diverse Bishops out of the East to
repair with all speed into Italy, and that the Bishops of the Weste should
meet them there. In the mean space while they travel into Italy, it fell out
that Julius Bishop of Rome after he had governed that church fiftene years
departed this life, and Liberius succeeded him in the Bishopric.

CAP. XXVIII.
Of the heretic Aetius the Syrian, the master of Eunomius. Cap. 35. in the
Greek.


AT Antioche in Syria there stepped up an other heretic, founder of a strange
and forayne Where in Aetius differed from the Arians.
opinion, whose name was Aetius, called also the Atheist. He although he
maintained the same things and vpheld the self same opinion with Arius: yet
severed he him self from ye Arians, because they admitted Arius into the
communion. For Arius (as I said before) meant one thing with in, and uttered an
other thing without: being at Nice, he allowed and subscribed unto the form of
faith laid down by the council, and deceived the Emperor which reigned the^,
with his fraud and subtltie. This was ye cause that made Aetius sever him
self from the Arian sect. until that time, Aetius was known not only for an
heretic, but also for a great patron of the pestilent doctrine of Arius.
When he had got some smacke of learning at Alexandria, he left that city,
Leontius. b. of Antioch.
and went to Antioch in Syria, where he had been borne, and there was he made
Deacon of Leontius the^ bishop of Antioch. In a short while after, he was able
to amaze such as reasoned with him, The Greek word is (...) and the special
title of Aristotle's predicaments, yet does it signify, as the sense here and
otherwise gives us to understand, his book of Elenches by him entitled (...)
with his subtle quirkes of sophistry. This did he by the means of Aristotls
Elenches, (for so is the book entitled) for whylest he disputed, unwittingly
could he frame such captious and sophistical propositions, as his own
capacity could not dissolve, the reason was, because he had not learned
Aristotls dryft of cunninge and learn* Logicians. For Aristotle, against the
sophisters who then derided and abused philosophy, wrote such a kind of
reasoninge, for the whetting of young men's wits, displaying their behavior,
and ouerthrowinge their sophistical fallacies with witty reasons, and well
couched subtilities. The Academikes that comment upon Plato and Plotinus works,
do mislyke very much with such things as Aristotle has so argutely and
subtly written: but Aetius not procuring unto him a master that was an
Academicke, cleaued unto these captious and subtle fallacies. Wherefore he could
not devise how to understand that there was an unbegotten birth: or how to
imagine y^ the begotten could be coeternall with the begetter, so barraine a
brain had he of his own, and so ignorant and unskillful was he in holy
scripture: for he had nothing in him, save a subtle kind of reasoning,
quarellous and contentious languages, such as may easily be found in the (...),
ignorant, and unlearned: he had read over the ancient writers, such as
published commentaries upon holy scriptures, and condemned Clemens, Aphricanus,
and Origin, sage men, of singular learning for unlearned persons: the epistles
which of set purpose he had patched and stuffed with litigious triflles and
sophistical conclusions, the same he sent unto the Emperor Constantius, and
to sundry others: And therefore was he called the Atheist. And Why Aetius was
called an Atheist.
although he affirmed the self same things with Arius, yet of his own crew
not attayning unto his intricate and captious manner of reasoning, was he
counted for an Arian heretic. Wherefore being excommunicated out of the
church, yet would he seem as though of his own accord he had severed him
self from their communion. Of him therefore as original of this error, the
Eunomius the heretic
Aetians had their appellation, but now are they called Eunomians. For in a
little while after Eunomius his scribe, who sucked of his filthy sink of
heretical doctrine, became a ringleader to this sect. But of Eunomius in an
other place.

CAP. XXIX. Cap. 36. in the Greek.

Of the Counsels held at Mediolanum and Ariminum, with the Creedes then
concluded upon.

BY that time there met in Italy, not very many bishops out of the East, for
heavy age and long iourneyes were letts, so that they could not come: but out
of the West there came above the number of three hundred bishops. The Emperors
edi^^ was proclaimed that the council The counsel of Millayne.
should be held at Mediolanum. When the bishops of the East came thither, first
of all they require, that sentence by their general consent should be
pronounced against Athanasius, thinking verily thereby, to stop all gappes
from goinge or returninge of him any more to Alexandria. After that Paulinus
bishop of Triuere in France, Dionysius bishop of Alba an head city of Italy,
and Eusebius bishop of Vercellae, a city of the Lygurian Italians had
perceived, that the bishops of the East bent all their might to enact a decree
against Athanasius, for no other purpose, but to overthrow the true faith:
they stood up, and cried out, that in so doing the christian religion should
be cancelled by the means of their deceatfull and fraudulent treachery: that
the crimes laid to Athanasius his charge, were false reports and mere
sclau^ders: and y^ they had inverted such things to deface the true and
catholic faith. When they had ended these loud speeches, the Council brake
up. Cap. 37. in the Greek.
The Emperor understanding of this, commanded them forthwith to exile and
banishment, and determines with him self to summone a general counsel, to y^
end, after citing of all the eastern bishops, into the west contries, he might
(if it were possible) bring them all to embrace unity and concord. But after
better aduisement taken with him self, he saw it was a very hard matter to
compass, by reason of the far contries and long journey, and therefore he
commanded the Council should be divided into two parts: the bishops then
present to assemble at Ariminum a city of Italy: the bishops of the East to
meet at Nicomedia a ritie in Bithynia. But his purpose took no prosperous
success. for nere another of y^ Counsels agreed* within them selves, both was
divided into sundry factions. For neither could the bishops which met at
Ariminu^ in Italy, agree among them selves, neither the bishops of the East
among them selves, for they raised a new schism at Seleucia a city of
Isauria, but how all this came to pass, I will hereafter rehearse in process
of our discourse, if that first I say somewhat of Eudoxius. In the very same
time Leontius* who preferred Actius the heretic to the degree of Deaconship,
having departed this life: Eudoxius bishop of Germanicia a city of Syria, then
being at Rome, thought it high time for him to return into the East: he
deals doubly with the Emperor forlicence to depart with speed, alleadginge
for him self that the city of Germanicia stood in great need of his help
and ghostly counsel. The Emperor little thinkinge what fetches he had in his
head, gave him his pasport. Eudoxius. b. of Antioche.
He through the suit and furtherance of the Emperors chamberlaynes, left his
own city, and crept through wyle and subtletie into the byshopricke of
Antioche: he endeavors to restore Actius again into the church: and goes
about to summone a Council of bishops, and to make him Deacon again. But his
lewd dryft was long in brynginge about, because the hatred owed unto Actius
was of more force to repel him, then the hearty good will and furtherance
Eudoxius used to restore him. but of this we need no more words. Of them
which assembled at Ariminum, the Eastern bishops not mentioninge the business
about Athanasius, signified that the cause of their coming was to discourse
of other matters. Vrsacius and Valens, who at the first were Arians, and
afterward exhibited a recantation unto the bishop of Rome, subscribing (as I
said before) unto the clause of One substance: stood them in great stead, for
these two, continewally cleaued unto the stronger and the surer side. There
came also to take their part Germanius, Auxentius, Demophilus, and Caius. In
the assembly of bishops then present, when diverse men would have diverse things
enacted: Vrsacius and Vales affirmed y^ all forms of faith laid down in times
past, were thenceforth to be ca^celled, and that y^ new form of faith
published a little before, at y^ council of Sirmiu^, was to be confirmed. When
they had so said, they gave forth a shete of paper, which they had in their
hands to be read. The second creed written before at Sirmium, and suppressed
there (as I said before) read also at Ariminu^, and translated out of the
Latin into y^ Greek tongue, was laid down in these words: This Catholic
faith was published at Sirmiu^, in the presence of Costantius our liege lord,
Flauius Eusebius, and Hypatius renowned consuls, the eleventh A form of faith
laid down in the council of A^imino in ^^aly, by certain Arian ^ishops.
Kalends of June. We believe in one only true God, the father almighty,
creator and maker of all things, and in one only begotten son of God, who
was before all worlds, before all beginninges, before all times that may be
imagined: and begotten of God the father without any passion, before all
comprehensible knowledge, by whom both the world and all things were made:
one only begotten, begotten of the father alone, God of God, like unto the
father which begatt him according unto the scriptures: whose generation no man
has known save the father which begatt him. him we know, his only
begotten son, to have come down from heaven at the fathers beck, to
banishe and vvype away sin: to have been borne of the Virgin Marie: to have
been conversant with the disciples: to have fulfilled according unto his
fathers will, all his message, to have been crucified, to have suffered and
died: to have descended into hell, and there to have disposed all things, at
whose sight the porters of hell gates trembled: to have risen again the third
day: again, to have accompanied with his disciples, and after 40. dates were
expired to have ascended into heaven, where he sits at the right hand of the
father, and shall come again at the last day with the glory of his father, to
reward every one according unto his works. And we believe in the holy ghost,
whom the only begotten son of God, Jesus Christ him self, promised to send
mankind, the co^forter, as it is written: I go unto my father, and ^h. 14. 16.
I will pray my father to send you an other comforter, the spirit of truth:
he shall take of mine, and shall teach and lead you in all things. The word
Substance being simply laid down of the fathers, and unknown of the ignorant
people, giving unto many great cause of offense, insomuch it is not found in
holy scripture: we have thought good to abandone it, and henceforth speakinge
of God to make no mention of the word Substance, because the sacred
scriptures have not once remembered the substance of the Son, or of the holy
ghost. We say that the son is like the father in all things, and that
because the word of God has affirmed and taught it us. When these things were
read, such as were not pleased with the circumstances and contents thereof, rose
up and said: We came not hither as though we wanted faith and beleese (for we
retain that The answer of the Catholic bishops.
faith which we learned from the beginning) but we are come to withstand
novelties, if ought be practiced prejudicial unto y^ same. If those things
which you have now read, neither savor neither rend to y^ establishing of
novelty: accurse and renounce the heresy of Arius in such wise, as the old
and ancient canon of the church has banished all heretical and blasphemous
doctrine. It is apparent unto the whole world what tumults and troubles the
blaspemous opinion of Arius has raised, even unto this day, in the church of
God. This offer was not accepted of Vrsacius, Valens, Germanius, Auxentius,
Demophilus, and Caius, and thereupon the bond of unity retained in the church
of God, was broken asunder. For these men cleaued unto such things as the
council of Ariminu^ had decreed: y^ other confirmed the canons of the Nicene
Council, and derided y^ contents of the creed y^ was read in their presence,
but specially Athanasius, so y^ by occasion thereof he wrote unto his friends
after this manner: What avails it (I beseech you) unto the Catholic church
for the furthera^ce of The epistle of Athanasius unto his familier friends,
where he lays down his censure of the creed going before condemning it for
heretical.
piety and godliness, now to propose questions of the faith? and to entitle
their creed with the names of the Consuls which then were in office? for
Vrsacius, Valeus, and Gormanius have wrought that which was never done or heard
of among the Christians, when they had written such things as they thought
necessarily to be believed of them, they laid down the Consulls, the month and
the day: that it might easily appear unto all wise men, their faith not to
have been before the reign of Constantius. Every one of them having respect
unto their own heretical doctrine, have laid down their several
censures. Furthermore when they take pen in hand to pronounce what they
think of the Lord, they name unto them selves an other Lord, to vvete,
Constantius. for it was he that opened them the gapp unto impiety. And while
they denied the son of God to be aeternall (for they fell into such
outrageous impiety, they became deadly foes unto the Christia faith) yet they
entitled the Eniperour sempiternall. But peradventure they took example of the
holy prophets, who noted unto us the times they lived in, for to entitle
their creeds with the names of Consulls. If they presume to allege them as a
president to their doings, they are foully deceived, and bewray very much
their own ignorance and folly. For though the Prophets made mention of the
times they lyned in, as we read in Esaias and Oseas, who lived in the days of
Ozia, Ioathan, Achaz, and Ezech^a: as we read in Jeremy, who prophesied in
the days of Iosia: as we read in Ezechiel and Daniel, who flourished under
the reign of Cyrus and Darius: and as we find in other prophecies revealed
unto the world at other times: yet were not they the first founders of the
service of God and sacred religion. It was long before their times, it was
from enerlasting, it was before the foundacions of the world were laid, the
which verily God him self, by Christ has prepared for us. The times when
their faith had her original* they did not signify, for there had been
faithful men long before them: but those were the days when such promises
of God and prophecies of things to come were preached by them. The promises
verily concerned chiefly the incarnation of our savior: the circumstances
thereof and such things as were annexed thereunto, signified plainly the
things that should happen both to Jews and to Gentiles. Moreover in the
aforesaid specified times, their faith (as I said before) had not her first
foundation and beginning but the prophets the^ selves: for they living the^
foreshewed such things to come. But these our fouthsaiers, neither writing of
stories, neither prophesying of things to come do write, This Catholic faith
was published: adding immediately thereunto the names of the Consulls, the month
of the year, and the day of the week. Even as the holy men of old have
declared both the times of the matters they wrote of, and the years of their
own ministry: so these men have noted unto us the days when their faith
first began. I would to god they had only written their own belief, for
now they have assigned an original or beginning of their faith, and they fall
a reasoninge of it, as if it had never been heard of before. They write not,
This is our belief, but in this fort, This Catholic faith was published.
Wherefore their bold and pressipteous enterprise bewraieth their barren and
wirles brains: and their nevve found faith is no otherwise, in plain
words, then the Arian heresy. So they vvrote, then they began to believe,
from that time forth they determined to reveal their faith in no other sense
then we read in Luke the Evangelist: There was given out then Luc. 2.
a commandment from Augustus Caesar, that the whole world should be taxed.
that commandment was not given before, but then took place from those days
forth, and was published by him which vvrote it. So when these men do
write: This faith is now published, they shevve their error newly invented,
and not to have been before. But if they add the word Catholic, they
plunge them selves vnvvares in the heretical pudle of the Cataphrygians: so
that they singe after their note: The Christian faith was revealed unto us, The
Christian faith began of us. And as they took Maximilla and Montanus for
their Lord, so these men in steed of Christ have chosen Constantius. If the
faith began in those days, in the time of their Consulships, what shall
become of the ancient fathers and blessed martyrs? What shall become of them,
whom these men them selves instructed in the faith, and departed this life
before these Consulls? How shall they raise them from the dead, to root out
of their minds their former religion, and to plant afreshe their late
invention of faith? They are so senseless and so void of understanding, that
they can do naught else save forge out feigned causes: the which being as
they are both fond, slender, and upon slippery foundations, may casilie be
confuted and overthrown. These were the contents of Athanasius his epistle
the which he sent unto some of his familiar friends, the studious may at their
pleasure examine it with them selves, and know thoroughly such things as he
has discoursed of, both subtly and substantially. We have only alleged a
portion thereof, lest we should seem over tedious. Toutchinge the premises we
have moreover to understand, that the Council deposed Valens, Vrsacius,
Auxentius, Germanius, Caius, and Demophilus, because they refused to renounce
and accurse the hereste of Arius. Wherefore taking their depasition
impaciently, they run unto the Emperor, and show him the form of faith
that was read in the Council. The Council also wrote unto the Emperor an
epistle, wherein they signified unto him what they had decreed, the which
being translated out of the Latin into the Breeke tongue, is usually read as
follows.

The Epistle of the Council assembled at Arminum unto the Emperor.
According unto the commandment of God, and the edict of your gracious
highness, we have thought good to ratify with our consent, such canons as
of old did concern the Christian faith. For we have met together out of all
the cities throughout the west parts of the The bishops ^ssembled at A^imino
in talie, where ^^e Arans ^^re condemned, do write ^us unto the ^mperour
^onstantius.
world, to the end the faith of the most holy and Catholic church may be
the more famous, and the adversaries thereof the better known. After
deliberation and good aduisement taken, it seemed best unto us firmly to
retain, and in retayninge to hold fast unto the end that faith, which has
been continevved hitherto from time out of memory, which has been preached
of the Prophets, Evangelists, and Apostles through the grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who is the protector of your empire, and the co^seruer of your
health. It seemed very absurd, nay we thought it an heinous offense, to alter
ought of the things that were rightly and reverently decided: but especially
to intermedle with the canons of the Nicene Council, so exquisitely handled,
and so thoroughly sifted out by the aid and succor of your father of famous
memory the Emperous Constantine: the sage doctrine and grave censures of which
council pierced the ears and has been pri^ted in the minds of all people: by
whose only force it came to pass that the heresy of Arius was foiled and
overthrown by whose means also not only this, but all other rotten heresies
whatsoever are rooted out. What may well be added thereunto, it is doubtful,
to take any thing therefro is dangerous. If ere other be permitted, there
will ensue there of such liberty, that every one will sovv such lewd
doctrine as pleases him best. Wherefore Vrsacius and Valens being of late
infected with the pestilent here sie of Arius, and therefore justly banished
our communion, they did not only repent them of their fond dealing, their
conscience yelding manifest testimony, and accusing the^ of the same, to the
end they might again be made partakers of the same communion: but also as
their own vvrytinges do bear vvittnesse, they craved pardon with humble
and earnest petitions, so that in the end all their lewd behavior, all
their corrupt learning was forgeuen and forgotten. these things were done at
what time the council of Mediolanu^ was held in the presence of certain
priests of Rome. But when we call to remembrance how that Constantine the
Prince, worthy of noble praise among all posterity, What credit and reverence
they ^eue unto the cou^c^ll of Nice.
employed great labor and industry for the curious sifting and true knowledge
of the Nicene Creed: it seemed unto us a thing contrary to all reason for to
renew any thing thereof, or to innouate any thing prejudicial to the same,
after his desease, who first was baptized, then departed this life, and now
rests in joy: and to make light account of so many blesled confessors and
martyrs who framed and furthered this doctrine, who also according unto the
ancient purpose of the catholic church were so persuaded, and persisted in
the same unto their lives end. Whose faith God the father through our Lord
Jesus Christ, has co^tinewed unto the years of your imperial reign, by
whose help your kingdom is enlarged, and your self become Lord of all these
our countries and dominions under heaven. But of the contrary those miserable
men and bewitched The lewd behavior of the Arians.
minds, carried away with a furious kind of motion, have gone about to
proclayme them selves authors and preachers of wicked doctrine under color of
well doing, and to overthrow the right sincerity of the truth. For as soon
as the counsel at your commandment met together, they laid wide open their
co^cealed fraud and covered deceat: as soon as also they perceived Germanius,
Auxentius, and Caius, who had brought discord and dissentio^ into the church of
god, to be in all respects like affectioned with the^, they assayed through
wiles and wilful asse^blies, to establish some nouelty. whose doctrine and
opinion, though but one in name, yet in number it farie exceeded the heap of
all blasphemies. But when as they saw they would not cleave unto their
opinion, neither condescend unto their lewd practices: they transported them
selves into our side, as if they had determined to subscribe unto the contrary
doctrine. but not long after their cankred minds were known well mough.
Wherefore that the quiet estate of the church may not be tossed with such waves
of troublsome disse^tion: that all be not set on tumults and vprores: it seemed
very necessary unto us to ratify the decrees confirmed of old, inuiolably to
conserve them, and to forbid these men our communion. For this cause have we
sent legates with our letters unto your majesty, of whom you may understand the
mind and meaning of the counsel: whom also we have charged first of all to
prove the manifest truth by authority and testimony of old and au^cie^t laws
wisely decreed, and to open unto your indifferent censure and just sentence not
(as Vrsacius and Valens affirmed) that quietness should ensure, if the canons
lavvfully decreed, and advisedly decided should be overthrown (how can they
plead for peace which have pierced through and broke asunder the bond of
unity) but that discord and debate should rise thereof not only in other
cities, but also in the Church of Rome. Wherefore we humbly request your
majesty of your gracious The Bishops assembled at A^imino request three
things of the Emperor Consta^tius. 1. that he wink not at novelties. 2. that
he call home the bishops from exile. 3. that there be no alteration of old
canons.
favor and wonted clemency to accept this our message, that you permit no
novelty to creep into the church of god to the co^tumelie of such as already
are departed this life: but that you grant us license and your lavvfull
favor, firmly to persevere in those things which our auncetors have
decreed, in as much as it is evident unto all men, that whatsoever they did,
it was through well advised council, prudent consideration, and the aid of
the holy Ghost. for the innouations of these men do graffe in the minds of
the faithful, incredulity: in the minds of the unfaithful cruelty. Also
we humbly request your highness, that the Bishops which wander in far and
foraine regions, grievously afflicted by reason of great years and the misery
of want and necessity, may by your safe conduyte return home from exile, to
the end the Churches remain not desolate and destitute of their Bishops being
thus far asunder. last of all our humble suit is unto your majesty that
nothing be either diminished or added unto the old and ancient decrees: but
that all whatsoever have been observed unto this day through the godly
procureme^t of your father, may henceforth be of force, strength and virtue:
and that hereafter there may rise no molestation unto us about those things,
that you suffer us not to be banished our churches: but that bishops may be
resiant with their slocke: that they may enjoy peace and tranquillity for
prayers and devout service of God: that they may pray co^tinewally for the
preservation of your health, your empire, and prosperous estate, the which God
of his goodness long continewe. Our legates will inform you of the subscriptions
and the bishops names: they are also of learning sufficient, to let you
understand by testimonies of holy Scripture, all the circumstances of the
decrees.


These things y^ council wrote and sent unto y^ Emperor by certain bishops.
but Vrsacius and Valens preventing their coming, reviled and discredited y^
council with the emperor, showing unto him a patched form of faith, which they
had brought in their pocket: y^ Emperor in so much he was before time infected
with y^ Arian opinion, began wonderfully to stomach y^ council. and to aduau^ce
into honor and estimation Vrsacius and Valens. Wherefore y^ bishops y^ were sent
by y^ council waited very long about his court, yet could they get no answer
of him. At length by other messengers the Emperor wrote unto the council in
this manner.

The epistle of Constantius unto the council assembled at Ariminum.
Constantius the mighty and triumphant Augustus, unto all the Bishops assembled
at Ariminum sends greeting. Although it is not unknown unto your holiness,
that we have alvvayes great care and consideration of the divine, the
reverend, and sacred religion of Christ: yet had we as yet no leisure to talk
with the twenty Bishops, whom your wisdoms sent in embassy unto us. For
we have hitherto been wholy occupied about the expedition we made against the
Barbarians. And requisite it is (as you know very well) for him that will
deal in matters of religion, to be void of all care and troublesome affairs.
Therefore we have willed the Bishops to wait for our coming at
Adrianopolis, so that when we have rightly disposed the common affairs of
the public weal, we may then give care and wey diligently afterward such
things as they shall lay before us. In the mean while let it not grieve your
vvisedomes to expect their return, that after their departure hence and the
bringing of our answer unto you, ye may finish and conclude such things as
shall be for the use and furtherance of the Catholic Church. When the Bishops
had received these letters, they wrote back again unto the Emperor in this
sort. We have received your majesty's gracious letters (most godly Emperor)
The rescript of the council held at A^immo un to the Emperor Constantius.
whereby we gather you had not sufficient leisure (by reason of the necessary
business of the common weal) to give our legates the hearing: moreover that you
give us in charge to wait for their return, until that your highness of your
wisdom has deeply vvayed the things we have decreed and laid down
agreeably unto the canons and constitutions of our auncetors. But now by
these our letters we protest and assure your majesty, that we will in no
wise shrink from our sentence and determination. We have also charged and
enjoined our legates the same. Wherefore we humbly beseech you, of our wonted
clemency to voutchsafe the reading of these our simple letters, and to take in
good part such things as we have enjoined our legates. Your clemency moreover
knovveth as well as we, how heavy and how lamentable a case it is, so
many churches in the time of this your most blessed reign, to be bereaved of
their Bishops. And therefore we are humbly to crave again and again (most
holy Emperor) that before the sharp and nipping season of vvinter (if it so
seem good unto your highness) you will license us to return home unto our
Churches, to the end we may pour out together with the people our
accustomed prayers unto God the father Almighty and to our Lord and Savior
Christ, his only begotten son, for prosperous estate of your reign, even as
we have accustomed in times past, and yet cease not to do.


After they had written thus and continewed there a while longer, when as the
emperor voutchsafed not to answer them, every one returned to his own home.
The Emperor because he had purposed with him self to sow the Arian opinion
throughout every Church, and endeavored with might and main every where to
prefer the same, took hereby occasion at the Bishops return, to bring about
his baynous offense: and said, that in contempt, and despite of him, contrary
to his will they had dissolved the council. Wherefore he gave Vrsacius
authority, freely at his pleasure to practice all mischief against the
Churches of God: and commanded him moreover, to send into the Churches of
Italy the form of faith that was read in the council of Ariminum: and such
as would not subscribe unto the same should be deposed, and others placed in
their rowmes. First of all Liberius Bishop of Rome, as soon as he Liberius b.
of Rome exiled. Felix b of Rome an Arian.
denied his hand thereunto, was exiled by Vrsacius: and Felix Deacon of the
Church of Rome, addicted unto the Arian opinion, was of the same Vrsacius by
main force and violence preferred to the bishopric. Wherefore all the
Western parts of the world by reason of these new devises, were at great
discord and tumults, while that some were by force deposed and sent to exile,
some other substituted in their rowmes, these things were wrought by virtue of
the Emperors edicts sent into the West contries. Liberius not long after was
called home from exile, recovered his bishopric Laberius b. of Rome restored
agai^e.
again^, because that the people of Rome was on an uproar, and thrust Felix out
of the Church, so that the Emperor was constrained against his will to agree
thereunto. Vrsacius having played such prankes in Italy as pleased him best,
took his journey into the East, and got The council of Nice in Thracia, call*
him to the city of Nice in Thracia. There, after he had continewed a long
while, he called a council, and went about to ratify the form of faith that
was read at Ariminum, and translated (as I said before) into the greek tongue:
to publishe and set forth the same with glorious titles as agreed upon by a
general council, calling it the Nicene faith, to the intent that thereby, in
using the name of Nice he might snare the ignorant, the rude and simple people.
For they thought verily that it was the same form of faith, which of old was
confirmed at Nice a city of Bithynia, but their forged pretense was no long
furtherance unto them. For in a short while after their treachery was revealed,
and the authors thereof derided for their labor. So far of such things as
were done in the West.

CAP. XXX. Cap. 38. in the Greek.

The cruelty of Macedonius the Arian, and tumults raised by him at
Constantinople and elsewhere.

Now that we have sufficiently discoursed of the West Churches, let us turn
our talk and direct our pen into the East, and there first begin with the
Arians: The Arian Bishops being puffed up with pride and confidence they put in
the Emperors edicts, presumed more boldly to bring their purposes to effect,
but in what sort they sommoned the council I will afterward declare, when
that first I have run over their lewd practices before the council. Acaius
and Patrophilus as soon as they had deposed Maximus bishop of Jerusalem,
placed Cyrillus Cyrillus b. of Jerusalem an Arian. The heinous practices of
Macedonius the Arian.
in his rowme. Macedonius went about utterly to overthrow y^ contries and
bordering cities of Constantinople, using his servants and ministers as fit
instruments to the defacing of the church of God. he made Eleusius bishop of
Cyzicum: Marathonius bishop of Nicomedia, who before time had been deacon under
Macedonius him self, and very careful about the affairs of men and women, y^
were addicted unto monastical and solitary life. But now hear how Macedonius
went about to ouerchrow y^ contries and cities within y^ province of
Constantinople. This man, aspiring (as I said before) unto y^ bishopric,
plagued infinitely such as were determined to persevere in y^ opinion contrary
to his, and thrust out of the church not only such as in y^ council seemed to
vary from him, but also y^ Nouatians (for he knew of suerty that they embraced
the creed containing the clause of one substance) and cruelly tormented them.
Agelius their bishop was feign to fly away for to save his life. Many
excellent and notable men were then apprehended, and grievously plagued,
because they refused to be partakers of their communion: yea after torments
they were constrained by force to communicate with them. for they stretched
wide open and gagged their mouths, they popped in the mysteries: such as were
thus handled took it far more grievous then all the other torments. they
trayled women and children by maine force into their communion. if any refused
or gaynesayd their doings, immediately they were scurged, after stripes
imprisoned, and in the end compelled to endure more bitter torments. Whereof I
will allege one or two examples, whereby the woodnes and cruelty both of
Macedonius, and also of others, who at that time were renowned and famous for
such lewd feats, may evidently appear unto the whole world. Of the women
that denied to The cruelty of the Arian heretics.
communicate with them, some were laid along in chestes and at the lidds, their
breasts sawed of: some other had their papps burned with searing irons glowing
hott, and with eggs laid thereunto that were roasted so hard, that they scalded
for heat. These new kind of torments never heard of before among Pagans and
Ethnicks were practiced of these men which professed christianity. These
things I my self have heard Auxanon (of whom I spoke in my first book)
report, being a very old man: who though he was a priest of the Nouatian
Church, yet suffered he very much of the Arians, before he had entered into
orders. He reported how that together with Alexander Paphlagon, who led a very
straict and severe kind of life, (after the same sort with him) he was
imprisoned, scurged and endured many torments: that Alexander after the
grievous lashes of the whipp dyed in prison, and was buried nigh the sea shore
on the right hand as ye go to Byzantium haven, called Ceras, by interpretation
an horn, where there is a Nouatian Church bearing the name of Alexander. They
destroyed at the commandment of Macedonius not only other Churches in other
cities, but also the Nouatian Church within the city of Constantinople, nigh
the sign of the storke. but why I made mention of this severally, at this
time, as I heard with mine own ears of Auxanon an old graybearde: now I am
about to declare. By the commandment of A law against the churches of God,
made by Arians.
the Emperor, and the cruelty of Macedonius, it was proclaimed that the
churches of such as embraced y^ creed containing y^ clause of one substance
should be thrown down, even to y^ foundations. this law being joined with y^
violence of Macedonius proceaded to y^ overthrow also of this church such as
were appointed to bring these feats to pass, busily occupied their brains
and promptly dispatched them. I can not choose but greatly marvel at the
Nouatian sect, to see what singular affection they bare unto their Church:
and what charitable mind such as then were deposed by the Arians, but now
enjoy their Churches in peace, showed toward them. For as soon as the
commissioners for the suppressing of Churches had given the onsett, immediately
a great number of Nouatians, and diverse others which maintained the doctrine of
one substance, pulled down that Church, removed it to an other place, and
there erected it again. The place is situate right over against the city, and
at this day called Sycae, it is the thirtenth portion of the province of
Constantinople. The church was removed in a very short space, by reason that so
great a multitude of people with great good will and promptnes of mind set to
their helping hands. for one carried the tyles, an other the stones, the third
the timber, others conveyed other stuff into Sycae. The women also and the
children were a furtherance to the buylding, for they thought their prayers
would be the sooner heard, and to profitt them selves very much, in that they
employed their labor and industry to the consecration of buylding unto the
Lord. In that sort the Church of the Nouatians was translated to Sycae, but
after that, Constantius being dead, Iulianus the Emperor commanded that the
place where the Church aforetime had been builded, should be given to the
Nouatians. The people again, in such sort as before, went about the buylding
of the Church, and the translating of the stuff into the place where it stood
at the first, and being builded far more gorgeous then it was at the first,
they called it after the name of the resurrection. That Church (as I said
before) was the third time builded in the reign of Iulianus. At that time
both the true Catholics and the Nouatians were a like handled. And because the
true christians abhorred the temples where the Arians frequented, they resorted
together with the Nouatians unto three other Churches (for the Nouatians had so
many Churches permitted them in that city,) and there they devoutly served God
together: little there was to the contrary but that they had been linked
together in the bond of unity and concord, had the Nouatians not refused to
retain their old mind, from the which they had fallen. But as toutching other
matters each embraced other, with such singular affection and entire love, that
one was ready to hazard his life for the other. They were molested together not
only at Constantinople, but also in other cities and provinces. In a while
after Eleusius who lately had been placed Bishop of Cyzicum, imitating the
steps of Macedonius, Eleusius a cruel Arian Bishop. Macedonius an Arian and
a ^reat murderer of the true Christians.
armed him self against the Christians, afflicted them every where and
tormented them grievously: he made the Nouatian Church which was at Cyzicum
even with the ground: and Macedonius gave the last stroke and final
conclusion to the heinous offenses which he committed. For understanding that
there were many both at Paphlagonia and Mantinium of the Nouatian opinion,
which could by no means commodiously be removed by Ecclesiastical
authority: he procured that four bands of soldiers at the Emperors
commandment should be sent into Paphlagonia, to the end the inhabitants
might be terrified with the great show of glistering armor, and thereby
brought to embrace the Arian heresy. But such as inhabited Mantinium, being
kindled with an earnest zeal toward Christian religion, went against the
soldiers with cheerful minds and valiant courage: after they had mustred
together a great host, they all marched forwards to battle: some had taken in
their hand long hedging bills, some axes, some other met by chance with
rusty armor. When they joined together and came to handygriping, many of the
Paphlagonians were beaten down, the soldiers (few only excepted) were
slain every one. Although there be many of the Paphlagonians which presently
can report y^ same, yet have I heard it of a certain husbandman of
Paphlagonia, who had been present him self at the skirmishe and borne away
many blows. And though Macedonius had wrought many such notable feats (as he
thought) in the behalf of religion, where slaughter, and battle, and bondage
and civil dissentions fell out: yet that heinous offense of his procured unto
him and that most justly, great hatred, not only among them which then bare
away incurable wounds (he being the cause thereof) but also among his own
familiar and dear friends, so that the emperor also had him in disple asure
and alienated his mind from him, partly for this thing, and partly for an
other cause, which was as follows. He went about to pull down the temple
where the tomb of the Emperor Constantine lay, and put the people which
prayed within, and served God devoutly in great fear of their lives.
Macedonius had purposed to translate the Emperors bones, lest the tomb with
the falling of the temple should break, and deface y^ monument. The people
understanding of this withstoode The translation of bones and relics is
forbidden as an unlawful thing by the true christians, but the Arians did
practice it
his enterprise, affirming it a thing unlawful to translate the Emperors
bones, that it was in manner nothing else but the digging of him up again, out
of his grave. The people was divided into two parts: the one judged the dead
carcass in no wise to be iniuried with removing: the other thought that wicked
offense might lawfully be done. They which maintained the faith of one
substance with general consent resisted the deed: but Macedonius making no
account of the gainsayers, translated the carcass into y^ church where Acacius
the martyr had been buried. This was no sooner done, but the multitude of the
contrary side ran thither in all the have, they set them selves one against
the other, and without any delay they went together by y^ ears. so great a
slaughter was committed, that the body of the Church was aflote with streams
of blood, and yet not only there, but also from the Church porch unto the
street, the way was all blood and dead carcasses crossing one an other. When
the Emperor understood of this woeful and lamentable case, he was
wonderfully incensed against Macedonius, partly for that he murdered so many
men, and partly also that he durst presume without his consent to translate his
fathers bones. After that he had committed the government of the western
dominions unto Julian (whom lately he had made Caesar) he returned into the
East. but how Macedonius in a short while after, was deprived of his
bishopric, and received so small a punishment for so great an offense, I will
declare in an other place.

CAP. XXXI. Cap. 39. in the Greek.

Of the council held at Seleucia a city of Isauria.

Now I begin to discourse of the other council resembling the council of
Ariminum, The council of Seleucia held Anno Domi. 363.
summoned also by the Emperors edict in the East. Although it pleased him at
the first that the Bishops should meet at Nicomedia in Bithynia: yet the
great earthquake which shook the country and ouerthrewe Nicomedia, was a let
so that they could not assemble there. This came to pass in the consulship of
Tatianus and Cerealius the eight and twentyeth of August. They consulted for to
remove the council into the city of Nice which was not far of, but altering
their sentence they appointed to meet at Tarsus a city of Cilicia. neither
yet could they all agree upon that, and therefore they assemble at Seleucia a
city of Isauria called Roughe. These things were done in one and the same
year, when Eusebius and Hypatius were Consuls. The number of Bishops which met
there was a hundred and threescore. There was also with them one Leonas a man
of great authority and fame in the Emperors court: in whose hearing it was
Leonas.
commanded by the emperors edict they should reason of the faith. Lauricius
also, captain of the Lauricius.
garrison in Isauria, was commanded to supply and minister unto the Bishops,
whatsoever they wanted. The bishops being met together the eight and twentieth
of September disputed to and fro, their disputation was laid down in writing
by public notaries, for there were scriueners present of swift pe^ning and
great exercise, ready for to note their objections, resolutions, and what other
thing soever was uttered. All which things are at large set forth in the book
of Sabinus, entitled the collection of counsels where the studious Reader may
peruse them at his pleasure: but I of my part will therefore run over briefly
the chief points thereof. The first day of their assembly, Leonas commanded,
that every one should freely propose what pleased him best. but they that were
present affirmed it was not lawful, to call any thing into question before they
came whose presence was required in the council. For Macedonius Bishop of
Constantinople, Basilius bishop of Ancyra and sundry others were looked for of
the council: who mistrusting their cause and suspecting they should be accused
of heinous crimes, abse^ted them selves of set purpose. Macedonius pleaded
sickness The Arians absent them selves with excuses.
for him self: Patrophilus, that he was sandblinde, troubled with dropping and
bleare eyes: and by reason of the aforesaid causes that of necessity they were
constrained to stay in the suburbs of Seleucia the rest alleged other causes
of their absence. And when Leonas said they might propose questions for all
they were absent: the Bishops answered, that it was not meet any thing should
be reasoned of, before they had first diligently examined the lives and
conversation of such as were accused. for Cyrillus bishop of Jerusalem,
Eustathius bishop of Sebastia in Armenia, and diverse others had heinous crimes
laid to their charge. Wherefore there was great contention between them that
were present whilst y^ the one part would first examine their lives, the other
part reason and question of the faith. The doubtful and dark sentence of the
Emperor was cause of that hurlyburly. For the letters which he wrote unto the
council commanded one while one thing, an other while an other thing first
to be handled. The varience that rose among them that were present so divided
them, that it ministered occasion unto the council of Seleucia to part them
selves into two factions: unto the one side there cleaued Acacius Bishop of
Caesarea in Palaestina, Georgius Bishop of Alexandria, Vrsacius Bishop of
Tyrus, Eudoxius bishop of Antioch together with thirty others: of the other
side there were Georgius Bishop of Laodicea in Syria, Sophronius Bishop of
Pompeiopolis in Paphlagoma, Eleusius Bishop of Cyzicum, together with many
others. When that that side prevailed which first would have had them reason
of the faith: the Accomplices of Acacius motioned that the Nicene creed should
be abrogated and that a new form of faith was to be laid down: the contrary
part (being more in number) approved all other things of the council of Nice,
the clause of one substance only laid aside. And when as they had thus
brawled among them selves from morning to night, at length Siluanus Bishop of
Tarsus cried out among them, that it was not their part to lay down a new
form of faith, but to retain vnuiolably that which was decided at Antioch, at
the dedication of the Church. He had no sooner spoken, but the confederats of
Acacius rose up and got them away: the other side bring forth the creed
concluded upon at Antioch, they read it, and immediately the council was
dissolved. The day after, meeting together at the Church of Seleucia, they
bar the doors, and ratisie with their subscriptions the form of faith that
was read the day before. In their steed which were absent, their readers and
Deacons subscribed, for they had signified before, that they would by their
Deputies approve the aforesaid creed.

CAP. XXXII. Cap. 40. in the Greek.

How that Acacius of Caesarea rehearsed an other creed in the council of
Seleucia: also how that he and his accomplices after the Emperors return out of
the west met at Constantinople and procured the council of Ariminum to be
ratified adding thereunto of their own.

ACacius and his accomplices found great fault with the canons of that council,
because they subscribed when the Church doors were shutt* for (says Acacius)
the things which are done in huckermucker, as they ought not to be approved,
so are they not void of suspicion. This he said because he carried in his
pockett an other form of faith ready to be offered up. he read it in the
presence of Lauricius and Leonas that were noble men: and bent his whole might
to have only the same confirmed. these things were done the second day of
the council, and besides nothing. The third day Leonas went about to call
both parts together, at what time Macedonius Bishop of Constantinople^, and
Basilius Bishop of Ancyra were present. When both these men met together and
presented them selves, to wete of the contrary side unto Acacius, his
consederats would not show their faces in the council, but said that it was
requisite they should be banished the assembly, who of late had been deposed,
and then also were accused. After much ado when this side had the upper hand,
they that were accused left the council, in whose rowmes Acacius together with
his company succeeded. Then Leonas stood up and said that Acacius had
presented unto him a book: yet knew they not that it was a form of faith,
which confuted sometimes privily, sometimes openly and plainly the opinion of
the contrary side. When that all made silence and gave diligent ear, thinking
nothing less then that it had been a form of faith: at length, Acacius read
his creed or faith, with a certain preface written before it as follows:
We which by the Emperors edict met yesterday, that is the fifth of the
kalends of October at A certain protestation of Arian Bishops where unto they
annexed their creed.
Seleucia in Isauria, have labored with all might possible to continevve
unity and agreement in the church of God: to dispute and reason of the faith,
according unto the sacred testimonies of the Prophets and evangelists, with
modest and quiet minds, as the most virtuous Emperor Constantius has given
us in charge: and to conclude nothing for canons of the Church which might be
found contrary to holy Scripture* but seeing there were such kind of men at
the council, who rayled at some: shutt up some others mouths: forbade these
to speak: excluded the other from their company: joined with them out of
diverse provinces certain deposed and expulsed persons and entertained them
contrary to the old canon of the church: the counsel (as Lauricius the most
valiant captain saw, more is the pity, with his own eyes) was all set on
tumult and grievous dissension. We have spoken these things to this end, that
you may understand we reject not the form of faith that was published and
confirmed in the dedication at Antioch: but we bring forth the same presently,
sithence that we know for suerty that the fathers then agreed upon this
controversy which concerned the faith. but in as much as the clauses of unity
in substance, and equality in substance, disquieted the minds of sundry men,
not only in times past, but also at this present, so that now also such as
affirm the son to be unequal to the father are said to be authors of
novelty: therefore have we laid aside the clauses of unity and aequalitie in
substance, as words not agreeing with holy Scripture: also we accurse the
clause of vnaequalitie, and hold all the patrons and favorers thereof for
excommunicated persons. We confess plainly the likeness the son has with
the father, imitating the Apostle where he says of the son, who is the
image of the invisible God. We protest therefore and believe in one God, the
father almighty Acacius creed an Aria^ bishop.
maker of heaven and earth, of visible and invisible things. We believe also
in his son our Lord Jesus Christ, begotten of him before all worlds without
affection, God the word, of the only begotten God: the light, the life, the
truth, the wisdom: by whom all things were made both in heaven and in
earth, be they visible or invisible. We believe that he in the latter days
took flesh of the blessed virgin Mary, to the end he might take away the
sins of the world: that he was made man, that he suffered for our sins:
that he rose again, ascended into the heavens, sits at the right hand of
the father, and that he shall come again with glory to judge both the quick
and the dead. We believe also in the holy Ghost, whom our Lord and Savior
called the comforter, promising after his departure to send him to his
disciples, whom also he has sent: by whom he sanctifies the faithful in
the Church, and such as are baptized in the name of the father, and of the
son, and of the holy Ghost. all those that besides this faith shall publishe
any other, we do excommunicate out of the holy and Catholic Church. This
was Acacius creed, whereunto both he and his accomplices (as many in number as I
reported before) subscribed. The creed being read, Sophronius Bishop of
Pompeiopolis in Paphlagoma, stood up and spa^ke against it in this manner, for
I will use his own words: If that the nevve devises and daily invention of
your brain, be laid down The words of Sophronius unto the Arians.
for creedes: it can not otherwise fall out, but that shortly, we shall be
found without one grain of faith. These as I have learned were the words of
Sophronius. In my opinion if that his auncetors and such as lived then with
him, had so settled their minds as toutchinge the Nicene council, all this
stir and tumultes had quite been taken away, all this hurlyburly, this rash
and unadvised sedition had never raygned in the Church. but to what pass
these things are now come, let them judge that can better discern and give
sentence thereof. When they had reasoned toe and fro of this matter, and of
them that were accused, and brawled together a long while, at length the
council brake up. The fourth day they assemble again, and a fresh they
chide one with an other. In circumstance of talk Acacius gave forth this
verditt as follows: If the Nicene creed was once altered of old, and
afterward often* what can you say to the contrary, but that presently a new
form of faith without any prejudice at all, may be established of us?
whereunto Eleusius made answer: We are not now come to this assembly for to
learn that which we learned before: neither to receive the faith which we have
not received before: but to walk in the faith of our forefathers, and not to
fall from the same unto our lives end. This was Eleusius answer unto Acacius,
calling the creed of Antioch, the faith of the fathers. but a man may here
replye and say thus: How O Eleusius call thou The reply of Socrates in the
name of the indifferent reader.
such as assembled together at Antioch, fathers: and yet denyest their
auncetors to be fathers? for the Bishops of Nice and the establishers of one
substance, ought more properly to be called fathers, partly for that they were
more ancient, and partly also because that the Bishops assembled together at
Antioch were consecrated and promoted by them unto the reverend office of
priesthood. If that the Bishops which assembled at Antioch were found to be
such as cut their fathers throtes, these men of their progenye, without good
aduisement do tread the trace of murderers. And how (I beseech you) do
they allow of their electing and laying on of hands, as sufficient and
lawefull, when as they cancel their faith, and abrogate their canons for
imperfect and corrupt doctrine? If they had not the holy Ghost, which lights
upon every one that enters into holy orders: these men received not the
function of priesthood. for how could they receive of them which had it not
to give? these things in my opinion may very well be urged against Eleusius.
Again there rose an other controversy among them for when as the accomplices of
Acacius had affirmed in the creed read before them, that the son of God was
like unto the father, they demand wherein the son was like unto the father?
Acacius makes answer: By this answer of Acacius we may see the double
dealing of the Arians, how under fair and smoth words they cloked the poison
of their heretical doctrine.
that the son was like unto the father not in substance, but only in will
and mind. but they on the contrary side affirmed plainly that he was in
substance like unto the father. they reasoned all that day of this question.
Acacius being sufficiently confuted, when they demanded of him the reason why
in his books he had written and auoutched the son in all things to be like
the father: and now denied that the son was of one substance with the
father? made this answer: No man that ever was either of old time, or of late
days, is wont to be tried by the books which he wrote. After they had
diligently sifted out this question of both sides, and could not agree
thereupon, Leonas rose up and dissolved the council, this was the end of the
council which was held at Seleucia. The next day after, when they made suit
for the proroging of the council, he would not sit with them again, but
told them flatly, that the Emperor had sent him to be present at an uniform
and peaceable council, but in so much that diverse of them be at discord and
debate among them selves, I can not away (says he) with your company. Go
your ways therefore, dally and brawle ye at home in your own Churches. This
being done, the conspiracy of Acacius supposing now they had got their
desired excuse, absented them selves and would not show their faces again
before the council. The other side met again at the Church, and cited
Acacius with his company to appear before them for to decide Cyrillus matter
who was Bishop of Jerusalem. Here we have to learn that Cyrillus b of
Jerusalem was an Arian and depos^d ^o^ some hamous crimes.
this Cyrillus had been accused before, (why I am not able to say) and deposed
from his bishopric, often called to purge him self, and to have absented him
self the whole space of two years, thinking thereby to escape and the crime
to be forgotten. As soon as he was deposed he sent an appellation in writing
unto the deposers, appealing from them unto the Judges of the higher court.
Constantius the Emperor admitted his appellation. Cyrillus was he that first
of all and alone gave forth a president prejudicial unto the practice of the
ecclesiastical canon, as if the matter had been decided before lay Judges. At
length he came to Seleucia for to have his cause heard, and therefore the
Bishops sent for Acacius and his company, to the end they might not only
hear Cyrillus cause, but also examine such as were accused and had fledd unto
the faction of Acacius. but in the end when they had often cited them and they
appeared not: they deposed Acacius him self, also Georgius Bishop of
Alexandria, Vrsacius Bishop of Tyrus, Theodorus Bishop Acacius an Arian with
his company deposed.
of Chaeretapon a city of Phrygia, Theodosius Bishop of Philadelphia in Lydia,
Euagrius Bishop of the I Will Mitylene, Leontius Bishop of Tripolis in Lydia, and
Eudoxius who first had been Bishop of Germanicia, and afterward crept by wiles
into the bishopric of Antioch in Syria, last of all they deposed Patrophilus
for disobedience and stubburne behavior. Dorotheus the Priest had accused him,
they cited him, but he appeared not. These only were deposed. They proceeded
further and excommunicated Asterius, Eusebius, Abgarus, Basilicus, Philus,
Philedius, Euthychius, magnus, and Eustathius, and decreed they should remain
in that state until they had answered for them selves and cleared them of the
crimes laid to their charg. When they had brought these things to this pass,
and sent letters unto the Churches of such as were deposed, certifying them
what they had decreed in their behalf: they ordain Amanus bishop of Antioch
in Eudoxius rowme, whom the faction of Acacius apprehended and delivered to
the hands of Leonas and Lauricius, they forthwith send him to exile. This being
done the bishops which ordained Anianus, made a long plee, and discoursed at
large before Leonas and Lauricius against Acacius and his confederacy, where
they signified in plain words, what extreme wrong the censure and sentence of
the council sustained. but when as they prevailed nothing, they took their
voyage into Constantinople for to certify the Emperor what they had decided
in y^ council. Cap. 41. in the greek.
The Emperor was then come thither from the west, and had taken away y^ office
of proconsulship, and in steed thereof ordained at Constantinople a certain
government the which he endowed with the title of honor: but Acacius had
prevented them and laid grievous accusations to their charge before the
emperor, persuading him y^ their form of faith was in no wise to be admitted.
Wherefore the emperor being grievously incensed against them, determined to
cut them of: he made a law, y^ as many as were Magistrates and bare office in
the common wealth should be brought back again to embrace a populare and
private kind of life. for of the bishops some were called to govern the
common wealth: some were Senators The Bishops then were Magistrates and of ^reat
authority in the common wealth.
and councellers: some other were Presidents and Lieuetenants of provinces.
While this stir reigned, Acacius and his accomplices remained at
Constantinople, and calling unto them y^ bishops of Bithynia they held there an
other council. They were all fifty in number, Maris also Bishop of Calcedon
came unto them: they confirmed the form of faith that was read at Ariminum, at
whose beginning and title, the Consuls were written. I would think it a
superfluous thing to repeat the same here, had they not added thereunto of
their own: but in so much they have written and annexed something of their
own brain, it is requisite that we rehearse it again. They wrote An Arian
Creed read at A^immo and no we confirmed by the Aria^ Bishops in the council
held at Constantinople Anno Dom. 364.
as follows: We believe in one God, the father almighty, of whom are all
things: and in the only begotten son of God, begotten of the father before
all worlds and before all begininge: by whom all things were made both
visible and invisible: the one only begotten, begotten of the father alone: God
of God, like unto the father which begat him, according unto the Scriptures:
whose generation (as holy Scripture does witness) no man knows but the
father alone which begat him. This only begotten son of God we know to
have been sent from the father, to have come down from heaven as it is
written: to have been conversant with his disciples: and after the
acco^plishing of his message according unto the will of his father to have
been crucified, dead, and buried: to have descended into hell at whose
presence the infernal power trembled: to have risen again the third day from
the dead, and again to have accompanied his disciples: and after forty days
were expired to have been taken up into heaven, where he sittteth at the
right hand of the father and shall come at the general resurrection with the
glory of the father, to reward every one according unto his works. and we
believe in the holy ghost, whom the only begotten son of God himself, our
Lord and God promised to send mankind a comforter, as it is vvrytten, the
spirit of truth, whom also he sent after his assumptio^ into heaven. The
clause of substance being of diverse simply laid down, because the ignorant
people understood it not, gave great occasion of offense. It seemed good
therefore, in as much as there was no mention thereof in holy scripture quite
to take it away, and henceforth not to reason thereof, because the word of God
has no where remembered the substance of the father and of the son. For the
substance or subsiste^cie of the father, of the son, and of the holy ghost
may not be once named or reasoned of. we therefore as we are taught by holy
scripture do affirm, that the son is like the father. All heresies
whatsoever, either heretofore condemned, or lately sprung up, if they be found
contrary to this faith, let them be held for accursed. These things as you see
were then decreed at Constantinople. The number of the creeds when, and where
and by whom they were made.
Now having at length run over the confuse multitude of Creeds and forms of
faith, let us once again briefly repeat the number of them. After the Creed
that was laid down by the Nicene council, the Bishops framed two others at
Antioch when they assembled to the dedication of the church: the third was made
in France of the bishops which were with Narcissus, and exhibited unto the
Emperor Constantine: the fourth was sent by Eudoxius unto the Bishops
throughout Italy. Three were published in writing at Sirmium, where of one
being gloriously entitled with the names of Consulls, was red at Ariminum. The
eight was set forth at Seleucia and procured to be red by the accomplices of
Acacius. The ninth was given abroad with additions at Constantinople, Vlphilas
Bishop of the Gotthes became an Arian in his later days.
there was thereunto annexed that thenceforth there should be no mention made
of the substance of subsistencie of God. Whereunto Vlphilas Bishop of y^
Gotthes then first of all subscribed. For unto that time he embraced the faith
established by the council of Nice, and was an earnest follower of Theophilus
steps, Bishop of the Gotthes, who had been at the Nicene council and
subscribed unto the Creed. But of these things thus much.

CAP. XXXIII.
How that after Macedonius was deposed, Eudoxius was made Bishop of Cap. 42.
in the greek.
Constantinople: and of Eustathius Bishop of Sebastia.

ACacius and Eudoxius together with their faction made foul tumults and great
stir at Constantinople, fully purposing to remove from their bishoprics some
of the contrary side. And here also we may not pass over with silence, how
that both parts inverted causes of depriuatio^ not for piety and religion sake,
but of private malice and quarellous spite: for though they varied in the faith,
yet in deposing one an other they charged not each other with their belief: but
such as were of Acacius side, took the Emperors displeasure (who purposed
among diverse other to revenge him of Macedonius) as a fit occasion, and first
they depose Macedonius from his bishopric, partly for that he had been the
cause of great slaughter, and partly also because he admitted into the
communion a certain deacon that was taken in adultery. They removed Eleusius
Bishop of Cyzicu^ for baptizing one Heraclius a sacrificing priest of Hercules
at Tyrus who was known to be a great coniurer and preferring him to the order
of deaconship: they deprived Basilius otherwise called Basilas, who was made
Bishop of Ancyra in Marcellus rowme, for that he cruelly tormented and
imprisoned a certain man, for because he forged sclaundres and discredited
diverse persons, and lastly for molesting the quiet estate of the churches in
Aphricke by his epistles: they suspended Dracontius for leaving Gallacia and
removing to Pergamus: they displaced moreover Neonas Bishop of Seleucia where
y^ counsel was held: Sophronius bishop of Pompeiopolis in Paphlagonia: Elpidius
bishop of Satalum in Macedonia: Cyrillus Bishop of serusale^ and many mo, for
sundry other causes. Cap. 43. in the Greek. Eustathius was not suffered to
speak for himself, his faults were so heinous and so well known.
Neither had Eustathius Bishop of Sebastia in Armenia license permitted him,
for to purge himself, because that a little before he had been deposed by
Eulauius his own natural father, who was Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia,
for apparelling himself in such weed as was not decent for the dignity and
order of priesthood. In this Eustathius rowme, Meletuis (of whom I mind
hereafter to speak) was made Bishop. Moreover Eustathius was afterward
condemned by the council held at Gangra that was summoned for the hearing of
his matters, because that after his former deposition in the council of
Caesarea, he had attempted many things, contrary to the canons and customs of
the church. He forbad mariadge and set forth precepts of abstue^ce. He parted
asunder diverse that were coupled together in wedlock, and persuaded such as
refrained the churches and public assembly, to raise conuenticles and
brotherhood in their private houses. He took servants from their masters under
color of religion. He himself used the Philosophers habit and constrained
his followers to use a strange kind of Atyre. He caused the women to be
shaven. He forbad the accustomed and prescribed fasting days, and commanded
abstinence on the sundays. He abhorted y^ prayers that were made in married men's
houses. He detested the offering and the communion of the married priest, who
when he was a lay man had lawefully coupled himself in the bond of wedlock.
This Eustathius when he had taught and set abroch these and many other such
lewd precepts, was (as I said before deposed by y^ council held at Gangra in
Paphlagonia, and his doctrine accursed. But these things were done a good while
after. When that Macedonius about y^ time was removed, Eudoxius supposing the
seae of Antioch, to be far inferior unto y^ Bishopric of Constantinople, was
proclaimed Bishop of Constantinople by Acacius and his adherents, who made
laws and put them in practice contrary to their own former decrees. For after
y^ deposition of Dracontius they made Eudo xius Bishop of Constantinople who
now the second time had translated himself from one seae unto an other, and
in so doing they were found far contrary to themselves. After this they
ratify y^ form of faith that was read at Ariminum together with y^ additio^s
and glosses as a very absolute thing, and send it abroad into the whole world,
commanding y^ whosoever refused to subscribe unto the same, should, by virtue
of the Emperors proclamation be condemned to perpetual banisheme^t. They
signified this their purpose unto many of the Cast churches, which maintained
yt same heretical opinion with them and to Patrophilus Bishop of Scythopolis,
who from the council of Seleucia got him straight to his own city. When
Eudoxius was settled Bishop of the noble city of Constantinople, y^ great
church calied after the name of wisdom was honored w the solemn feast of
dedication, in the tenth Consulship of Constantius, the third of lulianus
Caesar and the fifteneth day of the month of February. Eudoxius being stalled
in his seat gave this out for y^ first sentence The wicked and skoffinge
sentence of Eudoxius.
which at this day is riffe in every man's mouth: y^ son is religious, the
father irreligious. wherefore when tumult and sedition rose by occasion of
these words: let this saying (says he) nothing grieve you at all, for the
father is irreligious in that he worshipeth none: the son is religious in
that he worshipeth the father. When he had thus interpreted his mind, the
contentious multitude quieted themselves and in steed of the hurlyburly the
whole church was set on laughter. His fond saying unto this day is counted
a famous jest. The authors of error and schisine occupiyng their brain about
such trifling quircks, about such fond and frivolous words, have broken asunder
the bond of unity and concord retained in the church of God. The council
held at Constantinople had such an end as I have showed before.

CAP. XXXIIII. Ca. 44. in the Greek.

Of Meletius Bishop of Antioch.

Now it remains that according unto our former promise, we say somewhat of
Meletius. This man after the deposition of Eustathius (as I said before) was
first chosen Bishop of Sebastia in Armenia, afterward was he taken thence and
translated to the bishopric of Beroea a city of Syria. After he had been at
the council of Seleucia, and subscribed unto the form of faith which the
faction of Acacius had framed and exhibited unto the council, immediately be re
turned to Beroea, the Antiochians after the summoning of y^ council at
Constantinople, understanding for certain y^ Eudoxius had made light of their
church, and for greater lucre crept unto the Byshopricke of Constantinople,
sent to Beroea for Meletius and made him Bishop of Antioch. He in a Meletius
was after Eudoxius Bishop of Antioch, he was by the Emperor deposed for
maintaining the Nicene creed against the Arians and Euzoius placed in his rowme.
good while after his coming, meddled not with high matters and my steries of
faith, but delivered only unto his auditors such things as concerned manners,
good life and godly conversation: yet in countinewance of time he expounded
the^ the faith and the clause of one substance. The Emperor hearing of this,
commanded him to exile and gave charge that Euzoius (who before time had been
deposed together with Arius) should be stalled Bishop of Antioch. But such as
bare good will and great affection unto Meletius (laing aside for altogether
the Arian opinion and confederacy begannne to meet privately and had their
particular conuenticles: when as they which always had cleaued unto the faith
of one substance refused their communion for two causes, partly for that
Meletius had been made pricste by the Arians, and partly also for that his
followers had been baptized of them. Thus the church of Antioch leaned unto
that side which agreed with it self. But the Emperor hearing that the
Persians had proclaimed war against the Romans got him in all the haste
to Antioch.

CAP. XXXV. Cap. 45. in the greek.

Of the heresy of Macedonius.

MAcedonius being banished the city of Constantinople and taking very
impatiently the Of impaciency comes heresy.
sentence pronounced against him, could by no means quiet himself but got him
unto the contrary side, unto such as had deposed Acacius at Seleucia together
with his co^plices: he dealt with Sophronius and Eleusius by messengers, that
they should firmly addicte themselves unto the form of faith set forth at
Antioch, afterward confirmed at Seleucia: he requested them earnestly to call
it after that famous and renowned title, the faith of one substance. Wherefore
there frequented unto him many of his familiars together with sundry others who
after his name are now called Macedonians: there resorted unto him diverse
others also, who at y^ council of Seleucia were foes unto the faction of
Acacius, who also at the beginning maintained, both publicly and privately
the faith of one substance, but now tread the same under foot. This
Macedonius The blasphe mous opinion of the heretic Macedo nius. Marathonius an
old heretic.
though he affirmed that the son of God was like unto the father, as well in
substance as in all other things: yet auoutched he that the holy Ghost had
not these titles of honor but termed him their seruante or drudge. The report
goes that Macedonius was not the first founder of this blasphemous opinion,
but Marathonius who long before his time had been Bishop of Nicomedia, and
thereupon such as maintained yt opinion to have been called Marathonians. Unto
these men's company it was that Eustathius (who for the cause above specified
left Sebastia) linked himself. When Macedonius denied that the holy Ghost was
equal and partaker of the godhead which is in the blessed Trinity:
Eustathius made answer, I of mine own part (says he) do not mind to call
the holy Ghost God, neither yet dare I presume to term him a creature.
Wherefore such as embrace the faith of one substance do call these men
Pneumatomachous, by Pneumatomachot.
interpretation deadly foes unto the divinity of the holy Ghost. But how it
comes to pass that Hellespontus is full of these Macedonians I will discourse
when fit occasion is ministered. The faction of Acacius endeavored with all
might, again to call a council at Antioch, for it repented them that they
affirmed the son in all things to be like unto the father. Wherefore the The
council of Antioch was held An no Dom. 365 they co^s^^ me the Arian opinion.
The blasph^ mous opinio of the Arias.
year followinge in the consulshippe of Taurus and Florentius, they assemble
together at Antioch in Syria, at what time Euzoius governed that church and
the Emperor also abode there. Many of the^ after their meeting, call into
question such things as they had decreed in times past: they affirm that the
Clause of likeness by the Council of Ariminum, and the Council held at
Constantinople, is quite to be abandoned and not once to be named again: they
clock their opinion no longer, but pronounce with open mouth that the some
was altogether unequal and unlike the father not only in substance but also
in will, and also that he had his being (as Arius dreamed) of nothing. Such
as then also were at Antioch of the sect of Aetius, entangled them selves in
the snares of this pestilente opinion. Therefore besides that the Arians
Anomoioi.
were called Anomoioi which signifies that they affirmed the Son to be
unlike the Father: they were of the Antiochians, who defended the faith Of one
substance and then were divided for the foresaid cause of Meletius called
Exoucoutioi, signifying they had affirmed the Exoucoutioi.
Son of God to have had his being of nothing. When they were demanded
wherefore they constantely affirmed in their Creed that the Son was God of
God, and now durst presume to say that he was unlike the father and had his
being of nothing: they went about to bleare their eyes with a ridiculous kind
of fallacy. Whereas we affirmed (say they) the son to be God of God, we
meante it in that sense as the Apostle wrote where he said, that all things
were of God. Therefore the son is of God in as much as he is included in the
word all. And for this cause we laid down in our Creedes the Clause:
according unto the Scriptures. The author of this lewd and fond Gloss was
Georgius Bishop of Laodicea, who being ignorante and unskillful in such
kind of phrases, perceived not how Origin in times paste had plainly
interpreted such siguratiue kind of speeches contained in the Epistles of
Paul. The confederacy of Acacius though they were justly charged with
captious and sopisticall dealing yet weyinge neither the sclaunder risinge
thereof, neither the sentence pronounced against them repeated there the form
of faith, which they had rehearsed at Constantinople: this being done cuery
one repaired to his own home. Georgius after his return to Alexandria (for
there after the departure of Athmasius who then hid himself in some obscure
place, he was placed Bishop) vered very sore, and punished extremely such as
were of the contrary opinion and Cyullus. Herenius. Heraclius. Hilarious.
Cyrillus.
plagued the people of Alexandria which hated him as a tode. Herenius was
chosen Bishop of lerusalem in Cyrillus rowme. Whom Heraclius succeeded,
after him Hilarious, after all Cyrillus returned to lerusalem and recovered the
Bishopric again.

CAP. XXXVI.
Of both Apollinariuses the father, the son, and their heresy. Cap 46. in
the Greek.


ABout that time there sprange up a new heresy the occasion was as follows.
At Laodicea a ciue of Syria there were two men, the father and the son of one
name, for both was called Apollinarius, whereof the one I mean the father was
a priest, the other, that is the son was a reader. Both were professors of
humanity. The father caught grammar, the son Rhetorike. The father being
borne at Alexandria, first kept school at Berytus, afterward remouinge to
Laodicea, he got him a wife, on whom he begat Apollinarius. They both
flourished at Laodicea in the time of Epiphanius the sophist, and having great
familiarity with him they were never seen out of his company. Theodotus Bishop
of that seae, fearinge greatly lest their familiarity with him should bring
them from the faith, and so fall to embrace paganism, forbadde them his
company. They made no account of the Bishops commandment, but kept still
company with Epiphamus. In process of time Georgius the successor of Theodotus
having often assaied, and saying he could by no means separate them from
Epiphanius, excommunitated them both, hopinge thereby with punishment to
persuade them to the contrary. But the younger Apollinarius stomaking this
dealinge, put considence in his painted figures of Rhetorike, and invented a
new opinion, the which at this day after the name of the author is called the
heresy of Apollinarius. Imp^^^^nere causes heresy.
Some do affirm that they fell not out with Georgius for the aforesaid cause,
but for that they heard him preach strange and contradictorie doctrine:
affirminge sometimes the son to be like unto the father as in the council of
Seleucia, at other times maintayninge the heresy of Arius, and so for
triflinge and light occasion to have fallen from the church. Whilst that no
man gave ear unto them, they endeavored to establishe a new kind of doctrine:
first they taught that Bod the word, took manhood according unto the
order of incarnation without The heresy of Apollina^us.
soul: again recantinge the same, they affirmed he took soul, yet not the
mind or reason (being the highest and chiefest part of the soul) but that
God the word was shut up, included, and comprised in man, in place of the
mind. Only in this they vary from the church which are called their
followers, as for the Creed containing y^ clause Of one substance to be in the
blessed Trinity, they steadfastly cleave unto it. But I will hear cease and
differ the discourse of both these Apollinariuses until an other convenient
place.

CAP. XXXVII.
Of the death of Constantius the Emperor.

WHile the Emperor Constantius remained at Antioch Iulianus Caesar had much
ado in France with many barbarous nations. After that he had got the upper
hand the soldiers did so love him that they proclaimed him Emperor.
Constantius hearing of this, was wonderfully troubled and disquieted in mind,
so that the grief thereof cast him into a dangerous disease. Wherefore being
first baptized of E^^oius, he made expedition to give him battle, And coming
as far as Mopsus wells, between Cappadocia and Cilicia, by reason of the
great thought and sorrow he conceived of his unlucky affairs, he fell into yt
senseles and heady sickness called Apoplexia, and thereof presently dyed, in
the Consulship of Taurus and Florentius, the Constantius dyed Anno Dom. 365.
third day of Nouc^ber, the first year of the two hundredth, eighty, and fifth
Olympiad. Costatius lived five and forty years, he reigned thirty eight, that
is thirtene together with his father, and five and twenty after his fathers
death. This second book compriseth the history of so many years.

The end of the second book of the Ecclesiastical history of Socrates.
THE THIRD BOOK OF THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORYE OF SOCRATES SCHOLASTICVS.
CAP. I.
Of Iulianus his lineage and bringing up: also how that being Emperor, he left
Christian profession, and embraced paganism and gentilitie.

WHen the Emperor Constantius had departed this life in the borders of
Cilicia, the This second book compriseth the history of 2. years and 5.
months duringe the reign of Julian and Iouin^n the Emperors ending Anno Dom.
368. Julian succeeded Constantius An. Dom. 365. Constantius. Dalmatius.
Constantius. Gallus. Iulianus.
third of November within the Consulship of Taurus and Florentius: lulianus
the eleventh of December following, and the same Consulship, leaving the west
parts of the world, came to Constantinople, and there was proclaimed Emperor.
Now therefore in as much as I have determined with my self to discourse of this
Emperor Julian, a man passing eloquent, let none of his friends look at my
hands for curious and lofty style, as though it behooved my pen to
cou^teruaile y^ excellency of y^ person. But seeing our drift is otherwise
bent namely for to deliver y^ posterity in writing y^ true histories of y^
church, we will follow according unto out former promise, a lowly and soft kind
of phrase correspo^dent unto y^ capacity both of learned and unlearned
readers. Wherefore entering to discourse of him we purpose to proceed in this
order, after our preamble has used a little digressio^, and fet a small
compass, for to lay down his kindred, his nurture, and the manner how he
attained unto y^ imperial crown, Constantinus y^ Emperor who changed y^
name of Byzantiu^, and termed it Constantinople, had two brethren of one
father, but by diverse mothers, the one was Dalmatius y^ other Costantius.
Dalmatius had a son of his own name: Constatius also had two sons, Gallus
and Iulianus. When as after the death of Co^stantinopls fosider, y^ yo^ger
Dalmatius had been stain of y^ soldiers: these orphans likewise bereaved of
their natural father, escaped narowly the unlucky success of Dalmatius, for
they had been cut of and dispatched, had not sickness and diseases (as it was
thought incurable) saved Gallus life and youthly age of eight year old
preserved Iulianus alive, and kept him from y^ tyra^ts claws. But after yt the
Emperor was appeased, and his fury withdrawn from raging against the^,
Gallus was trained up under schoolemaisters at Ephesus in Ionia, where their
auncetors had left either of the^ great legacies. Iulianus also being come to
y^ stature of a spri^gall, gave him self to learni^g in y^ cathedral church
of Co^sta^tinople, where was a free school, he went in simple and mean
attire, and was taught of Macedonius Macedonius the Eunuche. Nicocles the
Laconian. Ecebolius the Sophist
y^ Cunuch. he learned gra^mer of Nicocles y^ Laconian: and Rhetorike of
Ecebolius y^ sophist, who the^ was a Christian. The Emperor Consta^tius
provided very well, lest y^ by having an ethnike to his master (for Iulianus
was a Christian from his cradell) he should fall to y^ superstitious idolatry
of paga^s. When he had profited very much in good discipline and godly
literature, y^ fame went of him among yt people, yt he was a man both able and
fit to govern and bear office in the common wealth. The which thing
afterward being then rife in every man's mouth, disquieted y^ Emperor not a
little. Wherefore he caused him to be removed from y^ princely city of
Co^sta^tinople into Nicomedia, and Iabanius the Sophist.
charged him not to tread in y^ school of Iabanius y^ Syrian Sophist.
Iabanius then was expelled by y^ schoolemaisters of Constantinople, and kept a
school at Nicomedia who powered out y^ poison of his ca^kred stomach and
displeasure conceived against y^ schoolemaisters in a certain book which he
published against the^. and though Iulianus was therefore forbidden to frequent
Libanis lesso^s because he professed paganism and heathenishe literature: yet
for all that, was he so in love with his works, that he procured them unto him
secretly and by stelth, and perused them with great labor and diligence. When
he had taken good success and great profit in Rhetorike, it fell out that
Maximus Maximus the Ephesi^ philosopher was a coniurer, and therefore put to
death.
the philosopher not the Byzantian the father of Eucleides, but the Ephesian,
came to Nicomedia* whom the Emperor Valentinianus afterward found to be a
coniurer, and recompensed him with present death* but that (as I said before)
fell afterward. At that time there was no cause that drove him thither, but
the fame of Julian. Of this man it was that Julian learned the precepts of
philosophy: but as for religion he had such a master as inflamed his mind to
aspire unto the imperial scepter. When these things came to the Emperors
ears, Julian now muzinge between hope and fearful hatred, how he might be
void of suspicion, who of late had been a true Christian, but now an
hypocritical dissembler, shaued him self, and Julian a cou^terfeyte shauching.
counterfayted a monkishe life. For all that, privily he applied heathenishe
and philosophical discipline, but openly he read holy scripture, so that he
was made reader in the church of Nicomedia. Thus craftily under cloak of
religion did he appease the furious rage of the Emperor incensed against him.
These things did he of fear, yet not dispayring of hope, for he sticked not to
tell diverse of his familiar friends, that it would be a happy world if he
were made Emperor. When it went thus with him, Gallus his brother was created
Caesar, who taking his journey into the East came by Nicomedia for to see him.
After that Gallus in a while after was slain, immediately from that time forth
Iuliamus was had in great suspicion of the Emperor, and thereupon commanded
that he should be straightly looked unto, he espying fit opportunity to
escape his keepers, conveyed him self away and saved his life. At length
Eusebia y^ Empress, finding him by chance lurking in some secret and obscure
place, entreated the Emperor in his behalf, that he would not only do him
no harm: but also grant him his lawful favor for to repair to Athens for
further knowledge in philosophy. To be short he sent for him: made him Caesar:
gave him Iulianus was made Caesar, and sent into France.
his sister Helen to wife: and sent him into France for to wage battle with
y^ barbarian nations which rebelled against their Christian Emperor. For the
Barbarians whom the Emperor Constantius had hired a little before to give
battle unto Magnentius the tyra^t, when as they prevailed nothing against
him, they fell a ransacking and spoiling of the cities within the Roman
dominions: and because Julian had but a green head and of no great years, the
Emperor gave him charge to enterprise nothing without the advice and counsel
of his sage and expert captains. When y^ they having this large commission
waxed negligent, so y^ the Barbarians had the upper hand: Iulianus permitted
the captains to banquet, to take their pastime and pleasure, and laid down a
set and certain reward for every Barbarian that was slain, whereby he did
the more encourage the soldiers. By this means it fell out that the power of
the Barbarians came to naught, and that he him self was greatly beloved of his
soldiers. The fame goes that as he entered into a certain town, a green
garland hanging by a cord between pillours (wherewith commonly A garlande
foreshewing the crown of the empire
they are wont to trim their houses, and set forth the beauty of their
cities) fell upon his head, and sitted him very well, insomuch that all the
people then present, gave a great shout thereat* for it was thought that the
falling garland prognosticated unto him the glory of the imperial seepter
following after. Some say that Constantius sent him against the Barbarians,
hoping that in skirmishing with them he should there be dispatched* but
whether they report truly or no I know not. For after that he had married him
to his sister, if then he should pretend him friendship and practice
mischief toward him, what other thing were that then to procure vengeance to
light upon his own pate. but whether it be thus or otherwise, let every man
judge as he thinks best. When Julian had signified unto the Emperor the
careless and s^outhfull disposition and negligence of the captains, he sent
him an other, that was valiant, serviceable, and a man for Iulianus own vain.
Julian after his coming fought manfully with the Barbarians: who sent an
ambassador unto him shewinge the letters patents and commission of the
Emperor that commanded them to go into the borders of the Roman countries.
But Julian laid their ambassador in hold, waged battle with the multitude,
overcame the enemy, and sent the king of the Barbarians captive Iulianus of the
soldiers proclaimed Emperor, and crowned with a chain of gold.
unto the Emperor Constantius. After this lucky and prosperous success, the
soldiers proclayme him Emperor. The imperial crown was not then present,
but one of his train took a chain of gold from about his neck, and
compassed his head therewith in steed of the crown. In this sort it was that
Iulianus began his reign. What he did in time following, whether it became a
philosopher or no, let other men judge that shall hear thereof. For he
determined with him self thenceforth to send no ambassador unto Consta^tius,
neither to do homage, or to honor him as his superior, patron, or
wellwiller: but to deal in all matters according unto his own will and
pleasure. He altered the presidents throughout every province, he discredited
Constantius in every city by reading openly and sko^^ing at his letters
written unto the Barbaria^s, so that all fell from Constantius and followed
after Iulianus. In the end he laid aside all his hypocrisy Julian the
Emperor is become an Apostata, and so was he called unto his end.
and dissembling of Christian religion. For as he passed throughout every city
he set wide open their temples and idol groves, he sacrificed to pictures, and
entitled him self an high priest: so that the pagans celebrated afreshe their
heathenishe and abominable feasts. When these things were thus brought to
pass, he took occasion to raise civil wars against Costa^tius, and procured
(as much as lay in him) all misery, calamity, and mischief which accustom
to follow war, to be committed. Neither truly could this philosophers mind
have been thoroughly known without great slaughter and bloodshedi^g, unless
God (who is the only judge of his own secret counsel) had without y^
calamity of others cut of from his purpose y^ other adversary. For as Iulianus
co^tinewed among y^ Thracians, tidings were brought him of Constantius death.
Thus was the Roman empire then delivered from civil wars. Immediately
Iulianus got him to Constantinople, and forthwith deuiseth how to win the
peoples hearts, and to link them unto him in love and obedience. He compassed
The policy of Julian for the winninge of the people
with him self this craft. Knowinge of a certainty that Constantius was
deadly hated of all them that embraced the Creed contayninge the clause of One
substance: partly for that he had dedepriued them of their churches, and partly
also for that he had banished and exiled their bishops: understanding also that
the Ethnickes could in no wise away with him, because that he kept them from
sacrificinge, and that they hoped to see the day when their idol groves should
be frequented, and their altars loded with sacrifice: seeing that both these
sorts of men severally owed spite unto the deseased Constantius, and to be
short how that all men abhorred the Eunuchs, and detested the heinous spoil
of Eusebius: he craftily applied him self to every sort, and framed his
behavior according unto every ones humor. He dissembleth and fla^tereth with
some: others he allureth with benefits and swellinge pride of hoped promotion.
But every where he proclaymeth, and all the world is given to understand his
disposition toward idolatry. And first he inueyeth at y^ cruelty of
Consta^tius, next to the end he might make him odious among the common sort of
people, he calls home by edict y^ bishops he had exiled, co^mau^ding also
that their co^fiscated substance should be restored the^ again. He gave charge
that without any ado y^ ethnickes should have free access into their temples:
he made a law y^ the Eunuchs should make restitutio^ of such substance as they
had injuriously taken away. he commanded y^ Eusebius the Emperors chief
cha^berlaine should have his head struck of his shoulders, not only for the
great injuries he offered to diverse me^, but also (as he was given to
understand) for y^ his brother Gallus through his malicious procurement had
been put Eunuchs, Barbours, and Cooks were banished the Emperors court.
to death. At length he buried Consta^tius honorably. Afterward he r^d y^
court of y^ eunuchs, barbours and Cooks: the Eunuchs, because y^ by their
means it came to pass, that Consta^tius being divorced from his wife, married
not again: the cooks, because he had used a spare kind of diet: the barbours,
because (as he said) one was enough for ^ great many. For the aforesaid causes
he banished these kind of men out of his palace. He turned out diverse of the
notaries to their former trades, and unto some he commanded that the stipend
dew unto scriueuers should duly be paid. Moreover he commanded that the
ordinary cariadge provided for necessaries, should no more be by Mules, Oxen,
and Asses: but permitted that in such public affairs the only use of horses
should be retained. There be but few which commend these his doings, and
sure I am, there be many that discommende them: because that in removing the
admiration and glory of the imperial treasure and sumptuous magnificence,
whereat many did wonder, he brought the Empire into an abject port, and
contemptuous kind of state. In the night he made orations, and pronounced them
the day followinge in the Senate: so that he alone of all the Emperors from
the raygne of Julius Caesar, unto his time was heard to sound orations in the
Senate. Although he favored greatly and bare singular good will unto all
learned men and paynefull students, yet above all others he esteemed such as
professed philosophy, so that the fame thereof being bruted abroad, all such
kind of men bragginge not a little of their profession frequented unto the
Emperors palace, of which number many attyred in mantells, were more
reverenced for their peltinge habit then their professed doctrine. All these
sort of men became heavy friends unto the Christians, as lewd varletts they
always applied them selves to the Emperors relygion. The Emperor him self
being puffed up beyond all measure with the swellinge pride of vain glory,
wrote a book the which he entitled Caesares, wherein he bitterly inueyed
against all the Emperors his predecessors. Being also of the same mind, and
having his stomach distempered with the cancred poison of malice, he made
declamations and inuectiues against the Christians. In that he banished Cooks
and Barbours out of his court, we have to gather that therein he played the
part rather of a philosopher then of an Emperor: and in that he opprobriously
taunted and reuyled his auncetors, he showed him self plainly to be neither
philosopher, neither Emperor. For both those sorts of men are void of
malicious backbytinge, and despitefull envy. For even as it behooves the
Emperor to seek after those precepts of philosophy which tend to the
moderation and modesty of mind: so the Philosopher if he imitate the Emperor
in all things, he shall pass the bounds of his calling, and forgett his
profession. Thus much briefly of the Emperor Iulians lineage, his bringinge up
and disposition, also how he came to be Emperor: now let us return to
discourse of the ecclesiastical affairs within that time.

CAP. II.
Of the commotion risen at Alexandria, and the death of Georgius.

IT fell out upon this occasion at the beginning, that there rose a great
uproar at Alexandria. There was a certain place within the city, which of old
time lay all wast and open, full of all filth and uncleanness, where the
Ethniks (with rites and ceremonies done to the honor of Mithra) accustomed to
offer up men for sacrifice. This platt of ground serving to no use or purpose,
The Persians worshipped the son, which they called Mithra.
Constantius gave to the church of Alexandria. Georgius purposing with him
self to found there a church, causes the ground to be ridd, and the filthe
to be carried away. Having purged the place, there was found a chauncell of
great heyghth where the Ethniks had laid up the relics of their mysteries.
There was also found therein an infinite number of dead men's skulles, both of
young and old, the which as we are given to understand, were slain when the
Pagans used bowels and intraylls for divination and deuelish southsaying,
thereby to dasell and bleare the eyes of simple and ignorant souls. When these
were found in the vesteryes and secret closets of Mithra, the Christians went
about to disclose unto the world their practices, to the end their fond
ceremonies might be derided of all men. They carry about the bauld skulls of the
dead for the people to gaze upon. The Pagans inhabiting Alexandria perceiving
their drift* stomaked the Christians, boiled within them selves for anger,
took that which first came to their hands, set upon them, and slew of them
every kind of way: so that some were run through with swords, some other
brayned with clubbs, other some stoned to death, some strangled with halters
about their necks, some other were nailed to the tree, casting in their teeth
the death of the cross. In the end, as commonly it falls out in such
hurlyburlyes, they held not their hands, no not from their dearest friends: one
friend fell upon an other, the one brother sought the other brothers life, the
parents put their children to death, and to be short the one cut the others
throat: so that the Christians were feign The death of Georgius bishop of
Alexandria.
to cease from rydding the filth and foul closetts of Mithra: and Georgius
was of the gentiles pulled out of the church by the ears, tied to a camel,
torn in pieces, and burned to ashes, together with the beast.

CAP. III.
How that the Emperor taking grievously the death of Georgius, rebuked
sharply in his letters the people of Alexandria.

THe Emperor being wonderfully moved with the death of Georgius, wrote bitter
letters unto the people of Alexandria. The report goes, that such as
conceived displeasure against him in the quarrel of Athanasius, committed these
things against Georgius, for to dispatche him out of the way. But in my
opinion they that be at variance among them selves, most commonly hold
together when necessity constrayneth them, in tumultes and seditions to
withstand the violence of desperate and damned persons. Wherefore the Emperors
epistle charge not the Christians severally, but all the inhabitants of
Alexandria. Georgius (as it is very like) had diversely molested and grieved
them all, and therefore the people was furiously set on fiery sedition. that
the Emperor wrote generally unto y^ whole multitude hear out of his epistle
The epistle of Julian the Apostata unto the inhabitants of Alexandria.
as follows. The Emperor Caesar Iulianus, Maximus, Augustus, unto the people
of Alexandria sends greetinge. Although it falls out amongst you that
there is no reverence given unto Alexander the founder of your city, or (that
which is greater) if ye stand in no awe of the great and most holy God
Serapis: yet do I greatly marvel that you were so void of common reason,
natural affection, and honest civility and that (which with modesty I may
add thereunto) you had so little consideration of our person, whom not only
the great God Serapis but also all the other godds have thought vvorthie to be
Emperor of the whole world, unto whom it should have been your part to
have had recourse, and to have given us the hearing of all such injuries
whatsoever you had sustained at the hands of lewd and disobedient persons.
But peradventure the boylinge heat of anger, and the furious motion of the
mind, ouershadovved your vvytts, and blinded your eyes, the which most
commonly being removed from the seat of reason, is wont to commit such
cruel and heinous acts. And though the fond humor of sedition feedinge on
malice, was hyndered a little: yet for all that it brake out to the contempt
and overthrow of the laws. You therefore seeing ye are numbered among the
people and inhabitants of Alexandria, whom neither reason could persuade,
neither shame withdraw from attemptinge the things, for the which you
might have justly detested them: I charge you in the name of Serapis tell me,
what wicked fiende has thus furiously provoked you to seek the death of
Georgius? you will say peradventure he incensed against you the most blessed
Emperor Constantius: that he procured a band of armed soldiers to be brought
into your sacred city: that the Liuetenant of Egypt ransacked and kept from
you the most holy temple of God, carried away thence the images, the
monuments, and glorious ornature provided for the solemnity of service: and
also that when you not digestinge those heinous acts, endeavored (and that not
without just cause) to maynetayne the quarrel of your god, yea rather to
retain the glorious ornaments of your great god, the same Liuetenant
contrary to all reason both unjustly and vvyckedly set upon you with armed
soldiers, who fearing more the displeasure of Georgius the bishop, then of
Constantius the Emperor, thought best in such sort to save him self. For
now of a long while he had behaved him self more orderly and ciuilly then
tyrannically disposed toward you. For the which causes you were incensed
against Georgius the open adversary of the godds, and have thus defiled with
conspiracy and slaughter your holy city, when as you might have sued him in
the law, and brought him to his trial, and the sentence of the Judges. In so
doing this heinous offense had not broken out into bloodshedinge and horrible
murder: but vvoulde have pacified the matter in aequall ballaunce and
preserved you without harm or damage: it vvoulde have sharply punished the
author of such lewd practices, and kept under all them which not only
despise the gods, but also set at naught such noble cities and famous
assemblies, supposinge the cruelty they exercise upon them to be a furtherance
unto their power and authority. Confer this my epistle with that which of
late I sent unto you, and weye diligently the difference between them. In the
former I have highly commended you, but now in the later I take the immortal
godds to witness, when that I endeavor (as duty requires) to praise you,
the horrible offense which you committed, stops my mouth, and stays my
pen. What? dares the subject as a mad dog pull man in pieces with his
teeth? ought not he be ashamed of so heinous an offense? Is this to purify and
cleanse the hands, and to hold them up streatched vvide unto the gods, as if
they were not polluted with the blemishe and infamy of murder? But Georgius
had no other then was dew unto his desert, and peradventure I my self might
justly have affirmed that by all right he should have suffered far worse.
But you will say, that he deserved it for his dealinge toward you: and
therein I am of your opinion. But if you say that it behooved you to punish
him, that will I in no wise grant. You have laws, the which ought
greatly to be honored and embraced of all men both publicly and privately.
But notwithstanding though it commonly fall out, that many be found faulty
and several trespassors, yet ought we to favor the public state of the
common weal, to obey the laws, and in no wise to violate the ancient and
godly decrees. Think your Nicephorus in steed of graundfather reads Uncle.
selves happy (O ye people of Alexandria) that this heinous offense was
committed by you in my time, for I can not in manner choose but embrace you with
brotherly affection, partly for the reverence I owe unto God, and the
affection I bear unto my graundfather of the same title with me, who
sometime governed both Egypt and your city. For the prince that will not
bring him self under the gyrdle of his subject, the discrete and vpryght
magistrate may not vvinke at so heinous an offense of the people, lest that
necessity constrayne to cure so grievous a malady with far greater grief,
and more desperate medicine. But I for the aforesaid causes do apply unto
these your sores most gentle and tolerable salues, to wete exhortation and
courteous language: whereunto I am certainly persuaded you will yield, if
you be the men I take you for, descendinge of the ancient stock of the
Graecians, and retaining in your breasts that noble and valiant courage, having
also all the properties of courteous and civil life (I speak unto you my
louinge citizens of Alexandria) impressed in the secret closets of your minds.
This was the epistle of the Emperor.

CAP. IIII.
How that after the death of Georgius, Athanasius returninge unto Alexandria,
took again the government of the bishopric, of Luciser and Eusebius: and
how that Lucifer made Paulinus bishop of Antioche.

NOt long after the people of Alexandria received with louinge and cheerful
minds Athanasius returns to Alexandria after the death of Co^stantius.
their bishop Athanasius returninge from exile, at what time also the Arians
were banished the Christian congregations, and the Church restored to the
government of Athanasius. But the Arians meetinge in private houses, appointed
Lucius to succeed Georgius in the byshopricke. At that time thus went the
affairs of Alexandria. Cap. 5. in the Greek.
In the mean while Lucifer and Eusebius by the Emperors edict were called
home from banishment. Lucifer was bishop of Caralitanum a city in Sardinia:
Eusebius (as I said before) was bishop of Vercellae a city of the Ligurian
Italians. Both they returninge from the higher countries of Thebae, consulted
together by what means they might recover their byshoprickes without prejudice
to the canon and decree of the church. Cap. 6. in the greek.
Wherefore after aduisement taken it seemed good that the one of them (I mean
Lucifer) should go to Antioche in Syria: the other, that is Eusebius, should
take his voyage to Alexandria, where by the means of Athanasius a Council
might be called together, and the canons of the church therein confirmed.
Lucifer sent thither a Deacon, signifyinge by him that he would subscribe unto
the decrees of the Council. He him self went to Antioche, where he found the
state of the church very troublesome. For the multitude was divided, and the
congregations at variance, not only by reason of Euzoius heretical opinion,
but also (as I said before) because that the sect of Meletius, for the
singular favor they bare unto him, severed them selves from the faithful.
Lucifer therefore when he had ordained Paulinus to be bishop of that seae,
departed thence.

CAP. V. Cap 7 in the Greek.

How that Eusebius ioyninge with Athanasius called a Council at Alexandria,
where the blessed Trinity was pronounced to be of one and aequall substance.

AFter that Eusebius came to Alexandria, he dealte earnestly with Athanasius
for the summoninge The council held at Alexandria condemned the A^^^ns,
Apollinari^^s, and Macedonians.
of a Council: so that the bishops assembled out of diverse cities: decreed
very necessary doctrine: confirmed the divinity of the holy Ghost to be of
one substance in the blessed Trinity: affirmed the son of God at his
incarnation, to have taken not only human flesh, but also a reasonable
soul, as the ancient fathers of old have delivered unto us. They would not
establishe neither thrust into the church of God any new opinion. But such
things as of old were enjoined by ecclesiastical decree, and laid down upon
good consideration by such as were wise, learned, and zealous Christians. For
thus did the elders of old time reason of this matter, and deliver in writing
unto the posterity. Irenaeus, Clemens, Apollinarius bishop of Hieratopolis,
and Serapion bishop of Antioch, have with general consent laid down every where
throughout their works, that the son at his incarnation was endued with
reasonable soul. Moreover y^ council summoned for the hearing of Cyrillus
cause, who was bishop of Philadelphia in Arabia* signified y^ self same by
their letters unto Cyrillus. Orige likewise who throughout his works teaches
y^ the son in taki^g flesh took also soul: yet in y^ ninth homily upon
Genesis, he opens this mystery more plainly, where at large he discourses
how y^ Adam ^are y^ figure of Christ, and Eve y^ figure of the church. Hereof
Pa^philus and Eusebius who of him took his appellation, are witnesses
sufficient, for both they employing their labor jointly for to pen in paper
the life of Origin, and preventing with Apollogies in his behalf the
sclau^derous accusations of the adversaries: have affirmed yt Origin was not
the first that entreated of this matter, but yt he interpreted unto the
posterity the mystical tradition of the church in y^ behalf. Moreover the
bishops which met in the council of Alexandria, have discussed the
controversy of the clause of essence and substance. For Osius bishop of
Corduba in Spain (of whom we have spoken before) being sent by the Emperor
Osius. b. of Cordubagoing about to remove one opinion, gave occasion to raise
an other. Hebr. 1.
Constantine to appease the tumult raised by Arius, in disputinge of essence
and substance, to the overthrow of Sabellius the Aphricks opinion, he
ministered occasion to the raysinge of a new controversy. But at that time
there was not a word of this matter in the Council of Nice: for afterward
when diverse contended and reasoned among them selves hereof, this council
took order toutching the clauses of essence and substance, and decreed: that
in handling the divinity of God there should thenceforth no mention be made of
these words: affirming y^ the word essence was not found in holy scripture,
and that the Apostle in deliueringe the ground of doctrine, was constrayued of
necessity to use the word substance. But they decreed farther that in an other
sense, to the end the opinion of Sabellius might be rooted out, these words
were to be admitted: lest that through the want of proper words we should be
compelled to imagine the thing of three names to be as one, but that the
several names of the blessed Trinity signify and set forth God, to subsist
by him self in proper substance. These were the things decided in that
Council. I see nothing to the contrary, but that presently also we may lay
down what we learned and read of the words essence and substance. Such as
labored in Greece to set forth the sage doctrine of the Grecians, gave us to
understand, that the word Essence was diversely to be taken, Irenaeus
Gra^maticus.
and had many significations: but of the word Substance they made no mention at
all: nay Irenaeus Gramm^ticus in his Atticke Dictionarie terms it a barbarous
word. He says moreover that it can not be found in any ancient writer, and
if that perchance we light upon it, that it was never meant in the sense we
take it: That Sophocles in his Tragedy of Phoenix, takes Hypostasis for wyles
or conspiracy, and Menander for sauce, and resignifyed also l^es or dregs of
wine. For though the ancient Philosophers have not used this word, yet we see
that the later writers have taken it very often for Essence. But we have spoken
before that the definition of Essence was delivered to have diverse
significations. If that Essence may be comprised by definition, how, when we
entreat of God which is incomprehensible, can we properly use this boyced
Euagrius in his book entitled The Mooke, exhorts us to refrain from rash
and unadvised reasoninge of the God head: he forbyddeth the definition of the
divinity of God, because it is a simple thing. For definitions (says he)
are always of conc^e^^ and compound things, not of the abstract and simple.
His words are these: Every proposition, as the Logicians do write, has
either Genus, of whom it may be verifyed, o^ Species, or Differentia, or
Proprium, Fuagrius in lib. Monach
or Accidens, or that which depends of these: But in the handlinge of the
blessed Trinity, none of all th^se is to be required, because it can not be
laid down, neither expressed by words, therefore it is not to be defined,
but reverently to be run over with silence. So far presently out of
Euagrius, but here after more at large. We of our own part, although we steme
to have digressed, yet in so much these things appertain unto the discourse of
our present argument, (...) have thought good to lay them down here.

CAP. VI. Cap. 8. in the Greek

The Apollogie of Athanasius in defense of his flight in the time of
persecution:

AThanasius at that very time read in the hearing of such as were present an
Apollogie, Athanasius re^d his Apollogie in the counce^ of Alexa^d^
the which he had written a little before in his own defense, when as by reason
of the armed soldiers that besett the church of Alexandria, and sought his
life* he was feign to leave all and run away. Whereof I have thought good at
this present to allege some such parcel as may seem to bring most profitt
unto the loving reader, leauinge the whole discourse being somewhat over long
unto the labor and industry of the paynefull students. Behold The Apol^gie
of Athanasius wr^ in his own defense against the sclaunderous mouths of the
Arians.
(^ayth Athanasius) the lewd practices of wicked persons. Although they are
privy unto these heinous offenses, yet for all that they are nothing ashamed
of the contumelyes an d^^uell tyrannle they exercised against us: but charge us
(in their opinion) with a foul spott and blemishe of infamy, for escapinge
the hands of cutthrotes and blood^uckers, yea they beshrevve them selves, that
they dispatched us not out of the way. Moreover to the end they may stayne my
credit and aestimation, they fall to accuse me for faint courage, and timorous
disposition, being forgetful that vvhilest they blased these things to my
dispraise, they turned the shame to light upon their own pates. For if it be
a discredit to sly the hands of the tyrant, how much more to persecute me^
unto the death. He that flies seeks means to save his life, but he that
persecuteth goes about to procure the others death. That we should fly in
such cases the scriptures are on our side, but in thurstinge after the blood
of our brother, the commandment is broken, and the author thereof is found
chief cause of the flight. If they blame any man for geuinge them the slip,
they are vvorthie of far greater shame and reprehension. For let them cease
from persecutinge and threatninge of death, then will the other remain still,
and not run away. But their spite and malice has no end, they do naught
else ^aue devise feats to bring men unto destruction, yea when they know
full well that the flight of the persecuted is a foul shame unto the
persecutours. For no man flies the gentle and meek, but rather the cruel and
wicked man. They that were grieved and far indetted unto 1. Reg. 22.
others, gave Saul the slip, and fled unto David. Wherefore these men go
about to dispatche such as convey them selves out of their way, lest the
levvdnesse of Bishops be manifestly known, without doubt herein they seem
to be stark blind. For look how evident the flight is, far more apparent
will their slaughter and banishmentes seem unto the world. If they murder
men, death no doubt lifts her voice, and sounds out their cruelty: if they
fall a banishinge of them, therein they set up monuments to the remembrance of
their wicked doings. Had they been in their right vvitts, they might have
easily perceaned their own folly, and them selves overthrown in their
own devises. But in that they are bereaved of their vvittes and beside them
selves, they fall a persecutinge of others, and while they endeavor to
mischief others, they perceive not their own malice and impiety. If they
reprochefully charge them which hide them selves from such as seek their
lives, and accuse them for strenge the hands of the persecutor, what have they
to say (I beseech you) when they hear that Jacob fledd from the face of his
brother Esau, and that Moses for fear of Pharao* Genesis 27. Exodus 2. 1. Reg. 18.
19. 20. 21. 22. 23. 27.
conveyed him self to Madian? What have these contentious quarellers to say
unto David, who fledd from Saul, which sent of his guard out of his house to
slaye him: hid him self in a cave: counterfeited his person until that subtly
he had past Abimelech the priest, and avoided their layinge of wait for him?
What answer can these rash bablers given when they see that the great
prophet Elias, who so devoutly called upon the name of God; and raised the 3.
Reg. 17. 18. 19. 3. Reg. 18.
dead, was feign to hide him self from Achaab, and run away because of the
threats of Ie^^^bel? For it is written how that in those days, the sons of
the prophets being sought for, hid them selves, and through the help of
Abdias ^urked in denns. What have they not read these ancient stories? what,
are they ignorant also of such things as the Evangelists have Mat. 26. Act 9.
2. Corinthians. 11.
written? For the Disciples fearinge the jews, stole them selves from among
them. Moreover Paul being at Damascus* and sought out by the governor of that
country, was let down over the wall in a basket, and so escaped the
magistrate. Seeinge that holy scripture has thus remembered the behavior of
holy men* what coulourable shyfte can they find to cloak their impudent
dealinge? If they charge them with timorous fear, the fault recoyles and
lights upon their own distempered brain: If they report it to be contrary
to the will of God, then are they found altogether ignorant of the word of
God. For it is commanded in the Law, that sanctuaries and cities of refuge,
should be ordained for such ^^on. 35. ^e^t. 4. ^e^t. 19. (...)sue. 20.
as were pursued to death, where after they had sledde unto them, they might
live in safety. Furthermore the word of the father which in old time spoke
unto Moses, has commanded in these last days: When they shall persecute you
in this city, fly into an other. And again: When you see (says Christ)
the abomination of desolation, ^at. 10. ^at. 24. ^ar. 13. ^c. 21.
mentioned in the Prophet Daniel, standinge in the holy place, (he that
reads let him understand it) then let them that be in Iudaea, fly unto
the mountains* he that is on the house top, let him not come down to
take ought out of his house: and let not him that is in the field, return
home for his raymente. The which when holy men had learned, they framed
their trade of life agreeable thereunto. For look whatsoever the Lord
commanded at that time, the same he uttered by the mouths of his Saints,
yea before his incarnation. And this is the way to perfection, for men to
perform that in deed, which the Lord commanded in word. Wherefore the
word of God being made man John. 8.
for our sakes, sticked not to hide him self, as we commonly do, when he
was sought for: and again to fly, to the end he might avoid the
conspiracy of the Pharisees which persecuted him. For even as by pacient
sufference of hunger and thurst, and such kind of miseries he vvoulde shevve
him self to be true man: so also by flyinge away from the face of the
adversary. Moreover even from the very cradle and svvadling cloutes, as soon
as he had taken Matthew 2.
flesh of the virgin, being as yet but a child, he gave charge unto Joseph
by the Angel, saying: rise, take the child together with his mother and fly
into Egypt, for it will come to pass that Herod will go about to seek
the life of the child. Likewise after the desease of Matthew. 2.
Herod, when he heard that Archelaus the son of Herod raygned in his
steed, it pleased him to go aside into the parts of Nazareth. Afterward
when he made him self manifest Matthew. 12.
to be God, and healed the withered hand, the Pharisees went out and took
council how they might dispatche him: but Jesus perceauinge their
conspiracy, conveyed him self from among them. Again when he restored
Lazarus to life, from that day forth (says Ioh. 11.
the text) they took council how they might put him to death. Jesus
therefore after that time shevved not him self openly among the Jews, but
departed unto a solitary place adjoining unto the wilderness. Beside all this
when our Savior auoutched, saying: before Abraham Ioh. 8.
was, I am: the Jews took up stones for to throvve at him: but the Lord
hid him self, and went out of the temple, and passing through the midst of
the thronge, escaped away. When they see these examples (but they seeing as
it is written do not see) and bethink Matthew. 13.
them selves of these presidents, are they not inwardly pricked in conscience,
when as they pre^mue thus unadvisedly to bolt out sentences, and sit in
judgment both upon the sayings and doings of our Savior? To this purpose was
that of Jesus, who understanding of the beheading Matthew. 14.
of John the Baptist, and the burying of his body by his disciples, took
shiping and went aside into a desert place. Thus the Lord him self both did
these things, and taught the same. I vvoulde to God these men vvoulde now at
length be ashamed of their doings, and cease even presently from sclaundering
of true professors: and not proceed on further in their furious disposition,
charging yea our Savior him self with timorous fear and faint courage,
blaspheming with all might the majesty of his blessed name* but no man can
away with such kind of persons, that are wholy given over unto all
ungracious behavior, it may easily be proved that they are altogether ignorant
what the Evangelists have left us in vvriting. The cause that moved our
Savior to sly and go aside (being laid down in the Gospel) seemed not
only to be agreeable unto reason, but was in very deed most true: we
therefore have to conjecture that the same by all likelyhoode happened unto all
the Saints of God. for whatsoever things are written to have chanced unto
our Savior, after the manner of men, we have not refer the same unto all
mankind: in so much he took our nature upon him, and lively expressed in him
self the humane affections of our frail constitution: even as it is written
in the Gospel after John: they sought to take him but no man laid hands upon
him, because that Ioh. 7.
his hour was not as yet come. Yea before this came about, he said unto his
mother: Mine Ioh. 2. 7.
hour is not as yet come. He spoke also unto them that were called his
brethren: my time is not yet come. Again when the hour was come, he said
unto his disciples: sleep on now Matthew. 26.
and take your rest, behold the hour is at hand, the son of man shall be
betrayed into the hands of sinners. Therefore neither suffered he him self to
be taken before his time was come: neither hid he him self, when the hour
was at hand, but yielded him self unto the enemy. In like sort the blessed
Martyrs in the great heat, and troublsome storms of persecution which often
came to pass, being pursued by men fled away, and hid them selves in secret
and solitary places, but being taken they valiantly encountered with the
adversaries and ended the combatt with martyrdom. These were the reasons of
Athanasius laid down in his Apollogie the which he wrote in the defense of his
departure from his bishopric in the time of persecution.

CAP. VII. Cap. 9. in the Greek.

Eusebius after the council held at Alexandria was broken up, returned to
Antioch, where he found the people at variance by reason that Paulinus was
there chosen Bishop: and when that he could not prevail among them with
exhort ations to peace and unity, he got him home to his own bishopric of
Vercellae.

EVsebius Bishop of Vercellae immediately after the dissoluing of the council
got him to Antioch. but when he found Paulinus whom Lucifer had assigned to
be their Bishop, and the people divided into two parts (for the sect of
Meletius had several conuenticles by them selves) he was wonderful sorry,
because they did not all agree unto the election of Paulinus. for in his secret
opinion he condemned the act, yet because of the reverence he owed unto Lucifer
he concealed his sentence: and as soon as he promised by summoning of a
council that he would provide for their quiet state, he left them and went his
way. but first of all when as afterward he had done his best for the
reconciling of the brethren that were at variance, yet all was to no purpose.
for Meletius returning from exile and finding his accomplices to frequent secret
meetings and conuenticles, became their superintendent. all the other churches
that were there abouts were under Euzouis the Arian. Paulinus had but one little
parish within the city, of the which Euzoius did not deprive him, because of
the reverence he owed unto him. Meletius had his conuenticles in the suburbs
without the walls of the city. For that time, when the affairs went in this
sort, Eusebius took his leave of Antioch. Lucifer understanding that Eusebius
misliked with that election of his, Impaciency brings heresy.
took it very contumeliously and was altogether impacient. He refused
therefore to communicate with Eusebius, and being kindled with the fiery flame
of contention, he rejected the canons of the council. these things falling
out in those heavy times and tempestuous seasons for ecclesiastical affairs
ministered occasion that many fell from the faith: so that a new sect called
the Luciferian heresy then first sprange up. but Lucifer could not have his
fill, neither satisfy him self with anger, The heretical sect of the
Luciferians.
because that he bound him self with his own promises, sent unto the
council by his Deacon (who subscribed thereunto in his name) to give his
assent. Wherefore having agreed (though against his will) unto the canons of
the church, he got him unto his own bishopric in Sardinia. But they which
fretted within them selves no less then he, as yet do remain out of the
Church. Eusebius passing throughout the contries of the East cured and
confirmed like a cunning Physician such as were weakelings in the faith:
restored them to their former health, and instructed them in the doctrine of
the Church. Thence he went into Illyrium and coming into Italy in like sort
he diligently preached the word of God.

CAP. VIII. Cap. 10. in the greek.

Of Hilarious Bishop of Poetiers in France.

Hilarious Bishop of Poetiers a city of Guyan instructed diligently both the
bishops of Italy and also of France, in the canons of the Catholic faith
before the coming of Eusebius. for he first after his return from exile had
prevented him in those provinces. but both of them very absolutely confirmed
the faith. Hilarious being endued with the gift of eloquence wrote Hilarious
wrote 12. books of the trinity the which are to be seen in latin among his
works.
in the latin tongue: expounded the canon containing the clause of one
substance: proved it sufficiently and confuted the arguments of the Arians. but
these things were done a little after their return from exile. Now we may not
run over with silence, how that in the very same time the followers of
Macedonius, Eleusuis, Eustathius and Sophronius, (all these were called
Macedonians) had their private and often conuenticles: called unto them such as
were of their opinion in Seleucia, and accursed the contrary faction to wete,
of the Acacians: rejected the faith that was set forth at Ariminum, and
confirmed the creed that was read in the council of Seleucia. It was the same
which a little before (according unto that we wrote in our second book) was
established at Antioch. These men being reasoned with in this sort: you that
are called Macedonians if so be that ye differ in opinion from the Acacians,
how is it that you could find in your hearts to communicate with them ever
unto this day as if they had been of one opinion with you? Sophronius Bishop of
Pompeiopolis in Paphlagonia, in the name of the rest made thereunto this
answer: The opinion of the We churches. The opinion of Aetius.
the Bishops of the West Churches have in manner doted over the faith of one
substance: Aetius also in the East endeavored to corrupt the sincere doctrine,
he taught the substance of the father and of the son were not like one the
other, both these opinions are absurd. They unadvisedly and without discreet
judgment joined in one the distinct and severed substances of the father and
of the son, linked it (not well) together under the name of coessentiall or
one substance: but this Aetius parted and divided the propriety of nature
which the son has together with the father terming it the unlikeness or
diversity of substance. And in so much that both these fell The opinion of the
Macedonians.
into contraries, and meare extreamities, we thought good to walk in the midd
way and hold the mean between both, to retain the true and godly opinion,
that the son is of like substance with the father. This was the answer of
the Macedonians (as Sabinus writes in his book entitled the collections of
the counsels) exhibited by Sophronius unto their demand. In that they charge
Aetius as author of the diversity of substance in the father and the son, and
not the Acacians, they craftily dissemble and cloak the truth: in so doing
they partly oppugn the Arians, and The Macedonians proved them selves
Neuterans.
partly the opinion of such as maintain the clause of one substance. but they
overthrow them selves with their own words, for in displaying and opening
both opinions, they lay down a new of their own. So far of these things.

CAP. IX. Cap. 11. in the Greek.

The hatred of the Emperor Julian owed unto the Christians.

THe Emperonr Julian although at the beginning of his raygne he was meek and
courteous toward all men: yet in process of time he showed him self not
alike unto all men, but when so ever any accusation was brough: before him to
the discreditt of Constantius, then the Christians were heard at will: when
that again he heard of no such thing, then began he to reveal unto the
world the private grudge and malice he conceived against all the Christians
every where. for he commanded to build up again at Cyzicum the Nouatian
Church which Eleusius the Bishop had pulled down: threatening Eleusius the
Bishop of that city with grievous punishment if he buylte it not again within
two months upon his own costs and charges. Furthermore he set up a fresh
the rites of the Gentiles: he set wide open (as I said before) their temples:
and offered sacrifice in the Cathedral church of Constantinople unto the
goddess of Fortune where her Idol was set up.

CAP. X. Cap. 12. in the Greek.

The conference which Maris Bishop of Chalcedon being blind had with Julian
the Apostata,

ABout that time Maris Bishop of Chalcedon in Bithynia being led by the hand
unto Julian the Emperor (for that he was old he had a webb grown in his eyes
which bereaved him of his sight) began to rebuke the Emperor sharply,
calling him an impious person, an Apostata and an Atheist. he of the contrary
answered him opprobriously, recompensed him with the like, called him a blind
fool and said unto him farther: thy God of Galilee will not restore thee thy
sight again. for Iulianus called Christ a Galilaean and all the Christians in
like The answer of M^^ is unto Julian.
sort. Maris a little after answered the Emperor somewhat freely, I thank God
(says he) which made me blind lest that ever I should set mine eye upon so
ungracious a face as thine is. Whereunto the Emperor made no answer but
handled the Bishop roughly. When he perceived that the Christians did highly
reverence and honor such as suffered martyrdom under the reign of Diocletian:
when he learned also for certayntie, diverse men to be so well disposed, that
willingly they would suffer martyrdom: he going about to deprive the
Christians of so great a benefitt, devised an other way to afflict them. And
although he let pass the insatiable tyranny practiced in the time of
Diocletian, yet ceased he not altogether from persecuting. In mine opinion he
is a persecutor Who is a persecutor.
which molesteth any kind of way such men as lead a quiet and peaceable lise.
Julian in this sort afflicted the Christans not a little. he made a law that
the Christians should not be trained up in profane literature. for (says he)
seeing they have the gift of utterance so readily, they shall easily be able to
overthrow the quicks of Logic, wherewith the Gentiles do uphold their
doctrine.

CAP. XI. Cap. 13. in the Greek.

Of the stir the Emperor Julian raised against the Christians, and what
devise he found out to extort money from them.

Moreover the Emperor Julian gave out a proclamation that such as would not
renounce the Christian faith should warefare no longer in the Emperors
palace: likewise that all should prepare them selves to do sacrifice: that
no Christian should bear office in the Julian sclau^de^eth and gibeth at the
Christians.
common wealth. for their law (says he) forbids the execution by sword
upon such as deserved death, and therefore they are not fit to be Magistrates.
He allured diverse with flattery and fair offers to sacrifice. but immediately
they y^ were Christians in deed, and they also which were thought to be no
less, made them selves manifest unto all men as if they had showed them selves
upon a stage. for they which with heart and good will professed Christian
religion, threw down their sword girdles and signified they would rather
suffer any kind of torment then deny their Savior Christ Jesus. Of which
number was Ionianus, Valentinianus and Valens, who afterward were crowned
Emperors. Other some that were counterfeit Christians, who thought that the
riches and honor of this world was true felicity it self, without any delay
fell to sacrifice. Of which number Ecebolius a Sophist of Constantinople was
one, who conforming him self unto the humors and disposition Ecebolius was a
turn coat.
of the Emperors, was an earnest follower of the christian faith in the time
of Constantius: but when Julian succeeded him in the empire he fell to
gentilitie and the idolatry of Pagans: again after the death of Julian he
became a professor of the doctrine of Christ. He lay alonge at the porche of
the Church and cried unto such as came in: tread me under foot for that I am
the unsavory salt. Ecebolius as he was light and unconstant, so he continewed
unto the end. It came to pass about that time that the Emperor purposed to
revenge him of the Persians for the injury they had done him by inuading some
part of the Roman dominions, and determined to take his journey into the East
through the coasts of Asia. When that he pondered with him self how many
evils and inconveniences appertayned unto wars, what great sums of money
were needful thereunto, and how that without it, it was impossible to bring
his purpose to effect, he devised a certain sleyght to wring money from the
Christians. for he set a great fine upon the heads of such as would not
sacrifice, and the tax was very grievous and duly demanded of the Christians
so that every one rateably was seized at a certain sum and the Emperor him
self in a short while was wonderfully enritched with the injurious heaps of
money unjustly exacted. This law was of force not only where he traueled, but
also in such contries as he came not near. Then did the Gentiles insult over y^
christians: the Philosophers celebrated their frequented conferences: The
ho^^ble practices of the l^h nicks.
they solemnized certain detestable rites and ceremonies: they made slaughter
of infants sparing no sex, they used their entralls for southsaying, they
tasted of their tender bowels. These horrible practices were both at Athens,
at Alexandria and other places.

CAP. XII.
How that Athanasius was feign to fly and leave Alexandria in the time of
Julian the Apostata.

THey forged at that time a false accusation against Athanasius and signified
unto the Emperor that he had subverted Egypt and the whole city of
Alexandria, and that of necessity it behooved to banishe him the city, so that
by the commandment of the Emperor the governor of Alexandria was sore
incensed against him. Athanasius uttering these words unto Cap. 14. in ^he
greek. Athanasius ^keneth per ^^ution to cloud or ^ist.
certain of his familiars: My friends let us go aside for a season, this is
but a little cloud which quic^ly will vanish away, fledd immediately, took
shipping and sailed into Egypt. the enemy pursued after and made have to
overtake him. When it was understood that the pursuers were at hand, his
companions gave him counsel to fly into the desert. he by following their
advise escaped the enemy. for he persuaded them to turn back and to meet the
pursuers, the which they did immediately. As soon as they who a little before
fledd away, met the persecutors there was nothing demanded of them, but
whether they had seen Athanasius: who answered again that he hid him self in
some bushe not far from them, and if they would make quick speed, they
would be like to take him. so the pursuers followed after and the farther they
run the further they raunge, but they lost their labor. for he escaped their
hands and conveyed him self privily to Alexandria where he hid himself
until the kindled flame of persecution was wholly quenched. Such was the hurly
burly after sundry storms of persecution and manifold vexations by the
Ethnicks, which happened unto the Bishop of Alexandria. Furthermore the
governors of the provinces supposinge now that it was high tide for them
under color of the Emperoures religon to make up their bags, vexed the
christians far sorer then the Emperors proclamations bare them out:
demanded greater taxes then they were seassed at, and sometimes tormented
their bodies. The Emperor understanding of their doings winked at them, and
answered the christians which Julian the Apostata mocketh christians with their
religion. Cap. 15. in the greek.
complained unto him in this sort: It is your part when you have injuries
offered unto you, to take it patiently, for so your God commanded you.

CAP. XIII.
Of such as suffered Martyrdom at Meris a city of Phrygia in the time of
Julian.

THere was at Meris a city of Phrygla a certain governor whose name was
Amachius, Amachius an Heathen magistrate.
who commanded that the Idolatricall temple of the Ethnicks which stood in yt
city should be set wide open, that the foul heaps and filthy corners of a
long time vnfreque^ted should be made clean, and fell himself a worshipping
of the Idols. Which act of his pricked not a little in conscience the zealous
christians. Wherefore one Macedonius, Theodulus and Tatianus being kindled
with fetuencie of love toward the christian faith, could in no wise away
with such horrible practices: but in the burninge zeal of their godly inindes,
brake in the night season into the temple, threw down their Idols, and
stamped them into powder. Whereat when the gouernoure was wonderful wroth and
purposed to execute diverse of the citizens which were giltelesse and
innocente persons, the authors thereof presented themselves of their own
accord before him and chose to dye themselves for the truth, rather then any
other for their sakes should be deprived of their lives. After they were laid
in hold the gouernoure commanded that they should clear themselves by
sacrificinge unto the Idols and threatened them if they refused he would
severely punish them. They being of a noble mind and valiant courage, set
naught by his threats, made themselves ready to suffer what tormente soever were
laid upon them, for they counted it far better to loose their lives then to
defile their souls with those impure sacrifices. The governor Macedonius,
Theodulus, and Tatianus broyled to death.
when he had assayd them at all kind of torments last of all set them on the
gredyron, caused fire to be made under, and broiled them to death. And to the
end they might valiantly encounter under the glorious garlande of victory, they
reason thus with the governor: If thou long (O Amachius) after broyled meat,
turn up the other side of us, least in the eatinge we seem raw unto thee and
the blood run about thy teeth. This was the end that these men had.

CAP. XIIII.
When the Emperor Julian forbad the christians the study of Profane
literature both the Apollinaruses the father and the son fell a wrytinge. The
profltte that the christians have in profane writers.

THe law which the Emperor made that the christians should not be trained
up in the liberal sciences made both the Apollinariuses (of whom we spoke
before) to be of far greater fame. For either of them being skillful in
such arts as directed our style and orations, the father a grammarian, the
son a Rhetorician profited very much the christians and furthered at that
time not a little the church of God. For the father as a profounde grammarian
framed the art of humanity unto the furtherance of Christian religion: he
turned The fine books of Moses in H(...)roycall verse(...) The new Testament
was turned into Dialogues.
the five books of Moses into Heroycall verse, together with other books of
the old Testament which contain Hystories: partly in Hexameter verse and
partly after the form of comedies and tragedies, with the fit application
of persons: he wrote in all kind of meter to the end the christians should
not be ignorant and unskillful in any rare gift that excelled among the
Gentiles. The son an eloquente Rhetorician, brought the wrytinges of the
Evangelists and works of the Apostles into Dialogues, as Plato used among
the Heathens. Although their labor and industry seemed auaylable and
greatelye to set forth the service of God, in so much that thereby the
lewd drift of the Emperor was stopped from taking effect: yet the
providence of God did far exceed both their careful study and dashed also
the Emperors wiked devise. For immediately the Emperors law (as hereafter it
shall more manifestly appear) was abrogated and their works were as much
spoken of, as if they had never been written. But here peradventure some man
will say unto me: why then do ye attribute both the aforesaid unto the
providence of God? As toutchinge the shorteninge of the Emperoures days it is
known well inoughe how auaylable it was unto christian religion: but in that
the Po^trye of both the Apollinariuses was neglected, and that the christians
freely applied the Philosophical sciences of the heathens, there is no man
will grant that it furthered the service of God, and the faith of Christ. For
it can not be without danger that the christians may wade in the doctrine of
Ethnickes, in so much it teaches that there be many Gods. Unto these things
which aptely may be objected unto us we will presentely frame such answers as
we can. The doctrine of the Gentiles is allowed neither by Christ neither by
his Disciples as inspired from above: neither altogether rejected for
dangerous. And I take y^ to have come to pass not without the special
providence of almighty God. For there were many heathen Philosophers which
were not far from the knowledge of God: such as by public disputation
confuted the Epicures and other contentious Philosophers delited with the
quirckes of logic and ouerthrewe their palpable error and ignorance. And
though they could stand the favorers of christian religion in great stead
for their furtherance of learning, yet attained they not unto the ground and
principal point of our religion insomuch they understood not the mystery of
Christ which was concealed the co^tinewance of many ages and generations. The
which the Apostle in his epistle unto the Romans shows plainly in these
words: The wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness R^m. 1.
and iniquity of men which withholde the truth in unrighteousness. For the
thing that may be known of God is manifest among the^, because God has
shevved it unto them. For his invisible things being understood by his
works, are seen through the creation of the world, that is, both his eternal
power and godheade, so that they are without excuse, because that when they
knew God, notwithstanding they glorified him not as God. Wherefore they
knowinge the truth which God revealed unto them were worthy of death, because
that when they knew God they glorified him not as God. Therefore sithence that
the Apostle forbadd not the knoweledge of the Gentiles doctrine, he gave free
license and liberty unto every man at his choice and pleasure to wade in the
understanding of them. Let this suffire for one reason to the satisfiynge of
the former doubts. The second is as follows. The holy Scriptures inspired
from above deliver unto us divine precepts and mystical doctrine: they graffe
in the mind^s of such as hear them, true Godliness and the right trade of
living: they set wide open before such as study them, the most sacred faith:
they teach us no logic, wherewith we may withstand such as oppugn the
truth, although the adversaries are easiest overthrown when their own
armoure and proper defense is used to their foil and destruction. But the
christians enjoyed not this benefit by the works of both the Apollinariuses.
This was it that the Emperor Julian shot at when as he made a law that the
christians should not be schooled in the doctrine of the Gentiles. He knew
full well that the fables contained in the works of the Hethen writers being
paised in the equal balance of indifferent judgment would quickly be found
light and subject to reprehension and discredit: the which fond invention of
theirs when Socrates their principal philosopher had dissalowed, the Judges
condemned him, as if he had gone about to disprove or destroy their Gods, nay
rather their deuells. Besides all this both Christ himself and his Apostle
commanded us to be tried exchaungers, to the end we might examine all things
and hold that (...). These. 5. (...)ss. 2.
which is good: We have also to take heed lest any circumuent us through
Philosophy and vain deceate. This we shall not be able to do unless we
possess the armoure of the enemy, and in enioyinge it, we turn the whole unto
an other use. For we have to reject that which is evil, to retain that which
is good, and to admit nothing without good trial. For that which is good
wheresoever it is found appertains unto the truth. For if any be disposed
to urge us farther herein set him consider with him self how the Apostle did
not only not forbid the knoweledge of Heathenishe doctrine, but is seen not
to have despised them himself, to the end he might be skillful in many of the
Ethnicks works. Where I pray you borrowed he this sentence: The Cretians are
always liers, evil beasts, slow bellies, was it not out of Epimenides a
Poet of Creta^ (...). 1. ^t. 17.
or where learned he this: we are also his offspring, was it not out of the
Phenomenon of Aratus the Astronomer? That saying also: Evil words corrupt
good manners, shows plainly that 1. Corinthians. 15.
he was well seen in the tragedies of Euripides. But what need I use many
words hereof? It is known well inoughe that the Doctors of the Church of an
aunc: ente custom never forbid unto this day, exercised themselves from their
youth up even unto the last hour in the sciences and doctrine of the Gentiles:
partly for to attain as well unto a fine style and eloquente phrase as the
exercise and whettinge of the wits: and partly also for to confute the
doctrine of such writers as delivered unto the world error and falshoode in
steed of the manifest and only truth. These things according unto our
simple hability we have laid down by occasion of both these Apollinariuses.

CAP. XV. Ca. 17. in the Greek.

How the Emperor taking his voyage to war with the Persians came to
Antioch where the common people derided him, unto whom after his departure he
wrote an oration entitled Misopogon.

THe Emperor when he had exacted of the christians and heaped together a
great sum of money proceedinge on his voyage against the Persians came to
Antioch in Syria, Being there and desirous to show unto the people of Antioch
a taste of his honors title the which he set much by, set the market low,
made all things very cheap, had no consideration of the time: he pondered not
with him self how that an host or army wheresoever it comes, brings
great damage unto the prouincialls and turns plenty of necessaries to
scarsitie of food. Wherefore tauerners and vittayling houses which provided
necessaries for wayfaringe men, not able to bear the loss of so weyghty a
burden, whereunto they were enjoined by the Emperors edict, gave over their
trade, so that the city was brought to great distress, because they wanted
necessary provision. The Antiochians an impatiente kind of people, soon
provoked to anger and reuengemente could not away with this plague (which they
took for no other) without any more ado they go to meet the Emperor, they
cry out against him, they inueye at his The bearde and coin of Julian.
doings, and play with his bearde (it was a long thrumme bearde) they bid
him go shave his bearde and make halters thereof: they bring him in
remembrance of his coin, wherein there was a bull conqueringe the world with
his horns. For the Emperor being wholly given to superstition, sacrificed
bulls upon the Idols altar, and therefore gave charge that both the Alter and
the bull should be engraven in his coin. The Emperor being incensed with
these skommes, threatened he would plague the people of Antioch. He removed
thence into Tarsus in Cilicia, as soon as he had provided there such
necessaries as he stood in need of, he The oratio^s of Libanius.
went on his journey. Whereupon Libanius the Sophist took occasion to write the
oration entitled of his embassy, where he entreated the Emperor for the
Antiochians, and also the oration unto the people of Antioch where he laid
before them the displeasure which the Emperor had conceived against them. The
report goes that the Sophist wrote the said Orations and yet The oration of
Julian against such as slouted his bearde.
they never were seen abroad: and that the Emperor was appeased not by
reuenginge him of such as had flouted his beard, but requitinge them with like
co^tumelious skommes. For he defamed the city of Antioch for ever in the
oration which he entitled Antiochian or Misopogon directed against the deriders
of his bearde. So far of these things.

CAP. XVI. Cap. 18. in the Greek.

When the Emperor would have an answer of the Oracle of Apollo, the deuell
would not speak because the body of Babilas the martyr was buried hard by.
The Emperors displeasure, and of the torments which Theodorus the Confessor
suffered.

Now let us speak of the injuries which the Emperor at that time did unto
the Christians at Antioch. When he had commanded that the Idolatricall temples
of the Ethnicks should be set wide open at Antioch, the Emperor made haste
to the Oracle of Apollo which was in Daphne a little out of Antioch. But the
Deuell whose dwellinge was in that den Babilas the martyr.
trembled for fear of Babilas the martyr (whose corpse lay interred not far
from the place) and would give the Emperor no answer, the Emperor
perceauing the cause, commanded that the martyrs tumbe should thence be
removed with speade. When the christians of Antioch understood of this they
assemble together with women and children, they rejoice and are glad, they
singe Psalms, they translate the corpse from out of Daphne into the city of
Antioch. The Psalms which they song tended to the reprehension of the Heathen
Gods, and of such as worshipped Rust. lib. 1. eccles. hist. cap. 35. says the
Psalm was this: confounded be all they that wo^ship carved Images and put
their trust in Idols.
Idols and carved images. Cap. 19 in the Greek. Theodorus a confessor Ruff.
li. 1. c. 36.
Then the Emperors disposition which was hid and cloked before time was made
manifest unto the whole world. For he who alitle before was a professor of
Philosophy, now breaks out, and fretteth within himself at y^ Psalms that
were song in derision of the Gentiles, and determines to torment the
christians as Diocletian had done in a while before. But when his expedition
against the Persians permitted no leisure to bring his purpose about, he gave
out a commission unto Salustius who was Liuetenante of that province, for to
see that such as had song the Psalms in derision of the Ethnikes should
severely be punished. The Liuetenant although he were a panyme yet was he
altogether unwilling to execute his commission. But he seeing there was no
other choice attached many of the christians, sent many to prison. But one that
was a young man by name Theodorus and appeached of the Paganes, he tormented
with sundry kinds of punishments, and rent the flesh all his body over with
the lashe of the whippe: and in the end he commanded that he should be let
loose when in very deed he was thought not possibly able to live. Yet God
restored him to his former health, for he lived many years after that
confession which he yielded in torment. Ruffinus who wrote the ecclesiastical
history of his time in the latin tongue reports that he had conference a
long time after with this Theodorus and demanded of him whether he had not
felt great pain when the lashe of the whip rebounded from his body: And that
he answered him again that the torments were not so grievous as some men
thought: that there stood by him a young man which wiped away all the salt
drops of that swettinge combat, confirmed him in the faith, and that the
hour of torment was unto him rather a delectable pleasure then a doleful
pain. This much shall suffice of the renowned Theodorus. At that very time
there came Ambassadors from the Persia^s unto the Emperor Julian, requiringe
him to proclaim open wars, he sent them back again with this answer. you
shall see me shortly in mine own person and therefore I shall not need to
send any in embassy unto you for this matter.

CAP. XVII.
How the Emperor exhorted the Jews to sacrifice. Of the wonderful signs
Cap. 20. in the greek.
which God showed unto the Jews and the utter ruin of their temple at
Jerusalem.

FVrthermore when the Emperor endeavored an other way to vex the christians,
he set for the his own superstition to be derided of all men. For when he
took great pleasure in sacrifice, he did not only feed his own fond humor
with the shedinge of blood, but also enjoined penalties for such as recreated
not themselves with the like. When he perceived that he could find but a few
men of his disposition, he calls for the Jews and demands of them the
cause why they did not sacrifice, saying that Moses had commanded them so to
do? after they had answered that it was not lawefull for them to execute that
function in any other place save at Jerusalem: he commanded that in all the
have the temple of Solomon should be builded up again. After this he takes
his voyage against the Persians. The Jews who of a long time had dreamed they
should see the day when their temple should be builded again for sacrifice,
now thinkinge that the hour was come, occupied their heads busily about the
buyldinge: they put the christians in great fear: they insolentely crowed
over them: they threatened them the like entertaynement, as they themselves had
of old at the Romans hands. When by the Emperoures commandment the cost
and charges was awarded out of the public treasory, all necessaries were
provided: as timber, stone, brick, claye, lyme, together with other things
that are required in buyldinge. At what time Cyrillus Bishop of Jerusalem
remembered the prophecy of Daniel, the which Christ had confirmed and
prognosticated unto many: that the time The prophecy of Cyril. Math. 24. A
great earthquake.
was now come when there should not be one stone of the temple left upon the
other but that the prophecy of our Savior should now take place and be
fulf^illed. When the Bishop had thus prophesied, there was a great earthquake
the night followinge which shook the old foundation of the temple and turned
all down to the ground, together with the houses which adioined thereunto.
The Jews at the sight thereof were taken with a sudden fear, the fame
thereof brought many which dwelled in far countries to see it. Again not
only this but also many that were present saw with their eyes an other
wonder. For there came down fire from Heaven Fire from heaven burned the
instruments of the Jews.
which burned all their tools and instruments. Then might a man have seen
their hammers, grauing irons, sawes, axes, hatchets and all such things as
the workmen occupied in the buyldinge, consumed with fire. The fire ceased not
to burn the space of a whole day. The Jews again being in manner astonyed
at this strange sight, confessed against their wills that Christ was an
omniporente God: yet yielded they not unto his will and pleasure but were held
back with the stubburne opinion of Iudaisme that was rooted in their bones.
Neither could the third wonder which ensued after convert them unto the
true faith. The night following Crosses were printed in the clothes of the
Jews that could not be wiped away.
there were forms of crosses marked in their garments which shined like the
sun beams: in the morninge when they saw them and coueted to wipe and rub
them of, they could not by any means. Wherefore being blinded as the Apostle
writes, they banished the goodness of God from among them. To conclude the
temple at that time in steed of raysinge up was ruynously thrown to the
ground.

CAP. XVIII. Cap. 20. in the greek.

Of the Emperor Iulians voyage into Persia and his miserable end.

THe Emperor understanding the manner of the Persians that in winter they are
very weak, The Persia^s and Medes can not abid cold
of small power and simple courage (for they are a kind of people that can not
away with cold: the Mede also as it is commonly said, all winter time, never
pulls his hand out of his bosom) knowinge also that the Romayne souldiere
is of power and force, though the weather pinche never so much: marched
forewardes a little before winter and led his army into Persia. First he
destroyed the country, the villages, threw down their castells afterward
he fell a ransackinge of their cities. He besieged Ctesiphon that great city
of Persia, and pinched therein the king of Persia very sore, so that he sent
unto him many Ambassadors humbly requestinge him to take from him some part of
his kingdom, to end the field, to raise the siege and so go his way. But
Julian was nothing moved therewith: pitied them not at all: neither remembered
he the common saying: To conquer is praise worthy but insolentely to
triumph over the conquered is a despiteful Act: he put confidence in fond
conjectures of south saying, he trusted to much fantastical dreams, the which
Maximus the Philosopher then present put in his head: he hoped verylie to
counteruayle or rather to surmount the greater glory and noble prowess of
Alexander the Great, so that he set naught by the humble suit of the
Persians: he dreamed according unto the opinion of Pythagoras and Plato that
by the transmigration of the souls from one body into an other, the soul of
Alexander was crepte into his carcass: or rather that he was Alexander
himself in an other body. The which opinion led him into a foul error, and
caused him to make light of the king of Persia his request. The king
understanding that his embassy was to no purpose, being brought to a
narrow straicte and sore plunge gathered his power the day after this
embassy and joined with the Romayne host face to face. The Romans although
they found great fault with their Emperor for refusinge the offer and
fallinge to bloodshed, yet doubted they not to deal with the Persians who now
were come forth to meet them, so that in the end they put them to flighte
and won the field. The Emperor himself was a horseback at the battle to
the end he might animate and encourage the soldiers: but trusting to much to
his prosperity and thinkinge himself cockesure went into his camp without
complete harness. Therefore an arrowe being soddaynely shot at him, pierced
through his arm and stuck in his ribs which gave him his deaths wound,
but who did it, was never known. Some report that he was wounded by a
fugitive Persian: some other that he was slain by one of his own soldiers,
which is rife in every man's mouth, yet Calistus one of the Emperors
household guard, who wrote his life in Heroycall verse, and the battle which
he gave then unto the Persians, say the that it was a wicked fiende or Deuell
that run him through, which peradventure is feigned after the manner of
Poetical invention, and yet it may very well be true, for we learn that the
furies of Hell have often times recompensed such lewd persons with extreme
punishmente. But how so ever it was every man knows that for his headye
rashenesse he was subject to danger: for his eloquence, and gift of
utterance he was desirous of vain glory: and for his counterfete gravity he
was contemned and derided of all men. Thus he ended his life in Julian dyed
Anno Dom. 367.
Persia (as I said before) in his fourth Consulship the which he enjoyed with
Salustius, being the sixth and twentieth of June and the third year of his
raygne: the seventh year after he was made Caesar by Constantius, the one and
thirtieth year of his age.

CAP. XIX.
Iouianus is created Emperor. A notable confutation of Libanius the Heathen
Rhetorician.

THe soldiers being doubtefull, knowinge not what was best to be done, the
next day after the death of Julian, without any further deliberation, they
proclaim Iouianus a man Iouianus was created Emperor Anno Dom. 367.
of valiante and noble courage their Emperor. This man being a tribune, when
Julian by proclamation gave the soldiers in choice either to do sacrifice or
to leave warefare: chose rather to throw away his swordegirdle then to
satisfy the wicked and detestable edicte of the Emperor. For all that,
Julian, when the necessity of the wars then in hand constrained him,
retained him in the number of his Captains. But Iouianus being nominated
Emperor refuses the crown and being compelled thereunto against his will
by the souldieres breaks out into loud speech, saying: In that he was a
Christian he would not be Emperor where Ethnickes should become his
subjects: yet when all with one voice confessed themselves to be Christians,
he yielded and was crowned Emperor. Being in Persia and suddenly put to his
shifts, his soldiers also being almost famished to death: upon certain
conditions he joined in league with the king of Persia and so ended the
wars. The couenantes as the Romans thought were unlawful, yet
consideringe the case of that present time they were not to be misliked. For
he was content to loose the dominion of Syria and to deliver the Persians
Nisibis a city in Mesopotamia. When these tidinges were blased abroad the
Christians conceived no small joy at the departure of Julian: the whole army
also misliked very much with his indiscreet and headye rashenesse and lay to
his charge that the bounds of the Empire were cut short. For be being
deceived by a Persian that was a fugitive, set afire certain vessels upon
the seaes which brought them corn, and thereof it rose that the famine
grieved them sore. At that time Libanius the Sophist made a funeral oration
where he be wayled the death of Julian and entitled it Iuliana or the Epitaph
of Julian. In the which he painted forth his life with loftye style in praise
of his person and to his further commendation reports of the books he had
written against the Christians, and how that in them he had proved their
doctrine for triflinge and ridiculous stuff. If this Rhetorician had extolled
the Emperor only for his other Acts, I would have proceeded with silence to
discourse of that which remains of the history: but in so much he has
mentioned the books of Julian, and like a grave and wise orator inueyed
bitterly against Christian religion, therefore I have thought good to say
somewhat thereof, and first I will lay down his own words Cap. 23. in the
Greek. Libanius the Sophist in his funeral oration upon the death of Julian
the Apostata.
In the vvinter season (says he) when the nights are somevvhat long, the
Emperor perusing those books which affirm that the man whose original
was in Palaestina is both God and the son of God, confuted them with many
reasons and strong arguments and condemned them for ridiculous doctrine:
affirmed moreover that the glorious religion, highly esteemed of them was full
of toys and trifles, where he proved himself to be far vviser then the
old grayberde of Tyrus. Wherefore let the old man of Tyrus (he means
Porphyrius) conceive no displeasure at all but patientely vveye wherein his
child does prejudice his creditte. These are the words of Libanius the
Sophiste. Truly I will say no less, but that he was a notable Rhetorician
and I am verelye persuaded that if he had not consented unto the Emperors
religion, he would have had no other speech in his mouth then the Christians
have at this day, and that by all likelyhoode, being an excellent Rhetorician,
he would have extolled Christian religion unto the skies. For he wrote in the
praise of Constantius while he lived, after his desease he wrote to his
disprayse and made inuectiues against him. Wherefore if Porphyrius had been
Emperor, he would have preferred his works before the wrytinges of Julian:
again if Julian had been a Sophist (as he wrote of Ecebolius in his funeral
oration of Julian) he would have called him a ^au^^e Rhetorician. In as much
as then he being of the same religion with the Emperor, being a
Rhetorician, being also his friend wrote his pleasure of him: we also after
our ability will fall to answer his sclaunderous works. First he says that
in the winter season the nights being somewhat long he took great pains in
perusing the christians books He signifies by taking of pains in this place,
that his travel was great in wrytinge of inuectiues, as Rhetoricians do use,
when they train up youth to the knoweledge of their art. A good while ago he
read those books in deed, took great pains, discoursed at large, not as
Libanius says with strong arguments, but with weak, in somuche they were
contrary to the truth, and endeavored skoffinge wise to refell such things
as of themselves were of force inoughe. For whosoever disputes with an other,
labors to foil his adversary, sometime by corrupting and perverting, some
other time by concealinge of the truth. Whosoever also he be that owes spite
and hatred unto any man, he will endeuer like a deadly enemy not only to do,
but also to speak the worste of him: he will also wreste all the mischief
which the enemy deuiseth against him, upon his adversary. Their own books
do manifestly declare, that both Julian and Porphyrius (whom he calls the
gray bearde of Tyrus) were raylers and skoffers. For Porphyrius in his book
entitled the lives of Philosophers, wrytinge of Socrates the chief of all the
rest, inueyeth against him bitterly: and writes to his contumely raylinge
speeches and far more opprobrious languages, then Melitus or Anytus who of
old sclaundered him alike, ever durst to revile Socrates with all. I mean
that Socrates whom the Gentiles have in great admiration for his temperance,
justice and others his virtues: whom Plato the divine Philosopher, whom
Xenophon with the whole Senate of Philosophers do greatly reverence. But
Julian followinge his fathers steps in all things, revealed unto the world
that corrupt humor which troubled his head (wherewich he reviled all the
Emperors and Caesar's that were before him) in so much that he spared not, no
not his dear friend the Philosopher Marcus. Wherefore let their wrytinges
be judge whether both Porphyrius and Julian were reuilers and sclaunderers or
no. Neither have I need of great and weyghtie arguments to confirm this my
assertion: but the opinions of diverse sage personages grounded upon good
conjectures the which I mind to allege shall stand for sufficient proof.
What Gregory Nazianzen has though of Julian, let us first of all see out
of his own words. For in his second Oration against the Gentiles he writes
thus. Although both his raygne and Gregorius Nazianzen ora. 2. cont. Gentil.
also experience has taught other men that these things were most true in
him: yet perceived I them long a go since the time I was aquaynted with him
at Athens. For he came thither when the Emperesse had procured license of the
Emperor for his voyage, when also his brother Gallus had conspired the
death of Constantius the Emperor. There were two causes that moved him to
repair unto Athens. The first tolerable, the second of small honesty: the
first to see Greece and the schools that flourished therein: the second
(which was more secret and known unto fevve) for to consulte with
southsayers and sacrificers about his affairs in time to come, because it was
not then openly permitted for the authors of such impiety to practice such
Deuelishe inventions. And I my self in coniecturinge of him at that time
(although I am not of the number of Propheciers) was not much deceived: for
his wavering mind and frenticke disposition, made me a Prophet good enough. He
which goes nearest the mark by conjecture, is commonly called the best
Prophere. I savve not one sign The phisiognomie of Julian the Apostata.
in him that gave me any hope of him that ever he would become an honest man.
He had a runninge head: his shoulders did never lynne vvagginge, and lay
slatte or stipe wise: he had vvinkinge eyes that continevvally rolled in his
head: his countenance was staringe: he had a slidinge, slippery and limpinge
pace: his visage was scornful: he had a flyringe face of his own, the
which his immoderate laughter and continevvall skorninge did declare: his manner
was without all good order to say and unsay: his words came tumblinge out
with vehemency and stoppes, the sentence broken in the mids: his questions
and objections were rash and foolish, his answers were little better which
oftentimes follovved one after the other, and as there was little hold of
them, so were they proposed without order. But what need I to run over all
particulers. I foresawe in him before he was created Emperor that which
afterward proved to be most true. If there were presentely in place any of
my familiars which heard me thus diuininge of him, I am sure they would
testify this to be no otherwise then I do report it: in whose hearing
also at the foresight of these things I uttered these words: O good God
what a monster the Empire of Rome does nourishe. When I had uttered these
words I desired of God that in this behalf I might be found a liar. For
that had been far better, then that the whole world should have been
visited with so many mischiefs, then that such a monster should ever have
been seen among men, when the like thereof had never been remembered before:
seeing there happened many deluges and floodes ouerflowing the countries, the
which both young and old at this hour does remember: great loss by fire:
terrible earthquakes and gapinge of the ground, and men also of a strange
shape were seen borne into the world, of mixte and compound natuers half
man half beast. But he purchased unto himself such an end as his frentike
disposition by all right deserved. These things did Gregory report of
Julian. Because that Porphyrius and Julian both, in many their rash
allegations to the sclaunder of Christian religion have done great injury to
the truth, partly by peruertinge certain places of holy Scripture, partly
also by reconcilinge of others after their own foolish judgment, with
applyinge of them to their own purpose: many withstoode them, confuted and
ouerthrewe their Sophistical positions, yea above all the rest, Origin, who
flourished a long time before the reign of Julian, sifted out such places of
holy Scripture as seemed to bring the readers into doubt, laid down the
objections together with the answers, and satisfied the captious and vain
doubts of wicked persons. If Julian and Porphyrius had diligently perused these
his works, they would (I am sure) not only have approved the same but also
applied all their gifts to other matters and never set their minds to write
Sophistical fallacies full of blasphemous impiety against the majesty of
God. It is manifest hereby that the Emperor used these cauillations among
rude and unlearned people, and not in the hearing of such as had learned the
manifest truth out of holy Scripture. For when he had heaped together many
words of holy Scripture which are necessaryly set forth after a common and
usual kind of frase to express the Oeconomie, the order in doing or
dispensation of God, in the end he says thus: Verily these places every one
unless the sentence has some secret or hid mystery (the which Julian lib. 3.
contra Christian.
I take to be most true) contain as far forth as the words give us to
understand many blasphemies against God. This was one among other of his
arguments laid down in his third book against the Christians. In his book
entitled Cynisme while he endeuoreth to instruct us how far forth it may
be lawefull for us to proceed in framinge of holy fables or divine comedies,
his opinion is that in the handelinge of such matters it behooved us to
conceal the truth, his words are these: Nature had lever be unrevealed, the
hid also, Julian lib. Cynis.
and the intrecate essence of the Gods will not in any wise suffer it self
to be beaten with plain and manifest words, into the defiled ears of men.
Wherefore the Emperor as far forth as we can gather by his words, seems
to be of that opinion toutchinge holy Scripture, because the words are
mystical and contain secrecy: but it grieves him that all men be not of his
mind and therefore he scorneth at such Christians as understand the said
mysteries simply. Yet he should not have so derided the simplicity of the
common people: neither therefore to have inueyed against holy Scripture:
neither to have abhorred and detested the sense and notable sentences comprised
in the same, because all men did not understand them as he thought good. Now
as it is very euidente the like happened unto Porphyrius. This Porphyrius
Impatiencie brought Porphyrius into Apostasy.
being rebuked of certain Christians at Caesarea in Palaestina, being
altogether impaciente through boylinge choler, and burninge heat of furious
rage fell from the Christian faith and rashely took pen in hand (because
of the hatred he owed unto them, which reprehended him) for to write books
where he inueyed bitterly with contumelious style against all Christians: as I
reed in the books of Eusebius Pamphilus which he wrote to the confutation of
his works. The Emperor also settinge up him self insolencely against the
Christians in the hearing of unlearned persons, and being provoked thereunto by
the self same frentike and raginge humor fell into the like Apostasy with
Porphyrius. Wherefore both of them, fallinge of their own accord into
extreme impiety, and priuye in conscience to their blasphemous practices
received punishment due unto their deserving. Furthermore when Libanius the
Sophiste skornefully derided the Christians, in these words: they take the man
that was borne in Palaestina for God and the son of God: me thinks he
forgets himself when as Libanius in (...) funeral ^f Julian.
in the end of his Oration he numbered Julian among the Gods, in this sort:
First of all (says he) they could not refrain, for they stoned him almost
to death which brought the first tydinges of Iulians departure out of this
life, as if he had lied against God. Again a little after: O thou scholar
(says he) of the deuells: O thou disciple of the deuells: O thou assistent
and associate of the deuells. Although he understood this otherwise, yet in so
much he eschewed not the equivocal word which comprised also the Deuell, he
seemed to utter no less then the Christians accustomed to do in reproach.
Wherefore if he had determined with him self to extol any man, he should
have avoided every ambiguous word in such sort as he rejected an other phrase
being reprehended for it, and blotted it out of his books. How that man in
Christ is made God: how that he is both man openly, and God in mystery, how
that also both these things may be justified, the holy books of the
Christians do declare. The Ethnickes before they believe, are not able to
comprehend it. For the saying of the Prophet is true: If you believe not, ye
shall not be able to understand. Wherefore they are not ashamed to number many
mortal men in the catalogue of the gods. I would to God they had offended
herein only in taking them for godds who were virtuous lyuers, just men, and
temperate persons: but they have preferred such as were impure, unjust, and
dronken sorts: I mean Herculeans, Bacchians, Aesculapians, whom Libanius
does very Hercules. Bacchus. Aesculapius.
often call to wittnes in his writings, whose amorous toys and wanton behavior
both with male and female if I should go about to rehearse, would compel
me to use a long digression. Such as are desirous to understand farther
hereof, let them repair unto Aristotle's Peplus, by interpretation the woman's
attire: unto Dionysius garlande, unto Reginus Polym^^emon, and to the whole
rabble of Poets, who writing of these things do set wide open unto the
world the vain and ridiculous mysteries of the Ethnickes. but that it is a
heathenishe custom to account of mortal men as of gods, let us consider
thereof a little better. The Rhodians being in great distress received
answer of the Oracle, that they Attis dyed for love.
should worship Attis the Phrygian, who was a priest, and dyed frentike. The
Oracle was as follows:

Set forth the great God Attis name, sound out his glorious praise,
Whom virtue joined with Adon chaste and Bacchus happy days. Adon was a
beautiful boy slain of a bore and because he was the dearlinge of Venus she
turned him to a purple flower, or as some say, unto a Rose. Bacchus was a
dronke^ so^t

This Oracle makes Attis, who dyed for love, a god, together with Adonis and
Bacchus. Moreover when Alexander king of Macedonia came to Asia, the people
Amphictiones brought him presents, of whom the Oracle of Apollo in Delphos
made this answer, and charged the people as follows:

Let altars burn and incense power, please Jove, Minerua eke:
The potent prince though nature frail, his favor you must seek.
For Jove from heaven to earth him sent, lo Alexander king,
As God he comes the earth to rule, and just laws for to bring.
These were the words which the deuell out of the breast of Pythia uttered of
Alexander. The same Oracle to the end he might flatter great personages and
Princes of great power, numbered them in the catalogue of the gods, and
peradventure this answer was no other but a flatteringe of Alexander. To what
end shall I write of Cleomedes the wrastler, of whom to the end Cleomedes
was a wrastler of exceeding strength and greatness of body, who being put
beside the price at the game of Olympus, fell mad. Antinous was a young boy
whom Adrianus the Emperor loved. Cap. 24. in the greek.
he might be canonized a god, the Oracle spoke in this sort:

Cleomede interred is, his fame let florishe still,
Advance with feasts and sacrifice his name, this is our will.
Diogenes Cynicus and Oinomaus the philosopher, condemned the Oracle of Apollo
for this aforesaid folly. The people Cyciceni called Adrianus the thirtienth
god: Adrianus him self counted Antinous his dearlinge in the catalogue of the
gods. Yet Libanius would not once open his lyppes to the reprehension of these
ridiculous toys and mere folly. Nevertheless though he perused these
Oracles, and read over the book of Adrias, entitled The life of Alexander,
yet was not he ashamed to esteem of Porphyrius as of a god. I am humbly
(says he) to crave pardon of the old graybearde of Tyrus, in that I have
preferred the works of the Emperor before his writings. Thus have we
discoursed by way of digression somewhat at large, to the end we might
satisfy the despitefull reports of the sclaunderous mouth of the Sophist: yet
in so much they seem to require a several volume we will end them hear and
proceed on in our history.

CAP. XX.
How that the bishops of all sects and opinions posted unto Iouianus the
Emperor as soon as he was created, hoping every one to find him according
unto their own veins.

AS soon as the Emperor Iouianns returned out of Persia, the churches
immediately The Emperor Iouianus was a fauorer of the Nicene creed.
were troubled with sedition. The bishops likewise whilst they hope to find
y^ Emperor of their own several opinions, endeavor with all might to prevent
one an other. The Emperor for as much as always he cleaued unto the creed
co^tayning the clause of One substance. made flatt answer that he would
always further the same, and encouraged Athanasius bishop of Alexandria by his
letters, who immediately after the desease of Julian enjoyed again y^
bishopric of Alexandria. For he being the^ confirmed therein by the Emperors
letters, laid aside all fear and fayntnes of courage. Moreover the Emperor
called home again the bishops whom Consta^tius had exiled, whom Julian also
had not restored to their seaes. The^ also the Idol groves and temples of the
Ethnicks were shut up: the Pagans them selves wandered and hid them here and
there: such as wore y^ philosophical habit, laid it aside and wore y^ common
and usual attire. Those bloody and detestable sacrifices wherewith they openly
defiled the^ selves, and took their fill during y^ reign of Julian, were now
wholly taken away.

CAP. XXI. Cap. 25. in the Greek.

How the Macedonians and Acacians assembling at Antioche, confirmed with their
subscriptions the Nicene Creed.

THe Christian affairs were not as yet pacified, neither enjoyed they a quiet
end. For such as were ringleaders of contrary factions got them unto the
Emperor, hopinge that he would give them free liberty to feed and foster
among them selves the fiery humor of contention, and license to deal
sediciously with their adversaries. And first of all y^ Macedonians exhibit unto
him a supplication where they request that such as auoutch the unlikeness and
dissimilitude between the son and the father should be banished y^ church,
and the^ selves substituted in their rowmes. The authors of this supplication
were Basilus bishop of Ancyra, Siluanus bishop of Tarsus, Sophronius bishop of
Pompeiopolis, Pasinicus bishop of Zenum, Leontius bishop of Comanum,
Callicrates Iouianus the Emperor could not away with contentious persons.
bishop of Claudiopolis, and Theophilus bishop of Castabala. The Emperor
receaui^g their supplication gave them no answer at all, but sent the^ away with
these words. I tell you truly I ca^ not away with contention, but such as
embrace unity and concord, I do both honor and reverence them. These words of
y^ Emperor coming to y^eares of other contentious persons, delayed the heat
of sedition y^ was kindled among them, which fell out right as the Emperor had
wished. Again at y^ time also the behavior of ye Acacians, a busy kind of
bodies, a sect wonderful seditious was perceived: a kind of people they are
always applying them selves according unto the veins of the Emperors. These
men assemble them selves at Antioch in Syria together with Meletius, who a
little before had severed him self from their communion, they creep to
familiarity and conference with him. The cause that moved them thereunto was,
for that they saw him in great estimation with the Emperor, who then made his
abode at Antioche. They frame a supplication among them selves with uniform
consent of them all: They acknowledge the faith of One substance: they ratify
the Nicene creed: They exhibit unto y^ Emperor their supplication co^tayning
y^ form The supplication of the Acacians assembled at the council of Antioch
unto the Emperor Iouianus.
as follows. Unto our most holy and gracious lord Iouianus, victorious,
puisant, Augustus: the council of bishops assembled at Antioch out of sundry
provinces, send greeting in the Lord. We have experience and trial
sufficient (most holy Emperor) how that your graces highness with great
industry endeavors to establishe peace and unity in the church of God:
neither are we ignorant how that your prudent advice thinks no less then
that the form of the catholic faith will prevail very much to the
furtherance and confirmation of the aforesaid unity and concord. Therefore
lest we should be numbered among the corrupters of the true and sincere
character of Christian doctrine: we thought good to let your majesty
understand that we both allow and retain vnuiolably the Creed confirmed of
old in the holy and sacred council of Nice: sithence that the clause of One
substance (according unto some men's thinkinge unadvisedly laid down) is very
well interlaced of the fathers, interpreted and expounded both with commodious
phrases, and fit epithetons: the which exposition shows forth the son to
be begotten of the fathers substance: to be like unto the father according unto
his substance: that no passion ought to be conceived in his inexplicable
generation: that the word Substance was not used of the holy fathers in that
sense which the Graecians take it, but to the overthrow of the poisoned
doctrine which the blasphemous mouth of Arius endeavored to establishe, saying
that Christ had his original of nothing: that also these Anomoians affirming
(by interpretation) the son to be unlike the father, who lately stepped up,
auoutched more impudent and lewd doctrine to the overthrow of the
ecclesiastical peace and unity. Wherefore we have thought good to annexe
unto this our supplication, wherein our censure and opinion is laid The
subscription of the bishops.
down, the form of faith (which we honor and reverence) decreed by the
bishops assembled at Nice. It begins as follows: We believe in one God the
father almighty, etc. containing throughout very sound and substantial
doctrine. I Meletius bishop of Antioch, do subscribe and allow of all the
parts and parcells of the aforesaid supplication and creed above written.
Even so do I Eusebius bishop of Samosata, Euagrius bishop of Sicilia, Vranius
bishop of Apamea, Zoilus bishop of Larissae, Acacius bishop of Caesarea,
Antipater bishop of Rosse, Abramius bishop of Vria, Aristonicus bishop of
Seleucobelus, Barlamenus bishop of Pergamus, Vranius bishop of Melitine, Magnus
bishop of Chalcedon, Eutychius bishop of Eleutheropolis, Isacocis bishop of
Armenia the greater, Titus bishop of Bostra, Peter bishop of Sipus, Pelagius
bishop of Laodicea, Arabianus bishop of Antros, Piso bishop of Adana, by his
substitute Lamydrio the elder, Sabinianus bishop of Zeugma, Athanasius bishop
of Ancyra by his substitutes Orphitus and Atetius the elders, Irenio bishop of
Gaza, Piso bishop of Augusta, Patricius bishop of Paltum by his substitute
Lamyrio the elder, Anatolius bishop of Beroea, Theotimus bishop of Arabia, and
Lucianus bishop of Arce. This supplication have we found in the book of
Sabinus entitled The collection of the Counsels. The Emperor who determined
with him self to pacify with gentle and courteous languages all quarelles and
contention, made answer that he would not molest any, what faith or religion
soever they professed, but above all others that he would honor and reverence
such as showed them selves peacemakers, and went about to maintain the bond
of unity and concord. Themistius the philosopher does Flatterers are likened
unto the sea Euripus which ebbeth and flows seven times a day.
report these things in this sort of him. For in the oration entitled Consul,
the which he wrote of him, he extolleth him unto the skies, because that in
grauntinge every man free choice and liberty to profess this or that kind of
religion, he stopped the mouths of all flattering parasites and sycophants,
which kind of men (says he nyppinge wise) as it is known unto the whole
world, worship not the king of heaven, but the earthly crown and scepter,
much like unto Euripus carried headlong some times this way, some times that way.

CAP. XXII.
The death of Iouianus the Emperor.

THe Emperor when he had appeased the sedition of contentious persons, in such
sort as we have said before, removed with speed from Antioche, and got him
to Tarsus in Cilicia, where after the wonted solemnity of honorable funerals
he buried the corpse of Julian his predecessor, immediately after he is
proclaimed Co^sul. Thence he took his voyage toward Constantinople, and came
unto a place called Dedastana, lying in ye midst between Galatia and
Bithynia. There was he met of Themistius the philosopher, together with other
Senators and noble personages, who then pronounced before him his oration
entitled Consul. the which afterward also he uttered at Constantinople in the
hearing of the whole multitude. The empire Iouianus the Emperor departed this
life Anno Dom. 368.
of Rome had enjoyed great prosperity: the state of all people both high and
low: the ecclesiastical affairs of the church of God, by reason of so
virtuous an Emperor, had flourished exceedingly: had not death unlooked for,
pierced his breast with her poisoned dart, and deprived him of all his princely
joy: for he dyed in the aforesaid place in winter, of the longues being
stopped with deadly obstructions, the 17 of February: he him self together
with his son Varonianus being Consul. He was Emperor seven months, and
departed this life being three and thirty year old. This book compriseth
the space of two years and five months.

The end of the third book of Socrates.
THE FOVRTH BOOK OF THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORYE OF SOCRATES SCHOLASTICVS.
CAP. I.
How that after the death of Iouian, Valentinianus was chosen Emperor, who
joined with him his brother Valens. Valentinianus him self was a true
Catholic, but Valens was an Arian.

WHen Iouian the Emperor had run the race of his natural life, and departed
out The fourth book compriseth the history of 16. years. ending anno Dom.
381. Vale^tinianus created Emperor anno Dom. 368. Valens the Arian was fellow
Emperor with Valentinian. An. Do. 368.
of this world at Dadastana, (as we said before) the seuentienth of
February, being Consul him self together with Varonianus his son: the
soldiers which came from Gallatia the seventh day after, into Nicaea a city
of Bithynia, proclaimed with uniform consent and one voice Valentinianus for
their Emperor, the five and twenty of the said February, and in the
aforesaid Consulship. This Valentinian was by birth of Pannonia, and of the
city Cimale, who applyinge him self to feats of arms, proved both a
skillful and a valiant warryer. He was a man of a noble mind, and seemed
always to deserve far greater honor and dignity then he enjoyed. As soon
as he was created Emperor, he got him with all speed to Constantinople, and
thirty days after his coronation, he made his brother Valens fellow Emperor
with him. And though they were both Christians, yet did they disagree in
points of religion. Valentinian embraced the faith established by the Council
of Nice: but Valens after a certain toye conceived in his brains, cleaued
unto the Arian heresy, the which opinion took root in his breaste, by reason
he was baptized of Eudoxius the Arian bishop of Constantinople. They were both
earnest followers of the faith which they embraced, and being created
Emperors, the one was far unlike the other in condition and trade of life.
For though before that time under the raygne of Julian, the one being Tribune,
I mean Valentinian, the other being of the ordinary guard and daily about
the Emperor, I mean Valens, they both declared unto the world the zeal they
bare unto Christian religion (for being constrained to sacrifice, they chose
rather to flinge from them their sword gyrdels, then forsake the faith of
Christ, so that the Emperor Julian deposed nere another of them from their
dignities, no more he did not Iouian, who immediately succeeded him in the
Empire, perceauinge they were profitable members of the common wealth) yet
afterward having gotten the supremacy and the imperial scepter,
notwithstanding their diligence and care was alike in the administration of
the public weal at the beginning of their raygne, for all that toutchinge
the faith (as I said before) they varyed one from an other, and showed a
contrary and a diverse countenance unto the professors of Christian religion.
Valentinian as he honored and reverenced the favorers of his faith and
opinion: so he molested the Arians not at all: yet Valens endeavored not only
to increase the number of the Arians, but also (as hereafter shall more
manifestly Liberius. Athanasius. d^ucius. Euzoius. p^aulinus. Meletius.
Cyrillus. Eudoxius.
appear) grievously to persecute the contrary opinion. About that time
Liberius was bishop of Rome, and at Alexandria Athanasius was over the
congregations which addicted them selves unto the faith of One substance: but
over the Arians was Lucius, whom the heretics chose to their bishop
immediately after the desease of Georgius. The Arians inhabitinge Antioch had
Euzoius to their bishop. Such as maynetayned there also the faith of One
substance, were divided into two parts, over the one was Paulinus, over the
other Meletius. Cyrillus was then bishop of Jerusalem, and Eudoxius the Arian,
bishop of Constantinople. The defenders of the creed which contained the
clause of One substance, were feign to meet in a little chapel within the
said city, and there to celebrate their wonted solemnity. The sect of the
Macedonians which varied from the Acacians in Seleucia, enjoyed their churches
throughout every city. And thus went the affairs of the church in those days.

CAP. II.
When Valentinianus abode in the West, the Macedonians repaired unto Valens
at Constantinople and obtained of him to summone a council. How that Valens
being an Arian persecuted the true Christians.

THe Emperor Valentinian took his journey with all speed into the West,
whither he was constrained by reason of earnest business to remove. But Valens
as he remained at Constantinople was visited of the Bishops which were of the
sect of Macedonius, and requested to summone an other synod for the
establishing of the true faith. The emperor thinking verily they were of one
opinion with Acacius and Eudoxius, gave them license to call a council
together. They from every where cited the bishops to meet at Lampsacum. But
Valens with all celerity got him The council of Lampsacum gathered together
of Macedonian heretics.
to Antioch in Syria, fearing lest the Persians should break the league of
thirty years made in the raygne of Iouianus, and invade the Roman dominions,
where he found that the Persians were quiet and meant no harm. The Emperor
therefore living in peace and enjoying quietness raised great and grievous
persecution against them which embraced the faith of one substance. And
although he molested not Paulinus the Bishop, for his rare virtues and singular
gifts, yet banished he Meletius. but others of the Churches of Antioch that
would not communicate with Euzoius, he vexed diversely and plagued with sundry
penalties and punishments. It is reported moreover that he threw many into the
river Orontes which runs by the city, and there drowned them.

CAP. III.
While Valens the Emperor persecuted the true Christians in the East,
Procopius the tyrant rebelled at Constantinople, then also were seen great
earthquakes and ouerflowing of the sea which destroyed many cities.

WHen Valens exercised such practices in Syria, Procopius the tyrant rebelleth
at Constantinople. Anno Dom. 369.
Who when in short space he had gathered great power, marched forwards to give
battle unto the Emperor. Valens understanding of this, was in a sore taking,
and by reason of this stir his tyranny and cruelty rested a while from
persecuting. In the mean space Earthquakes
while y^ smoke of this tumult waxed hott, there rose upon a sudden a great
earthquake which scattered the building asunder and destroyed many cities.
Moreover the sea kept not with in his bounds, The sea ouerflowed.
brake over the banks and drowned the contries. for it fell out in many places,
that where a little before men went afoote, all then was aflote, botes, barks
and ships were used: again the sea went so far from it self in other places
that it left much dry land, much sandy ground, and many fishes to swim
without water. These things happened in the first consulship of these two
Emperors.

CAP. IIII.
In the troublesome state of the Church the Macedonian sect in the council of
Lampsacum ratified the creed of the council held at Antioch: accursed the
faith of the council summoned at Ariminum, and confirmed the deposition of
Acacius and Eudoxius.

IN the time of the aforesaid calamities, neither enjoyed the common weal
peace, neither were the ecelesiasticall affairs in prosperous estate. for such
as had procured license of y^ Emperor The council of Lampsacum held^ of
Macedonians 7. years after the council of Seleucia.
to summone a council met together at Lampsacum in the same Counsulship, that
is the seventh year after the council of Seleucia, and there after they had
confirmed afresh the form of faith which of old was published at Antioch,
(they had also a little before subscribed unto the same at Seleucia) they
accursed the creed of the Bishops which with uniform consent in religion they
had lately established at Ariminum. Again they gave sentence against Acacius
and Eudoxius, as of right deserving to be removed. Eudoxius Bishop of
Constantinople could in no wise resist their doings, the commotion and wars
then in hand raised by the tyrant Procopius, was a cause and let that he
could not revenge him of them. Wherefore Eleusius Bishop of Cyzicum having
gotten the upper hand, maintained for a while together with his accomplices the
Macedonian opinion, the which also a little before was disclosed and made more
manifest at the council of Lampsacum. I suppose verily the said council to
have been cause why Hellespontus (for Lampsacum is a town on the sea side of
Hellespontus toward Asia) is so full of the Macedonian heretics. The
aforesaid council was ended as you read before.

CAP. V.
How the Emperor and the rebel Procopius pitched their field by Nacolaea a
city of Phrygia. The rebel was betrayed by his own captains, and executed
together with them.

THe year following in the consulship of Gratianus and Dagalaephus the war
began. For Anno Dom. 370.
Procopius the tyrant left Constantinople and made expedition against the
Emperor: Valens understanding of it removed out of Antioch and with all speed
went to meet Procopius, joined with him at Nacolaea a city in Phrygia, and
there pitched the battle. In the first s kirmishe he had the worse, his ^ide
was the weaker, in a while after he took Procopius alive, for Angelo and
Gomarius his own captains had betrayed him, whom (I mean all three) he
executed Angelo and Gomarius the captalnes of Proco pius were sawed alsider
Procopius dies miserably.
with new and straung kinds of torments. The traitors for contemming their
allegiance and oath past between them, he sawed asunder in the midst. The
tyranes thighs he tied to the tops of mighty boughs growing not far
asunder, the which first of all with certain Engines he wrested to the
ground, afterward loosed them which lifted Procopius on high and pulled him
in pieces. The rebel being thus corn in two parts died miserably.

CAP. VI.
How the Emperor after his victory against Procopius went about to compel the
Macedonian council of Lampsacum and all Christians to the Arian opinion.

THe Emperor being puffed up with his prosperous and lucky successes, turned
himself again to molest and persecute the christians because he determined
with him self to prefer every where the Arian opinion. And first of all the
council held at La^psacum lay on his stomach not only because they deposed
the Arian Bishops and deprived them of their Churches, but also because they
accursed the form of faith lately established at Ariminum. Wherefore after his
coming unto Nicomedia a city of Bithynia he called before him Eleusius Bishop
of Cyzicum, who as I said before was of the Macedonian opinion. The Emperor
called together a council of Arian Bishops, and compelled Eleusius to
subscribe unto their faith. Who though at the first he denied utterly that he
would agree thereunto, yet afterward being fore threatened of the Emperor
with banishment and confiscation of all his substance, he yielded unto the Arian
opinion: Immediately after his subscription he was in a great agony and torment
of conscience: he returned thence to Cyzicum: In the face of the congregation
he made a pitiful complaint with relation of the injury which the Emperor
had done unto him: how he had condescended not with his will, but by compulsion
unto the Arian heresy: he requested they would get them an other bishop,
because that he was constrained to deny his own opinion, but the inhabiters of
Cyzicum for the great love and affection they bare toward him, neither would
acknowledge an other bishop over them, neither yield up the government of their
Church. Wherefore they both took him for their superior, and kept still their
former opinion.

CAP. VII.
How that Eunomius after the deposition of Eleusuis the Macedonian, was made
Bishop of Cyzicum. The original of Eunomius, and how that he being the scribe
of Actius the Atheist followed his stepps.

WHen the sormer deposition was heard of, the Bishop of Constantinople those
Eunomius to be Bishop of Cyzicum, who being an eloquent man, was thought able
with his gift of persuasion easily to induce them to embrace his opinion. After
that Eunomius was come thither, the Emperor sent his commandment that
Eleusius should be removed, and Eunomius placed in his rowme. Whereupon the
favorers of Eleusius builded them a church without the walls of the city, and
there had their private conuenticles. but of Eleusius so far. And ^nomius is
the ^be of Ae^s the he^ck.
now let us return unto Eunomius. This Eunomius was a scribe of Aetius, who
was surnamed the Atheist, of whom we spoke before. And living with this Aetius
he learned of him captious fallaces and quircks of Logic, the which Sophisters
do highly embrace and exercised him self therein continewally. Moreover he was
delighted with vain speeches and epithetons: he learned unadvisedly to frame
sophistical arguments: he took great pride therein and ran headlong into
open blaspemy. he embraced the heresy of Arius and impugned the truth in
Christ. And although he was in manner ignorant as toutching holy Scripture and
the understanding thereof: yet was he able to decline the words and vary the
phrase, but he could never attain unto the mark he shot at, as his seven
books of commentaries upon the epistle of S. Paul unto the Romans foolishly
written do declare. When he had uttered many dayne and frivolous expositions
of that epistle, his capacity could not comprise neither attain unto the drift
of the Apostle. There are extant certain other books of his not unlike the
former, the which if any be disposed to peruse, he shall find many words, but
little matter. It was this Eunomius that Eudoxius preferred to the bishopric
of Cyzicum. When as he after his wonted manner fedd the ears of his auditors
out of the pulpitt with sophistical arguments and reasons of Logic, he amazed
his auditory, so that thereupon there was raised a great tumult at Cyzicum. for
the citizens of Cyzicum when they could not away with his arrogant and insolent
manner of preaching, they banished him their city. Thence he got him to
Constantinople, lived with Eudoxius and played the Bishop no longer. Yet lest we
seem in the way of sclaunder only to report these things of him, let us
hear the blasphemous words of Eunomius him self, wherewith most impiously
after his Sophistical manner he derogated from the majesty of Almighty God. he
said as follows: God of his own essence understands no more The blasphe
mies of Eunomius the heretic.
then we do, neither is the same better known or understood of him then of
us: and whatsoever we know of it, the same knows he, and look what his
capacity reaches unto, the same thou shall find in us. These and many other
such lewd fallacies linked Eunomius together, but after what sort he fell
from the Arians, I will hereafter declare.

CAP. VIII.
Of the oracle that was found engraven in a stone, when the Emperor Valens
upon displeasure ouerthrewe the walls of Chalcedon.

THe Emperor upon displeasure gave commandment that the walls of Chalcedon
lying over against Byzantium should be overthrown. for he took an oath that
if he got the upper hand of Procopius the tyrant, he would do it because y^
citizens of Chalcedon took Procopius part and reviled him as he passed by the
walls of their city with spiteful and contumelious languages, and shutt up
their gates against him. so it fell out that the walls of the city by the
commandment of the Emperor were thrown down to the ground. the stones
there of were carried to the common baths at Constantinople called
Constantianae. In one of the said stones there was an oracle found engraven
the which of old lay in secret, and then first came to light. Whereby it
appeared that the walls should be taken to the use of the baths, when great
plenty of waters were seen in the city: and that when infinite of the
Barbarian nations invaded the Romayne dominions, they should wonderfully
molest the empire of Rome, and in the end be overthrown them selves, there is
no cause to the contrary but that the reader may have the oracle laid before
him.

When Nymphs with noise and royal feasts, when mirth in city raygnes An
oracle found engraven in a stone when the wall of Calcedon was the own down.

When walls with woe keep streamy bathes that boil up filth and staynes
A people strong in number great shall pass Danuby streams
Calliro eke, the Scythian ^se and Misian craggy realms
The Thracian banks with armor bright all covered men shall see
This nation fierce though armor fight in armor foyld shall be.
The oracle is in this sort. for not long after the conduyt which Valens made,
yielded great plenty of water unto the city of Constantinople: at the same time
also (as hereafter shall more manifestly appear) certain of the Barbarian
nations took armor against the empire of Rome. yet y^ oracle may otherwise be
understood. for Clearchus the Lieuetenant of the city after y^ conueyance of
the conduyt, made a great pipe in Theodosius market the which was called the
plentiful pipe, where also for joy thereof the city kept a solemn feast,
and this peradventure was it which the Oracle meant when he said:

When Nymphs with noise and royal feasts when mirth in city raygnes
When walls with woe keep streamy bathes that boil up filth and staynes.
But these circumstances and knowledge of the oracle fell out afterward. When
ye walls of Chalcedon were a throwing down, y^ citizens of Constantinople made
humble suit unto ye Emperor yt he would not so deface the city of Chalcedon.
y^ like did y^ Bithynians, Nicomedians and Nicaeans, who by chance then were
at Constantinople. but the emperor being thoroughly incensed against them,
took their suit in very ill part: and to the end he might keep his oath, he
commanded the wall should down and the foundation should be filled up with
little pelting stones, so that as yet there is to be seen in some places of the
wall, how sclender and what new building of no account was raised upon so
ancient and substantial a foundation. but of the walls of Chalcedon so much
shall suffice.

CAP. IX.
How the Emperor Valens persecuted the Nouations who embraced the clause of
one substance no less then the true Christians. How the Emperor Valentinianus
begat a son and called him after his own name, for his son Gratianus was
borne before Valentinianus enjoyed the empire.

THe Emperor moreover ceased not from persecuting such as embraced the creed
containing the clause of one substance, but banished them out of
Constantinople, and together with them the Nouatians who addicted them selves
unto the same opinion: their Church doors he commanded to be nailed up:
their Bishop Agelius a man that led a precise life, and ruled the Church even
from the reign of Constantine he exiled. This man all his life time went
barefoote and according unto the commandment of the Gospel, he had but one
coat. At that tune Martianus who sometime was a soldier in the Emperors
palace, a zealous and an eloquent man, appeased the displeasure of the
Emperor conceived against the Nouatians. He was then a Priest of the Nouatian
Church, and trained up Anastasia and Carosis the Emperors daughters in the
precepts of Grammar: in whose name the common bathes builded by Valens at
Constantinople were consecrated, the which as yet are there to be seen bearing
the name of the Emperors daughters. Wherefore by reason of his suit and
because of the reverend opinion which the Emperor conceived of this priest,
the Nouatian Churches being shutt up for a while, were set wide open and
frequented a new, yet were they not ridd of the Arians nor delivered from
their persecution. The Arians abhorred them because they loved entirely such as
embraced the faith of one substance. The state of the Ecclesiastical affairs
then was at this point. This one thing we may not leave vntoutched, how the
battle between the Emperor and Procopius the tyrant was fought about the
latter end of May. in the consulship of Gratianus and Dagalephus. In a while
after the said battle, the aforesaid men being Consulls, the Emperor
Valentinianus had a son borne him in the West, whom he called after his own
name, for his son Gratianus was borne before he was crowned Emperor.

CAP. X.
Of the great hayle that fell at Constantinople, and the earthquakes which
happened in Bithynia and Hellespontus.

THe year following in the Consulship of Lucinus and Iouianus, the second of
Iulie, hayle of Great hail.
a wonderful bigness, like unto stones lighted at Constantinople. It is rise in
every man's mouth that God sent that great hayle in token of his displeasure
against the Emperor, for banishing many Priests and Bishops which refused to
communicate with Eudoxius the Arian. Not long after in the aforesaid
consulship, the four and twentieth of August, Valentinianus created his son
Gratianus Emperor. The year following, being the second Consulship of
Valentinianus Terrible earthquakes.
and Valens, the eleventh of Octobre, there was in Bithynia a great earthquake
which ouerthrewe the city of Nice. It was the twelf year after the ruin of
Nicomedia. Immediately after many pieces of Germa, a city in Hellespontus were
turned vpside down with an other earthquake. for all these dreadful sights were
beheld in the open face of the world, the lewd disposition of Eudoxius the
Arian Bishop, and the perverted mind of the Emperor Valens was nothing moved
to incline unto piety and right reformation of true religion. for they observed
no mean but furiously raged against all such as held the contrary faith and
opinion. These earthquakes were no otherwise to be taken then for manifest
tokens of the schism and tumults then raised in y^ church. And though many of
the priestly order were deprived of their dignities, yet of all the rest
Basilius Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia, and Gregorius Bishop of a small and
mean city bordering upon Caesarea, by the providence of God for their great
piety were not banished their native soil. Of whom I shall have occasion
hereafter to discourse more at large.

CAP. XI.
How the sect of Macedonius being put to their shifts by reason of the
Emperors displeasure, sent their letters unto Liberius Bishop of Rome, where
they subscribed unto the faith of one substance.

WHen as at that time such as cleaued steadfastly unto the clause of one
substance being the true Christians, were vexed above measure: the Macedonians
also were pursued of the wicked and godless persecutors. These men partly for
fear and partly for their faith being brought to their wits end, wrote
letters and sent messengers from their bishoprics one unto the other,
signifying that of necessity they must fly for refuge both unto the Emperors
brother and to Liberius Bishop of Rome, and subscribe rather unto their faith
then condescende to communicate with Eudoxius the Arian. Wherefore they send
Eustathius Bishop of Sebastia, one that had been often times deposed: Siluanus
Bishop of Tarsus in Cilicia, and Theophilus Bishop of Castabala a city
likewise of Cilicia: these men are charged not to disagree as toutching the
faith with Liberius, but to communicate with the Church of Rome and to ratify
by their subscriptions the faith of one substance. When these men had received
their letters which impugned the faith at Seleucia, in all the have they post
to old Rome. They show not them selves unto the Emperor (for he was in
France, busily occupying him self about the battle against the Sarmatians)
but deliver their letters unto Liberius. Liberius refuses to give their
letters the reading, he told them they were Arians and therefore in no wise to
be entertained of the Church, because they had abrogated the creed of the
Nicene council. Unto whom they make answer that his words were true, yet
that they repented them afterward of their folly: that they acknowledge the
truth: that of late they had condemned the opinion which affirms the son
to be unlike the father: that they confessed the son in all things and in
all respects to be like the father, and that the clause of likeness differed
nothing from the sense of one substance. When they had made this protestation
by word of mouth, he requires them to do the same in writing. They immediately
exhibit unto him a supplication where in the form of faith published and
established by the council of Nice was comprised. And lest that I seem
ouertedious unto the reader, my purpose is to omit the letters they wrote from
one company to an other, namely from Smyrna in Asia, from Pisidia, Isauria,
Pamphilia and Lycia: only here to lay down the supplication which Eustathius
sent from his lodging unto Liberius, it was written as follows:

Unto their Lord and brother their fellow minister Liberius, Eustathius,
Theophilus and Syluanus send greeting in the Lord.
To the end we may remove all suspicion of heresy and partaking with sects
whatsoever, The heretical Bishops of Macedonius sect, now do recant and
exhibit this supplica tion unto Liberius bishop of Ro^e.
which heretofore have molested the quiet estate of the catholic church:
presently we do allow of the synods and assemblies of bishops which met at
Lampsacum and Smyrna, and at sundry other places maintaining the right and
sound faith. that these our words may seem for no other the^ our true meaning,
we are legates and have brought letters unto your holiness, unto all the bishops
of Italy and to the other churches whatsoever of the west country, whereby it
shall manifestly appear that we are of the Catholic faith: that we defend
the sacred Canons of the Nicene council established in the happy raygne of the
holy Emperor Constantine by three hundred and eyghteene Bishops, the which
unto this day have been continewally observed and vnuiolably retained: where
the clause of one substance was godly enterlaced to the overthrow of the
poisoned opinion of Arius. for by subscribing with our own hands we do
plainly protest that we are of no other opinion then these fathers were of: but
that heretofore and presently also we embrace the same faith with them and mind
firmly to continue therein unto our last hour. Moreover we condemn Arius, his
detestable opinion, his disciples, his accomplices: the whole heresy of
Sabellius, all the Patropassians, Marcionists, Photinians, Marcellia^s, and to
be short the wicked sect of Paulus Samosatenus. We pronounce these men's
doctrine for accursed together with all that hold with them, all heresies like
wise which are contrary unto the aforesaid sacred faith, generally and godly
framed by those holy fathers assembled in the city of Nice. We accurse also
the form of faith that was repeated at the council of Ariminum, partly for
that it repugneth the Nicene Creed, and partly for that diverse were
fraudulently brought to subscribe unto the same at Constantinople, through
vviles and perjury mistaking the title, for they took Nice a city of Thracia,
for Nice in Bithynia. The belief and faith we are of, and of them likewise
whose legates we are, is as follows: We believe in one God the father
almighty, maker of all things visible and invisible, The Nicene Creed.
and in one only begotten God our Lord Jesus Christ the son of God,
begotten of the father, that is of the substance of the father: God of God,
light of light: very God of very God begotten not made: being of one substance
with the father by whom all things were made, either in heaven or in earth, who
for us men and for our salvation came down from heaven, was incarnate and made
man, he suffered and rose again the third day, he ascended into heaven and
shall come again to judge both the quick and the dead. And we believe in the
holy Ghost. such as say there was a time when he was not: or that he was not
before his incarnation: or that he has his being of nothing: or that he
consists of any other essence or substance then of the fathers: or that the
son of God is conuertible and mutable, them I say* the holy and Catholic
Church under heaven does hold for accursed. I Eustathius bishop of Sebastia,
Theophilus and Siluanus legates of the counsels of Lampsacum, Smyrna, with
others, have voluntarily with our own proper hands subscribed unto all the
premises and to every parcel within comprised. If any man after this our
protestation commense any suit or accuse either us or them which sent us, let
him come with your holiness letters unto some of the catholic Bishops whom
you think best, and there plead with us in their presence and so let the
punishment light upon his head that is faulty.


Liberius having bound the legates with the subscription of their own hands,
received them into the communion, gave them these letters following and sent
them away.

The epistle of Liberius Bishop of Rome, unto the Bishops of the Macedonian
Cap. 11 in the Greek.
sect inhabiting the East contries.
Unto our well-beloved brethren and fellow bishops Hythius, Cyrillus,
Hyperechius, Vranius, Heron, Elpidius, Maximus, Eusebius, Eucarpius, Heortasius
etc. unto all the Catholic bishops of the East churches: Liberius Bishop of
Italy together with other Bishops of the West send greeting always in the
Lord. Your letters (well-beloved brethren and me^ that are bedecked with the
bright beams of faith) we have received by the reverend brethren and bishops
Eustathius, Siluanus and Theophilus, containing quietness and concord of the
catholic church, which confirmed in us fully out desired joy and gladness. And
first of all because that thereby we perceived your faith and opinion to be in
all points agreeable both with mine which am the meanest of you all, with the
other bishops of Italy and the rest of the west contreyes: nay not only this
but also your legates have confirmed it with the testimony of their own hands.
This Catholic and Apostolic faith we do acknowledge which from the council
of Nice hitherto has firmly and vnuiolably continewed. This was the faith
that your legates protested: in this faith with notable courage they have
accursed all the crooked steps of cankred opinions, and quenched all the fiery
sparcles that slashed thereof. This faith not only by preaching unto the
people but also by penning of it in paper they have published unto the world.
The copy whereof we thought good to annexe unto these letters, lest the
heretics find means hereby to cavil: even as some heretofore have gotten
lighter occasion then this to leueale at the church of God the darts of their
dispiteful mind and the flaming firebrands of contention for our most
reverend brethren Eustathius, Siluanus and Theophilus confess the same, and
withal them selves, together with your fatherhoode, to have been ever of this
faith, and now with free purpose to continewe firm in the same unto the last
hour: that in the faith which was approved of three hundredth and eyghteene
Catholic Bishops assembled in the city of Nice: which contains the absolute
and perfect truth: which stops the mouths of heretics and utterly
overthrows their counterfeit doctrine. Neither came it to pass by happ
hazard that so great a heap and multitude of bishops met together: for it was
the will and providence of Almighty God that assembled them to the suppression
of the fury and rage of the heretic Arius. It was with the same number that
blessed Abraham overcame through faith Genesis 14.
so many millions of me^. The which faith being comprised in the force and
virtue of one substance, is so firm and invincible a bulwark that it foyleth
all the sleights and crafty invention of the Arian heresy. And although the
cursed and abominable Arians caused all bishops from every where to assemble at
Ariminum, to the end that either through persvvasion or rather (to tell the
truth) by the commandment of the Emperor, that which was the principal
point of the creed might by them be blotted out, or at least wise levvdly
perverted: yet for all their spiteful devises, they prevailed not. For all the
Bishops in manner which met at Ariminum, and were either The council of
Ariminu^ recanteth and accurseth Arius.
allured by their fradulent enticements, or compelled by force, and so fell at
that time from the faith: now having remembered them selves better, accursed
the faith set forth by the Bishops at Ariminum: ratified by subscription the
Catholic and Apostolic faith confirmed by the bishops of the Nicene council,
and now they communicate together with us: once I say again all they
presently are earnest and zealously bent against the heretical opinion of
Arius and his followers. The which thing when your legates had thoroughly
examined and deeply vveyed with them selves, they freely subscribed in your
names, and accursed Arius together with the canons concluded upon at Ariminum
contrary unto the Nicene faith, unto the which sometimes you your selves being
trained through fraud and vviles have by oath subscribed. Wherefore it seemed
good unto us to write unto your loving brotherhoode and to asist you in such
reasonable requests: especially seeing we are given to understand by the
protestation of your legates that the bishops of the cast are now come into the
right way and embrace one faith together with the Catholic Bishops of the
west. Neither would we have you ignorant that they who sometime were
craftily and violently drawn from the truth to establish the blasphemous
decrees against the majesty of the son of God at the council of Ariminum:
now have wholy and unfeignedly condemned the same, and with uniform consent
of them all to have embraced the Nicene creed. Moreover you have to certify
all men by your letters, that they which heretofore vnvvittingly svvarued from
the faith and now wander in the wast desert and dark miste of heresy may at
length return unto the bright and celestial beams of christian liberty
shining in the world to the comfort of their souls. All which let them
know for suertie that if they will not after this damnable council purge
them selves and vomit out the deadly poison of this detestable doctrine: if
they will not remove from among them all the blasphemies of Arius: if they will
not abhor him from the heart root and accurse him for ever: that they them
selves are cut of and excommunicated from the communion of the faithful as
aliens and forayners, (for the Church norisheth no bastards) together with
Arius and his disciples, and all such vipers brood as the Sabellians,
Patropassians and all other heretical opinions whatsoever. God have you in his
tuition well-beloved brethren.


The legates of Eustathius company having gotten these letters took their
journey into Sicilia: where after that The council of Sicilia.
a synod of Sicilian bishops was called together, they protested in like sort
before them y^ they embraced y^ faith of one substance: there also they ratify
the form of faith established by the council of Nice. When they had also
procured these bishops letters toutching the same matter together with the
epistle of Liberius unto y^ east churches, straight way they return home. The
eastern bishops after the receat of Liberius epistle, sent legates into every
city of them which defended the faith of one substance, requesting them with
one consent to assemble at Tarsus in Cilicia: partly for to ratify the Nicene
creed, and partly for to remove all schism and contention raised in the
Church since that time. The which peradventure had been done, if that Eudoxius
the Arian Bishop who was in great favor with the Emperor had not withstoode
it: who also for the summoning thereof was wonderfully incensed, so that
afterward he diversely vexed them. Sabinus also in his book entitled the
collection of the counsels, reports in like sort that the Macedonians
communicated by their legates with Liberius, and ratified the Nicene Creed.

CAP. XII. Cap. 13. in the Greek.

How Eunomius the heretic fell from Eudoxius the Arian: how by the procurement
of Eudoxius, Athanasius was feign to sly and to hide him self, so that there
rose a great tumult, and to appease the same, the Emperor wrote lovingly unto
the people of Alexandria, and commanded that Athanasius should quietly enjoy
his bishopric.

ABout that time Eunomius divided him self from Eudoxius, and raised several
conuenticles: The one heretic fallen out with the other.
because that after he had made long and tedious suit unto Eudoxius in the
behalf of his master Aetius, he would not receive him into the Church.
Neither did Eudoxius that of him self (for he misliked not at all with the
opinion of Aetius, in so much that his own differed not from his) but all the
whole faction of Eudoxius abhorred Aetius for one that was of a contrary
opinion unto them. It is known very well that this was the cause which moved
Eunomius to disagree and vary from Eudoxius, for we learned of a truth these
things to have thus fallen out at Constantinople. But at Alexandria the writ
that was sent thither by the governors, through the procurement of Eudoxius
molested wonderfully the quiet estate of the Church. Athanasius mistrusting the
heady and rash motion of the common people, fearing if any mischief were
wrought by them that it would be laid to his charge: hid him self in his
fathers priuey closset, the full space of four months. The Emperor hearing
that the people was all on an uproar at the departure of Athanasius, for the
love and longing they did for him, was wonderfully incensed and signified unto
the people of Alexandria by his letters that his pleasure was that Athanasius
should quietly as they wished them selves enjoy the bishopric. by this means
it came to pass that the Church of Alexandria had peace and tranquillity unto
the death of Athanasius. but how the Arians possessed that Church after his
death we will hereafter declare.

CAP. XIII. Cap. 14. in the Greek.

How that after the death of Eudoxius, the Arians chose Demophilus bishop of
Constantinople: the Catholics chose Euagrius whom Eustathius Bishop of
Antioch did consecrate, but by the commandment of the Emperor Valens they
were both exiled* so that afterward the true Christians were wonderfully
afflicted. Of the fourscore priests that were burned in the ship, and the
great famine that fell in Phrygia.

THe Emperor Valens hastening again to Antioch left Constantinople and
coming to Nicomedia in Bithynia, was feign to make there his abode for a
while, the cause was as follows. Eudoxius the Arian Bishop having enjoyed the
bishopric of Constantinople the space of nyneteene years departed this life
immediately after the emperors removing out of the city, in the third
Consulship of Valentinianus and Valens. Wherefore the Arians placed Demophilus
in his rowme. but such as embraced the faith of one substance, supposing now
they had got fit opportunity, chose Euagrius a man of their own opinion. He
was consecrated bishop by Eustathius, who of old had been bishop of Antioch,
and then lately had been by Iouianus called home from exile and at that time by
chance remained (though in secret) at Constantinople for to confirm such as
were of the faith of one substance. Cap. 15. in the greek.
This being done the Arians begone again with furious motion to persecute the
faithful christians, so that tidings thereof came quickly to the Emperors
ears* he fearing greatly lest the seditious tumult of the vulgar sort should
overthrow the city, sent out of Nicomedia into Constantinople great power of
armed soldiers: and commanded withal that both the consecrator and the
consecrated bishop should be banished one to one place, the other into an
other country. Wherefore Eustathius was exiled into Bizya a city of Thracia,
and Euagrius was conveyed into an other city. When the world favored the Arians
in this sort, they set up them selves, they crowed insolently over the true
christians, they scurged, reviled, imprisoned, mearced they laid upon them all
the grievous and intolerable burdens they could devise. The true Christians
being thus oppressed with extreme dealing, went unto the Emperor, besought
most humbly of him, that if not altogether yet at least wise he would ease
them of some part of their troubles: but where they thought to have found
favor, there were they foully deceived, insomuch they hoped to obtain justice
at his hands which was their deadly foe and the cause of all their woeful
calamity. Cap. 16. in the Greek.
For when as those godly and religious men of the priestly order being in
number fourscore and sent in the name of all the rest into Nicomedia, (namely
as the most famous, Vrbanus, Theodorus, and Menedemus) made supplication unto
the Emperor, opened unto him their grief, certified him of the injuries they
sustained at the hands of the Arians: he although he was then wonderfully
incensed against them, yet concealed his displeasure until that privily he had
commanded his Lieuetenant Modestus to lay them in hold, and punish them with
death. The kind of death insomuch it was new and strange, I think best to
paint it forth in paper to the knowledge of the posterity in time to come. The
Lieuetenant fearing greatly lest if he would execute them in the open face of
the Citizens, the common people would be on an uproar and set upon him: made
them believe that he would banishe them the contreye. They took the threats of
exile in good part. The Lieuetenant commanded them to hasten unto the rode, to
go on board, and take shipping as if they were to be conveyed into foreyne and
far contreyes: yet charged he the maryners, then when as they came into the
main seae they should set the ship afire, so that dying ^ourescore ^ue
christians ^ere se^^ in a ship and fired by commandment of Valens the Arian
Emperor.
in that sort they should have none for to bury them. And so they did. For
immediately after their coming unto the Astacen seae, they conveyed them selves
into a cockeboate, fired the ship and returned home. There rose by chance a
mighty Eastern wind which drove the ship with violence, swiftely for to
sulcate the seas and continewed so long until she arrived at the haven called
Dacidizus: where in the end together with those godly men she was utterly
consumed to ashes* Yet the report goes, and rife it is in every man's mouth
that this cruel and horrible act was not long after unrevenged. For
immediately all Phrygia was plagued with a sore and a lamentable famine: so that
many of the inhabitants of that country were constrained of necessity to
fly unto Constantinople and to other provinces for necessary food. The city
of Constantinople though it find and relieve an infinite multitude of me^, yet
there is great plenty and abundance of all things partly by reason that all
necessaries are carried thither by seae, and partly also that Euxinus is so
nighe and conueyeth thither great store of grain.

CAP. XIIII. Cap. 17. in the greek.

How the Emperor went to Antioch and persecuted all them that professed the
faith of one substance: of his doings at Edessa and the great constancy of a
Christianwoman.

THe Emperor Valens weyed not at all this grievous famine, went forth on his
journey to Antioch: and continewing there pursued with deadly hatred such as
detested the Arian opinion. He deposed of their churches for no other crime
then because they were enemies unto y^ Arians, all that embraced the faith of
one substance, not only throughout all the Eastern parts of the world: but
also not satisfied with this punishemente, tormented them with diverse grievous
devises and executed a far greater number then we spoke of before, with
sundry kinds of death but specially with drowninge of them in the surginge
waves of the sea. Cap. 18* in the Greek.
Furthermore let us here call to remembrance, the horrible Act committed by
him at Edessa a city in Mesopotamia. There I mean in that city there is a
goodly and a gorgeous temple called Saint Thomas the Apostles, where infinite
troops of men for y^ reverent opinion conceived of the holy place are wont to
frequent. Valens being desirous to see it, although he knew full well that all
those flockinge assemblies detested his heretical opinion: as the report
goes, gave the Liuetenant a blow with his fist because he had not scattered
those conuenticles as he had charged him before. When the Liuetenant for all
this grievous contu^ely framed himself with unwilling mind to obey the
Emperors wrath and displeasure: gave notice privily hereof unto them (it was
far from his mind to fall a murdering of so many godly citizens) that none
should show his face in the temple that none should be found raising of any
conuenticle: but not one made account of his advise nether weyed of his
threats, for the day followinge all flocked in great companies to the temple.
And while the Liuetenant hastened with great power of armed souldieres unto
the temple, to the end he might delay the boiling heat of the Emperors
stomach which breathed out anger and displeasure: a simple woman leadinge a
child in her hand all in have brake the raye and thrust her self in the
throng of armed soldiers to pass on her voyage. The Liuetenant being moved
therewith calls the woman before him, reasons with her in this sort: thou
fond and unfortunate woman, whether runnest thou so rashly? thither (said she)
where others do hasten. Have not thou heard (says he) that the Liuetenant
will execute as many as he finds there? I heard it (said she) Rustinus
reports this story lib. 2. cap. 5. eccles. hist.
and therefore I go thither in all the have that I may be found there. But
whither (said he) leadest thou this child? that he also (said she) may be
accounted in the number of Martyrs. When the Liuetenant heard this he
coniectured thereafter of the rest. Thereupon he got him unto the Emperor, and
gives him to understand that all from the highest unto the lowest prepared
them selves to die in the quarrel and in defense of their faith: he aded
moreover that it was very rash and without all reason that so great a
multitude in so short a space should so soddainely be executed, in so saying
he fell a persuading of the Emperor so long until that his words prevailed,
and the Emperor was with reason appeased. Thus the Edessaeans avoided the
overthrow pretended of the Emperor toward them.

CAP. XV.
How the Emperor Valens put many to death whose names began with TH, Ca.
19. in the Greek.
by reason of certain Necromancie whereunto he gave some credit.

ABout that time a certain pestilent spirit used the tyrannical crueltye of
the Emperor to yt satisfieng of his deuelish lust and pleasing mind. For he
allured certain fond and curious kind of people to search and sift out by
Necromancie who should succeed Valens in the Empire. The deuell after his
wonted guise gave no perfect and plain but a very dark and doubtful answer
unto the coniurers, that his name began of four letters Th, E, O, D, which
should succeed Vale^s in the Empire, and that his name was compound. The fame
thereof was spread so far that it came to the Emperors ears. He as it fell
out neither attributed casualties, neither referred the knowledge of things to
come, neither admitted y^ bestowing of scepters to lie in y^ power of God whose
providence rules all things: but laying aside the principles of Christian
religion the which colorably he pretended, executed diverse whom he suspected
after him should enjoy y^ Emperial scepter. So yt he dispatched out of the way
as many as were called Theodorus, Theodotus, Theodosius, Theodulus, or after
any such like names. Of which number was Theodosiolus a noble man, y^ son of
a Senator, being brought unto Valens from Spain, who lost his head. Many for
fear changed their names which their parents had given them at their coming
into y^ world and denied themselves and their own names being in great peril
and danger of their lives. But of this matter thus much shall suffice.

CAP. XVI.
After the desease of Athanasius, Peter became his successor: but the Arians
Cap. 20. in the greek.
by the commandment of the Emperor clapte Peter in prison, and placed Lucius
in the Bishopric.

HEre we have to learn that while Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria lived, the
Emperor through the providence of God tempered himself from troubling of
Alexandria and Aegipt, because he understood yt there was a great multitude
which would live and die with Athanasius: and therefore he feared if Alexandria
were set on anvprore (for it is a hot and a hasty kind of people) lest the
common weal should thereby greatly be annoyed. Athanasius in y^ end after many
skirmishes Athanasius died Anno Dom. 375.
endured in the quarrel of the church: after he had been bishop six and forty
years not without great hazard of his life, departed out of this world in the
Consulship of Probus and the second of Gratianus and left behind him Peter a
godly and a zealous man to succeed him. Cap 21. in the Greek. Peter b. of
Alexandria.
Immediately the Arians set up themselves, they brag and boast of the Emperors
religion, and in all the have they certify the Emperor who then continewed at
Antioch of Athanasius death. Euzoius also the Arian being then at Antioch,
determined with himself by reason of the opportunity of the time, in all the
have to ride into Alexandria, for to confirm Lucius y^ Arian in the
Bishopric. The same likewise seemed good unto y^ Emperor. Wherefore he
prepares himself and takes his voyage into Alexandria together with great
power from the Emperor. There accompanied him Magnus the Emperors treasorer.
The Emperor sent with him a commandment unto Palladius Liuetenant of
Alexandria, that he should aid the enterprise of Euzoius with armed soldiers.
Being come to Alexandria they lay hand on Peter and clap him in prison: the
rest of the clergy they banished some unto one place, some unto an other: but
Lucius they stalled Bishop.

CAP. XVII.
How Sabinus the Macedonian made no mention of the mischiefs committed by
Lucius the Arian: how Peter Bishop of Alexandria sled unto Damasus Bishop of
Rome and saved his life: of the cruelty which the Arians exercised Cap 22. in
the Greek.
upon the worshippers which lived in the desert.

ALthough Sabinus being half an Arian and therefore a concealer of the
heinous faltes of his friends, made no mention of the horrible Acts committed
immediately after the stallinge of Lucius in y^ Bishops seae of Alexandria
against such as inhabited the rest of Egypt, by imprisonning of some,
torme^ting of others, exiling of yt rest: yet Peter after he had escaped out of
prison, signified how great they were by his epistles written unto all the
Christian churches under heaven. Who as soon as he got out of prison, fled
unto Damasus bishop of Rome. Wherefore the Arians though they were few in
number yet favored the world the^ so much, that they held all the churches of
Alexandria. Not long after y^ Emperors edict was proclaimed, by virtue of y^
which as many as held the faith of One substance were banished not only
Alexandria, but all Egypt. Moreover y^ Liuetenant was commanded to pursue with
power of armed soldiers all such as Lucius should appoint him. The^ were the
religious houses in the desert and wilderness, spoiled, overthrown and without
all compassion turned down to the ground. For the armed soldiers set upon
these seely and unarmed souls which stretched not out as much as the naked
hand to their own defense: they were miserably slain, y^ manner of the
slaughter was so lamentable yt it can not sufficiently he painted unto the
world by pen and written paper.

CAP. XVIII. Cap. 23. in the Greek.

Of Ammon the monk and diverse religious men inhabiting the desert.

IN so much that we have made mention of the monasteries in Egypt, there is
no cause to the contrary but that we may discourse somewhat thereof. The
places commonly called religious houses, though peradventure the original of
them was many years before: yet were they very much augmented and amplified by
Ammon an holy man. Who though in the prime of his flourishing Ammon a Monk yet
married.
youth he disdained of wedlock: yet at the entreaty and earnest request of his
dear friends which exhorted him not to inuey so bitterly against mariadge but
to take a wife, he yielded unto the^ and was married. Immediately he led the new
married spouse by the hand out of the parlour, with the wo^ted pomp and
sollemnity, into the wedding and ved chamber: when their friends were gone he
took the new testament in his hand: read the epistle of Saynct Paul unto the
Corinthia^s: expounded unto his wife out of the Apostle such doctrine as
concerned wedlock: interlaced many other exhortations borrowed out of other
writers: laid before her the disco^modities of mariadge how heuye a case was
the company of man and wife together, what bitter panges and griping griefs
women great with child have at the deliverance of their burden. He added
moreover unto these the care and sorrow incident to the education and bringing
up of children: last of all he rehearsed the virtues and commodities annexed
unto virginity: how the pure life, the undefiled and vnstaunched vessel was
free from all the aforsayd annoyance and cumbrances: and that virginity
commended us highly and presented us next unto God. When he had used these and
the like reasons with his wife as yet being a virgin: they prevailed so much
yt she was persuaded before their coming together to forget the wonted
familiarity of man and wife. wherefore both they having concluded among
themselves toutching the premises, got the^ immediately unto the mount Nitria,
where for a season they led a monastical life in a blind cottage, without
respect of sex, not thinkinge either on man or wife, for they were as the
Apostle says, one body in Christ. In a while after the new married spouse, the
undefiled virgin reasons thus with Ammon. It becomes not you in so much you
have vowed te^perancie and chastity to have a woman in your sight in so narrow
and straict a rowine. Wherefore if you think my advise any thing to yt
furtherance of co^tinency and virtuous life, let us both severally lead
solitary and monastical lives. Thus they agreed among themselves, they parted
a sunder one from the other and so spent out their days, both abstained from
wine and oil, their food was dry bread, they fasted sometimes one whole day,
sometimes two, some other times more. Antonie who lived in those days Antonie.
(as Athanasius bishop of Alexandria writes in his life) saw the soul of
Ammon after his desease carried up of the Angels into heaven. Wherefore many
became earnest and zealous followers of Ammons trade of life: so that y^ mount
Nitria and Scitis were full of religious me^, whose lives severally to pen
would require a peculier volume. But in so much there were of the^ many
singular and rare men, renowned for their monastical discipline and partly
also for their Apostolic trade of life, famous also for many notable acts and
sage sentences worthy of immortal memory: It shall not be amiss in my opinion
to cut out and here lay down diverse things, which may seem commodious for the
profit of y^ studious readers. The report goes that Ammon never beheld his
naked body: and yt he was wo^t to say: that it was a shameful thing in a monk
to delight himself with the sight of his bare skin. Of y^ same man it is
reported y^ goinge about by chance to pass over a river, and very loath to
shift himself, to have prayed unto God yt he might not be foiled neither
hindered of his Didymus.
enterprise: an Angel to have come and conveyed him over unto y^ further bank.
Didymus also an other monk having lived fourscore and ten year is said in
all yt space, never to have kept company Arsenius.
with man. Arsenius of the same vocation was never wont to excommunicat y^
younger sort when they had offended, but such as profited very much in ye
monastical discipline. his reason was this: A yo^g man when he is chasticed
(says he) with excommunication, forthwith he will disdain and take the matter
in a snuff: but he that profits will quickly perceive the grief and be sore
pricked with punishment. Pior as he walked was wont to eat, and being
demanded, why he did so? made this Pior.
answer: that he took not feeding for a several work but as an od or
superfluous thing. Unto an other that asked of him the like, he gave this
answer: My behavior is as you see, lest the mind by pamperinge of the
carcass, be pufte up with fleshelye pleasure. Isidorus affirmed that for
Isidorus.
the space of forty years, his mind had not consented to sin, that he had
never yielded to fleshly lust, or furiouse anger. Pambo a simple and an
unlearned man, came unto his friend for to Pambo.
learn a Psalm, and hearing the first verse of the thirtieth and eight
Psalm, which is thus read: I said I will take heed unto my vvayes, that I
offend not in my tongue, would not Psalm. 38.
hear the second, but went away saying: This one verse is inoughe for me
if I learn it as I ought to do. And when as his teacher blamed him, for
absentinge himself wholle six months, he answered for himself, that as yet
he had not well learned the first verse. Many years after that, when as one
of his acquayntance demanded of him, whether he had learned the verse: said
again: that in nyneteene years he had scarce learned in life to fulfill that
one line. The same man when as one delivered him money to the relief of the
poor, and said tell the sum: made answer: we need no counters but a sound
mind and a settled conscience. The report goes that at the request of
Athanasius the Bishop he came from the deserte into Alexandria, and seeing there
a certain light woman, sumpteously attyred and gorgeously arrayed to feed the
eyes of fond people, to have burst out into tears. And being demanded what
the cause was and wherefore he wept, to have answered, that two things moved
him to lamente very sore. One was that he saw the gaye and painted woman to
run headlonge into destruction: the other was that he was not so careful and
earnest in pleasinge of God, as she busied to bayte and entrappe men, already
burdened with sin and iniquity. An other said: the monk that lived The
idle Monk is a thief. Petirus.
idly and labored not for his living, was no otherwise to be taken them for
a thief, a roge, or a vagabounde. Petirus a man of great skill in
metaphysicall and divine contemplation gave out one precept or other
continewally unto such as co^ferred with him, his manner was to conclude every
sentence with a prayer. Among the aforesaid religious men of that time there
were two of equal fame, and renown, of like piety and virtue, of one name and
appellation, either was called Macarius, the one of the upper part of Egypt,
the other of Alexandria it self: both flourished 2. Macarius.
and excelled in many things, as monastical discipline, institution of godly
life, right conversation, and strange miracles. The Egyptian Macarius cured
so many men, cast out so many Deuells out of such as were possessed of them,
that all the wonderful acts he wroughte, desire a peculier volume. He mingled
austere severity, with temperate reverence and gravity toward them which
reasoned or dealt with him. The Alexandrian Macarius although in all other
things he fully resembled him, yet in this one point was he far from his
disposition, for he behaved him self cheerful and pleasant toward all
them that talked with him, so that with his courteous civility, and comely
mirth he allured many young men unto the monastical trade of living. Euagrius
was a disciple of theyrs, who at the first was a Philosopher in word, but
afterward in deed Euagrius.
and truth it self. This man was first made deacon at Constantinople by
Gregory Nazia^zen: thence together with him he went into Aegipt and there had
conference with the aforesaid religious men: he became an earnest follower of
their trade of life, and wrought as many miracles as both the Macariuses
before him. He wrote learned books, one entitled: the monk, or of that trade
of life which consists of practice, an other called Gnosticus of science or
knowledge, divided into fifty chapiters, a third Antirreticus, that is a
confutation collected out of holy Scripture against the temptation of Deuells,
divided into eight parts, resemblinge very fitly the number of the eight
devises or imaginations of ma^s mind. moreover he wrote six hundredth problemes
to the understanding of things to come. Unto these are added two books
inverse, one unto the mo^ks inhabiting the monasteries and public assemblies:
the other unto him that leads a virgin life, what singular books these are,
I referr it unto y^ judgment of the reader. Yet opportunity serves in my
opinion presently to allege here some part out of his book called the monk
and to link it with this our history, for thus he writes: The institution and
trade of life, laid down by the monks Euagrius in ^is book ^^titled the
Monk.
of old is necessarily to be known of us, and furthermore we have to direct
our ways thereafter. For they uttered many sage sentences, and did many
notable and worthy acts. Of which number one said that a dry and spare kind
of diette, at all times precisely kept, (mingling brotherly charity and love
vvithall) would quickly purge man's mind, of all perturbation and fond humor
of humane and earthly affection. The same man delivered a certain brother that
was wonderfully tormented in the night season with spirits, for he charged him
alvvayes with devotion to minister unto the poor fasting Being demanded
why: there is no way (says he) to quench the fiery heat of perturbation as
soon as by alms and charity. One of them which at that time were called
wise, came unto Antonie the just, and reasoned with him, saying O father how
can you prolong your days, being bereaved of that solace and comfort which is
by reading of books, and perusing of holy writers? My book o philosopher
(said Antonie) is the co^templation Antonie.
of all the creatures under heaven, in the which as often as I am disposed, I
may read the wonderful works and writings of God. The old Egyptian
Macarius, the chosen vessel, demanded Macarius.
of me the reason why, when we remember the injuries that men do unto us, we
do weaken the seat of memory ingraffed in the mind: when as we call to
remembrance such spite as the deuell owes us, the memory takes no hurt? and
when I muzed what to answer, and requested him to resolve me the doubt, he
said: that the former perturbation was contrary to nature, the later agreeable
with the heat and anger of nature. Furthermore when I came unto the holy
father Macarius, about noone time in the heat of the day, being sore
athurst, and requested of him a draught of water: be content (says he) with
the shade, for many that travail on earth, and many that traffic by sea,
have not that. When that I reasoned with him of continency: God send thee
well to do o son (says he) these twenty years have not I taken my fill
either of bread, o^ water, or sleep. For I eat bread by vveyght, and
drunk water by measure, and slept fevve hours, my manner is to lean unto a
wall, and so take a nappe. A certain Monk understanding of his fathers
death, told him that brought him the tydinges thus: Hold thy peace (friend)
utter no such blasphemy, for my father is immortal. A certain brother soulde
the nevve I estament being his only book, and gave the money for to relieve
the poor, and uttered a vvorthie saying vvithall: I have soulde the same
book which says, Sell all that thou have, and give to the poor. There is a
certain Isle not far from Alexandria northvvarde, situated over the brook
of Marie, where there dvvelled a Monk of the sect of Gnostici, a notable man,
he said that all whatsoever the Monks did, were done for five causes: for
God, for nature, for custom, for necessity, and for handie work. At an
other time he said, that naturally there was but one virtue, yet because of
the powers and facultyes of the soul where her seat rests, the same one
was divided into sundry parts and members. The light of the Sun (says
he) wants form and figure, yet by reason of the windows and chinkes
through the which it pearceth, it is said to have a figure. It is reported of
him, that unto an other Monk he said thus: I do therefore cut of all
occasion and baytes of fleshly pleasure, to the end I may expel every humor
that tends to heat of anger. I am verily persuaded that this heat of Anger
contendeth for pleasure, disquieteth the quiet disposition of my mind, and
bereaueth my understanding of her force. An other fatherly old man said:
That love or charity could never hoord or lay up great store of meat and
money. Again he said, that to his knowledge the deuell never deceived him
twice in one thing. These among other things has Euagrius remembered in his
book entitled The trade of life which consists of practice. In his book
called Gnosticus he Euagrius in his book entitled of Science or knowledge.
Prudence. Fortitude. Tempera^ce. Justice.
writes thus. That there are four virtues, and so many offices or functions
belonginge unto them, we have learned of Gregory the Just: Prudencie,
Fortitude, Temperance, and Justice. The office of Prudencie is to contemplate
those faculties that appertain unto the mind, (these he affirmed to proceed
of vvisdome) without intermedlinge with words. The office of Fortitude is
firmly to persist in the truth, and though therefore thou suffer grievous
torment, yet it is thy part never to yield unto falsehoode. The office of
Temperance is to receive seeds of the highest and supreme husbandman, and to
put him by, that poppeth in any other seed. Last of all, the office of
Justice, is to render an account of every thing vvorthely, he said that this
virtue acknowledged some things obscurely, signified other things darkely,
explicated some things openly to the profit of the ignorant and unlearned.
Basilius of Cappadocia, the pyller of Basilius.
truth said: that the knowledge which one man learneth of an other, is made
perfect by continual use and exercise: but that which through the grace of God
is ingraffed in the mind of man is made absolute by justice, gentleness, and
charity: And that they which are subject unto perturbation, may be partakers
of the former, but of the later they only which are purged of all such heat and
motion, who also while they pray unto God, do behold the proper and peculier
light Athanasius.
of the mind shining to the comfort of their souls. Blessed Athanasius
likewise the light and mirror of all Egypt, says, that Moses was commanded
to set the table northward: let the^ therefore which are in contemplation
remember always, who the adversary is which assaulteth them, and see that
they endure manfully all temptations: and that they refreshe and relieve
cheerfully all such as frequent unto them. Serapion bishop of Thmuis spoke
much like an Angel, that the mind Serapion.
which feeds upon spiritual knowledge, must thoroughly and wholy be
cleansed: that the parts of the mind which boil with fiery heat of furious
rage, must be cured with love and brotherly charity: and that the lewd
motion and lust of the flesh being crept into the inner Didymus.
closett of the mind, is to be suppressed with continency. Didymus that
great doctor and beholder of heavenly things was accustomed to say: Ponder
with thy self alvvayes the praecepts of the providence and judgment of
almighty God, endeavor to retain in thy memory the sum of them, for many
do err therein: the praecepts of judgment thou shall easily discern in the
variety of bodies, and in the alteration of all the creatures under heaven:
the praecepts of providence thou shall perceive in those means whereby we
are drawn from vice and ignorance unto virtue and knowledge. These things
have we borrowed out of Euagrius books and alleged here for the profit of the
studious reader. An other monk there was a very notable man, his name was
Ammonius, who by chance being at Rome together with Athanasius, was nothing
Ammonius a religious man ^u^t of his ear and fledd away because he would not
be bishop. Euagrius refused a byshopricke.
curious, he desired to see nothing of all the gaye and gorgeous buyldinge of
the city, save the temple of Peter and Paul: The same man being urged with a
byshopricke, fledd away secretly, cut of his right ear, that the deformity
of his body might be a canonical impediment, so that he should not be chosen
bishop. Afterward when that Euagrius, being chosen bishop by Theophilus
bishop of Alexandria, had run away without mayming any part of his body,
and by chance met Ammonius, whom he merely taunted for committing so heinous
an offense in cuttinge of his ear, and that he should answer for it before
God: Ammonius made answer: And do thou think Euagrius to escape
punishment, for that of selfeloue thou have shut up thy mouth, and used not the
gift and grace which God has given thee? There were at that time sundry other
rare and singular men of those religious houses, to rehearse all would be very
long, insomuch that if we should run over their several lives, and the
strange miracles wrought by them by reason of their singular virtue and
holiness, we should far digress from our former discourse. Wherefore if
any man be desirous to know further of the acts, to understand more of their
trade of life, to learn their profitable sayings and sentences, to be
instructed how they strove with beasts and overcame them: let him read the
book of Palladius the monk who was the disciple of Euagrius, the which he
wrote only of them. For all that appertayned unto them is fully laid down
there, where also there is a discourse of the women which lead the like trade
of life with the aforesaid holy men. Euagrius and Palladius flourished in a
while after the death of Valens. But now let us return thither where we left.

CAP. XIX. Cap. 24. in the Greek.

Of the religious men that were exiled, and how that God wrought miracles by
them, and drew all men unto him.

WHen the Emperor Valens had proclaimed against all them that maintained the
faith of One substance throughout Alexandria and all Egypt, that they should
look for no other then fire and fagott, and deadly foes: all was destroyed,
whilst that some were brought before the bar, some clapped in prison, some
others diversely tormented, for they vexed the^ with sundry punishments which lead
a peaceable and quiet life. When these things were practiced at Alexandria
according unto Lucius his pleasure, when that Euzoius also was come back from
Antioche, the captain with great power together with the company of Lucius
the Arian (who was nothing behind, but without all pity and compassion vexed
these holy men far more grievous then the soldiers did) marched forwards
toward the Monasteries of Egypt. When they came to the place, they found the
men after their wonted manner powringe out of prayers unto God, curing of
diseases, casting out of deuells. These men making no account of miracles,
would not suffer them in their accustomed places to accomplish their usual
lyturgie, but chased them away. Neither were they content with this, but they
proceeded forwards in the raginge fury of their mind, and set upon them with
the heady and rash troop of soldiers. This, Russinus reports him self to
have seen, and to have been partaker with them of the same calamity.
Furthermore the things specified in the Apostle, seemed in them to be fulfilled
anew. For many of the^ were set at naught, scurged, spoiled of their raiment,
fettered in prison, crushed with stones, beheaded with bloody swords, shut up
in the desert, covered with sheep and goats skins, destitute of aid and
succor, grievously afflicted, wonderfully troubled with adversity, whom y^
world was not worthy to enjoy, neither y^ earth to bear so holy a burden:
many wa^dred in deserts and dangerous ways, they hid the^ selves in
mountains, in denns, in caves, and hollow rocks. These afflictions they
suffered for their faith, for their works, for their gift of healing y^ which
God miraculously wrought by them. Yet as we have to conjecture, it pleased y^
providence of almighty God, that they should endure such great calamittes, to
y^ end their misery might be a medicine to reduce other unto y^ health of
their souls, purchased by God him self, y^ end proved y^ the premises were
no less. for after that these notable men through their invincible patience
and suffera^ce had overcome these sundry and manifold torments, Lucius being
deceived of his purpose, persuaded y^ captain to exile the fathers and
ringleaders of these religious me^, by name Macarius y^ Aegyptia^, and Macarius
y^ Alexa^dria^. These men were banished into an isle where there was not a
Christian. In this Isle there was an Idol grove and a priest, whom all y^
inahbitants worshipped for their god. when these holy me^ came thither all y^
deuels y^ were conversant there, began to tremble for fear. At y^ time such a
miracle as follows is said to have been wrought. The priests daughter was
suddenly possessed of a deuell, she raged out of measure, and kept a foul
stir, neither could her fury any kind of way he mitigated, but she
exclaimed and cried out against these godly men, saying: Why came ye hither to
chase us away? then the holy men revealed and made manifest unto all those
inhabitants y^ gift which God had bestowed upon them. For they cast y^ deuell
out of y^ maid, they deliver her safe and sound unto her parents, and A
miracle.
convert both priest and people unto y^ Christian faith. Immediately they
changed their religion, and were baptized, and willingly embraced the service
of almighty God. Wherefore those holy men being grievously persecuted for y^
faith of One substance, were proved, and sufficiently tried the^ selves,
ministered both health and salvation unto others, and also confirmed that holy
and reverend faith.

CAP. XX. Cap. 25. in the Greek.

Of Didymus a blind man, yet of great skill and knowledge.

ABout that time God raised in the world an other rare and singular man, by
whose means he Didymus.
made the faith to florishe. for Didymus a notable man, excelling in all kind
of literature, was famous at that time. who being a young man, and entering into
the principles of learning, was wonderfully plagued with sore eyes so long,
until y^ at length he was bereaved of all his sight. But God in steed of the
outward sense of the eye, endued him of his goodness with rare gifts and
understanding of the mind. For look what he could not attain unto by the
eye, that got he by the ear. Because that of a child he was of great
towardnes, sharp witted, and singular capacity, he far excelled all the
famous wits of his time. For he was quickly seen in all the precepts of
grammar: Rhetoric he run over sooner then the other: it was a wonder to see
in how short a space he profited greatly in philosophy: first he learned
Logike, next Arithmetike, then Music, afterward the rest of the liberal
arts, the which he so applied, that he was able to encounter with them, who by
the help of their eye sight had profitted very much therein. He was so perfect
in the old and new testament, that he made thereupon many commentaries. He
published three books of the Trinity. He interpreted the books of Origin
entitled Of principal beginnings, left commentaries thereof, commended the
books highly, condemned for fools such as not understanding what he wrote,
found fault with the works, and accused the writer. Wherefore if any be
desirous to know y^ profound skill and great study of Didymus, let him peruse
his works, and there he shall be fully persuaded. The report goes, that Antonie
a good while ago in the time of the Emperor Valens coming out of the desert,
because of the Arians, into the city of Alexandria, had conference with this
Didymus, and understanding of his great skill and knowledge, he said unto
him: Let it not grieve thee at all (o Didymus) y^ thou art bereaved of the
corporal eyes and carnal sight, for though thou want such eyes as commonly
are given to flies and gnatts for safety, yet have thou greatly to rejoice,
that the eyes wherewith the Angels do behold, wherewith God him self is seen,
wherewith the clear shining of the celestial godhead is comprehended, are not
dygged out of thy head. These, as they say, were the words of Antonie unto
Didymus. At that time Didymus was a great patron and defender of the true faith
against the Arians: he withstoode them, he dissolved their captious fallacies,
and confuted their lewd and false arguments.

CAP. XXI.
Of Basilius bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia, and Gregory Cap. 26. in the
greek.
bishop of Nazianzum.

Even as Didymus by the appointment of God him self withstoode the Arians at
Alexandria, so in other cities did Basilius of Caesarea, and Gregory of
Nazianzu^, of whom now fit opportunity is ministered to discourse. Although
the fame of them is ryfe in every man's mouth, and the great profitt that rises
by their works, is of great force to their praise and commendation: yet
seeinge that then the Christian faith was greatly furthered by them as by two
great lights, it is our part to say somewhat of them. If in case that any
will compare Basilius with Gregory, and with long discourse confer the life
and learning of the one with the other, it will be long ere he shall be able to
discern whether to prefer of them both. They were both equally matched for
right trade of life, for both kind of knowledge, divine and profane. Being
young men in the flower of their youth, they heard at Athens the famous
Rhetoricians, Hymerius and Proaeresius: afterward at Antioche in Syria, they
frequented the school of Libanius, in the end they excelled in Rhetoric.
When they were thought worthy men to deliver unto the world the precepts of
philosophy, and were entreated of many to take that function upon them: when
as also others persuaded with them to become Orators: they set naught by both
those trades, they despised the manner and guise of Rhetoricians, and gave them
selves unto solitary and monastical life. Wherefore as soon as they had
sufficiently profited in philosophy, under a certain reader, who then was a
professor at Antioche: they provided for the^ selves the commentaries of Origin
(who then was famous throughout the world) and learned out of them to expound
and interpret the holy and sacred scripture. being exercised in them, they
valiantly encountered with the Arians. And when as the Arians alleged out of
Origin for the confirmation of their heretical opinion, they refuted their
ignorance: and showed by plain demonstrations that they understood not the
mind and meaning of Origin. For Eunomius a favorer of that sect, and as many
Arians as were of greatest reputation, and accounted the profoundest clerks in
respect of all the rest: when they disputed with Gregory and Basil, proved
them selves stark fools, and unlearned persons. Basil first of all being
ordained Deacon of Meletius bishop of Antioche, afterward Basil bishop of
Caesarea in Cappadocia. Gregotius first bishop of Nazianzum, afterward of
Constantinople.
bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia, where he was borne: gave him self wholly to
the furtherance and profit of the church of God. When he feared greatly lest
the new devise of Arius brain would creep throughout the provinces of
Pontus, he got him into those parts in all the have, and ordained there the
exercise of monastical life, instructed men in his opinion, and confirmed the
waueringe mind of weakelinges in the faith. Gregory also being made bishop of
Nazianzum a mean city of Cappadocia, (whereof his father had been bishop
before him) did y^ like unto Basils doings. As he passed throughout yt cities,
he confirmed y^ faint and weak in the faith: by often visiting of
Constantinople, he settled with his grave lessons and great learning the minds
of all them that embraced the faith of One substance. Wherefore in a short
while after, he was by the voices and consent of many bishops, chosen bishop of
Constantinople. When the fame of them both was ^lased so far, that it came to
the Emperor Valens ears, in all the have he gave forth commandment, that
Basil should be brought from Caesarea before him to Antioche. He was no sooner
Basil reasons with the Arian president of Antioche.
come, but the Emperor charged he should be brought before the tribunal seat
of the president. When the President demanded of him, why and wherefore he
liked no better of the Emperors religion? Basil unfeignedly and freely spoke
his mind of the Emperors opinion, yet highly commended the faith of One
substance. When the President threatened him with present death: I would to God
(says Basil) it would fall out so well of my side, that I might leave this
carcass of mine in the quarrel of Christ, in the defense of my head and
captain. When the President advised him, again and again to remember him
self better, the report goes that Basil said unto him. As I am today, so
shall thou find me tomorow, but I pray God thou alter not thy mind. Then lay
Basil in prison that whole day. In a while after the Emperor Valens son, by
name Galates, of youthly and tender years, fell to so dangerous a disease
that the phisicions gave him up, and despaired of his recovery, whose mother
Dominica the Empress told her husband the Emperor, that the same night she
was wonderfully disquieted in her sleep with vglesome shapes, and dreadful
visions of deuells and wicked spirits: that the child was visited with
sickness, because of the co^tumelie and reproach he had done unto Basil the
bishop. The Emperor marking diligently the words of his wife, muzed a while,
and pondered them with him self, at length resolved him self what was to be
done, sent for Basil, and because he would know y^ truth, reasoned thus with
him: If thy faith and opinion be true, pray that my son die not of this
disease. Then Basil answered, If thou The co^fere^ce of Basil and the Arian
Emperor Valens.
wilt promise me to believe as I do, and if thou will bring the church unto
unity and concord, thy child no doubt shall live. When the Emperor would
not agree unto this, let God (says Basil) deal with the child as pleases
him. Immediately after this conference Basil was set at liberty, and
forthwith the child dyed. Thus much have we run over of both these men's
doings. They both left behind them unto the posterity many notable books,
whereof Ruffinus reports him self to have translated some into the Latin
tongue. Basil had two brethren Peter and Gregory. Peter lead the solitary
life, after the example of Basil: Gregory was a teacher, and finished after
the desease of his brother, the Commentaries which Basil had left imperfect,
upon the Six days works. The same Gregory preached at Constantinople a
funeral sermon upon the death of Meletius bishop of Antioch. There are extant
many other notable orations and sermons of his.

CAP. XXII. Cap. 27. in the Greek.

Of Gregory bishop of Neocaesarea.

INsomuch that many are deceived, partly because of the name, and partly
because of the works attributed unto Gregory: we have to learn that there was
an other Gregory borne in Neocaesarea a city of Pontus, who was the disciple
of Origin, and far more ancient then the former men we spoke of even now.
This Gregory is much spoken of not only at Athens, and at Berytus, but
throughout Pontus, and in manner throughout the whole world. As soon as he had
left the famous school of Athens, he gave him self at Berytus unto the study
of the civil laws: hearing there that Origin professed divinity at
Caesarea, got him thither in all the have. When he had been the auditor of the
heavenly doctrine of holy scripture, made no account of the Roman laws, but
Gregory. b. of Neocaesarea. Gregory. b. of Nazianzu^ Gregory the brother of
Basil. Gregory. b. of Alexandria an Arian.
leaned thenceforth unto that. Wherefore having learned of him the true
philosophy at y^ commandment of his parents he returned unto his native
country. Being a lay man he wrought many miracles, he cured the sick, he
chased deuells away by his epistles, he converted the gentiles and Ethnicks unto
the faith, not only with words, but with deeds of far greater force. Pa^philus
Martyr made mention of him in his books written in the defense of Origin,
where the oration of Gregory in the praise of Origin is laid down in writing.
To be short, there were four Gregory's: first this ancient father, the
disciple some times of Origin, next Gregory Nazianzene, thirdly Gregory the
brother of Basil, and the fourth of Alexandria, whom the Arians after the
exile of Athanasius, chose to their bishop. Thus much of these men.

CAP. XXIII. Cap. 28. in the Greek.

The original of the Nouatian heretics, and how that as many of them as
inhabited Phrygia, celebrated the feast of Easter after the Iewishe manner.

ABout that time the Nouatians inhabiting Phrygia, changed the days appointed
by the council of Nice, for the celebration of Easter, but how that came to
pass I will declare, if that first I lay down the cause and original why so
severe a canon of the Nouatian church prevailed so much with the Phrygian and
Paphlagonian nations. Nouatus the priest severed him self from the church of
Rome, because y^ Cornelius the bishop received into the communion after
repentance the faithful that fell from the church, and sacrificed unto Idols
in the persecution under Decius the Emperor. When he had divided him self
from y^ church for the aforesaid cause, first he was made bishop of such
bishops as were of his opinion: next he wrote epistles unto all churches every
where, that they should not receive as meet partakers of the holy mysteries,
such as had sacrificed unto Idols, but exhort them unto repentance, referring
y^ forgeuenes and remission unto God, who is of power and authority sufficient
to remit sin: when the letters were brought into every province, every one
judged thereof as pleased him best. Because Nouatus had signified that such as
after baptism committed a sin unto death, were not afterward to be admitted
unto the communion: the publishing of that canon seemed unto some toe severe,
unto others but right and reason, auailable also for the direction of godly
life. When this controversy was tossed toe and fro, the letters of Cornelius
were sent abroad, signifying that there remained hope of pardon for such as
had sinned after baptism. They both wrote contrary letters, and conveyed them
unto the churches abroad. And whilst that both went about to confirm his
opinion with testimonies of holy scripture, every man (as the manner is) look
where affection lead him, there he addicted him self. For such as were given
to sin, took occasion by the liberty and favor that was granted them,
went forewardes headlonge into every shameful crime. The Phrygians are a
nation far The Phrygians. Scythians. Thracians. Paphlagonians.
more temperate and modest then others, for they swear very seldom. The
Scythians and Thracians are hotter and more prone unto anger. For they that are
nearer unto the rising of the sun, are set more upon lust and concupiscence.
The Paphlagonians and Phrygians are inclined to nere another of these
perturbations. For at this day they use no running at tilte, no such warlike
exercise, neither do they use to pastime them selves with spectacles and stage
plays. Wherefore these kind of men in mine opinion, draw nearest unto the
drift and disposition of Nouatus letters. Adultery is counted among them for a
detestable and horrible sin. It is well known that the Phrygian and Adulte^y
abominable.
Paphlagonian trade of life is far modester, and more chaste and continent,
then any other heretical sect whatsoever. I conjecture that they shot at the
same modest trade of life, which inhabited the west parts of the world, and
leaned to Nouatus opinion. Nouatus him self though he varyed from the church
of Rome, by reason of a certain severe trade of living: yet altered not he the
time appointed for the celebration of Easter. For he always observed the
custom of the West churches* and celebrated it as they did. For such as live
there, since they were Christians kept always that feast after the
Equinoctiallspringe. And though Nouatus him self was putt to death in the
persecution under Valerianus: yet such as in Phrygia are so called of him, for
all they are fallen from the faith of the Catholic church, were licenced to
become partakers of his communion, at what time they altered the celebration of
Easter day. For in the village Pazum, where the springs of the floode Sangarius
are found* there was a Council summoned of few, and the A Council o^
Nouatian bishops h^ld at Pazum, a p^lting village, where contrary to the Nic^ne
Counsel they keep Easter with the Jews.
same very obscure Nouatian bishops, where they decreed, that the manner and
custom of the Jews, who kept the^ days of unleavened bread, was to be
observed, and that the time appointed by them was not to be broken. This have
we learned of an old man who was a priests son, and present at the Council
with his father: whereat Agelius the Nouatian bishop of Constantinople was not,
neither Maximus of Nice, neither the Nouatian bishop of Nicomedia, neither the
bishop of Cotuaium, who was of the same opinion with the rest, for these were
they that chiefly laid down the canons of the Nouatian churches. These
things were of old in this sort. Not long after because of this Council (as
it shall be showed in an other place) the Nouatian church was divided within
it self.

CAP. XXIIII.
Of Damasus bishop of Rome, and Vrsinus his deacon, of the great stir Cap.
29. in the greek.
and slaughter that was at Rome because of them.

Now let us return unto the affairs of the West that were done at the same
time. When Damasus. b. of Rome.
the Emperor Valentinianus lead a peaceable and quiet life, molestinge no
kind of sect: Damasus succeeded Liberius in the bishopric of Rome, at what
time the quiet state of the Roman church was wonderfully troubled, the cause,
as I could learn, was as follows. Vrsinus Deacon of that church, in the
vacancie of the seae, made suit for him self against Damasus to Vrsinus a
Deaco^ of the church of Rome, aspired unto the bishopric.
be chosen bishop. Who seeing that Damasus was preferred, and him self put
back, seeinge also that all his canuasse was to no purpose: fell from the
church to raysinge of private and particular conuenticles, and persuaded
certain base and obscure bishops to consecrate him bishop. Wherefore they
created him not in the open church, but in an odd corner of the cathedral
church, called Sicona. This being done, the people was all on an uproar. the
tumult was not toutchinge y^ faith, or heresy, but whether of them both by
right should be bishop. The heat of thronging multitudes was so grievous, and
the contention so great, that it cost many their lives. For which schism and
rebellion many both of the laytie and clergy were grievously tormented by the
commandment of Maximmus the governor, and so was Vrsinus foiled, and the
enterprises of his faction suppressed.

CAP. XXV. Cap. 30. in the Greek.

After the death of Auxentius the Arian bishop of Mediolanum, when there rose a
great schism about the election of a bishop, the which Ambrose Liuetenant of
that province suppressed, he him self by the voice of all that were present,
and by the consent of the Emperor Valentinianus was chosen Bishop.

ABout that time an other strange act fell out at Mediolanum. When Auxentius,
whom y^ Arians chose to be bishop of that sea^, departed this life: all was
there on an uproar about the election of a bishop, and great strife there was
whilst that some would prefer this man, some other that man unto the
bishopric. The tumult being raised, Ambrose Liuetenant of the city, who
also was a Consul, fearing greatly lest that schism would breed mischief
in y^ city, came purposely into the church for to appease the sedition. After
that his presence had prevailed very much with the people, after that he had
given them many notable exhortations, after he had mitigated the rage of the
heady and rash multitude: all of a sudden with one voice and S. Ambrose was
chosen bishop of Millayne an. Dom. 378.
with one mouth nominated Ambrose to their bishop. For in so doing there was
hope that all would be reconciled, and that all would embrace one faith and
opinion. The bishops that were present, thought verily that the uniform voice
of the people, was the voice of God him self. Wherefore without any further
deliberation they take Ambrose, and baptize him (for he was a Catechumenist)
and stall him bishop. But when Ambrose came willingly to the baptism, yet
denied utterly he would be bishop, they make the Emperor Valentinianus privy
to their doings. He wonderinge at the consent and agreement of the people,
supposed that which was done, to be the work of God him self, and signified
unto the bishops that they should obey the will of God, who commanded they
should create him bishop, that God rather then men preferred him unto this
dignity. When that Ambrose was thus chosen bishop, the citizens of Millayne,
who aforetime were at discord among them selves, thenceforth embraced peace and
unity.

CAP. XXVI. Cap. 31. in the Greek.

Of the death of Valentinianus the Emperor.

AFter the aforesaid stir was ended, when the Sarmatians assaulted the
Roman dominions, the Emperor raised great power, and made expedition against
them. The Barbarians understanding of this, and foreseeing their own weakness,
that they were not able to encounter with so great a power, sent ambassadors
unto the Emperor, crauinge of him that he would join with them in league, and
establishe peace between them. As soon as the ambassadors had presented them
selves before him, and seeing that they were but abiects and raskalls,
demanded of them, what be the rest of the Sarmatians such men as you are? When
the Ambassadors had answered: yea O Emperor, thou see the chiefest of the
Sarmatians before thee, Valentinianus was wonderfully incensed against them,
and brake out into vehement language: that the Empire of Rome had ill luck to
fall into his hands, under whose raygne so beggarly and so abject a kind of
Barbarians could not quiet and content them selves with safety within their
own bounds, but they must take armor, rebel against the Roman Empire,
and so boldly proclayme open war. He strayned him self so much in
exclayminge against them, that he opened every vain in his body, and brake
the arteries asunder. whereof there gushed out such a stream of blood, so
that he dyed in the Castle commonly called Bergitium, in the third
Consulshippe of Gratianus, together with Ecoetius the sixtienth of November. He
lived Vale^tinianus dyed Anno Dom. 380.
four and fifty years, and raygned thirteen. The sixth day after the
desease of Valentinianus, the soldiers of Italy proclaimed Emperor
Valentinianus the younger, so called after his fathers name, who was of very
tender years, at Aconicum a city in Italy. The rest of the Emperors
understanding of this, took the matter very grievously, not because
Valentinianus, who was y^ ones brother, the others brothers son, was chosen
Emperor, but because he was appointed without their consent, unto whom it
belonged to create him Emperor. But both gave their co^sents that he should
be Emperor, and thus was Valentinianus the younger set in the imperial seat
of his father. We have to learn that this Valentinianus was got upon Iustina,
whom his father married for all that Seuera his first wife was alive, and that
for this cause. Iustus the father of Iustina, who a good while ago in the
reign of Constantius the Emperor, was Liuetenant of Picenum, saw in his
sleep that his right side was delivered of the imperial purple robe. When
that he awoke, he told his dream to so many, that at length it came to the
Emperor Constantius ear. He thereby was given to conjecture, that there
should one be borne of Iustus, which should be Emperor, and therefore he
sent from him that should dispatche Iustus out of the way. Wherefore Iustina
now bereaved of her father, contineweth a virgin. In process of time she
became acquainted with Seuera the Empress, and had often conference with her.
When that there grew great familiarity between them, they used both one
has for to bayne them selves, Seuera seeing the beauty of this virgin as she
bayned her self, was wonderfully in love with Iustina, she told the Emperor
also what a goodly maid she was: that the daughter of Iustus passed for
beauty all the women in the world, that she her self, though she were a
woman, yet was wonderfully enamored with her sweet face. The Emperor
printinge in his heart the words which seemed only to pearce but the ear,
devised with him self how he might compass this beautiful Iustina to his
wife, not diuorcinge Seuera* upon whom he had gotten Gratianus, whom also he
had made Emperor a little before. Wherefore he made a A wicked law.
law, that as many as would might lawfully have two wives, the which he
proclaimed throughout every city. When the law was proclaimed, he took
Iustina to his second wife, upon whom he got Valentinianus the younger, and
three daughters, Iusta, Grata, Galla. Of the which, two lead their lives in
virginity, the third Galla by name, was married to Theodosius Magnus, on whom
he got his daughter Placidia. For he got Arcadius and Honorius of Placidia
his former wife. But of Theodosius and his children in an other place.

CAP. XXVII. Cap. 32. in the greek.

After that Themistius the Philosopher had made an Oration in the hearing of
Valens, the Emperor relented from persecuting of the Christians: and how the
Goths in the time of Valens embraced the Christian faith.

VAlens making his abode at Antioche, although he warred but little with
forayne nations (the Barbarian nations kept them selves within their bounds)
yet pursued he continewally such as held the faith of One substance, and
ceased not daily to invent new devises and straung torments, wherewith he
might plague them* until that his fierce and cruel mind was somewhat
mitigated with the Oration which Themistius the Philosopher pronounced before
him: where he admonished the Emperor not to maruayle though the Christians
varyed among them selves in religion: that if Christianity were compared with
infinite multitudes of opinions raygninge among heathen philosophers (sure he
was that there were above three hundredth opinions, and great dissension about
rules and precepts, whereunto every sect necessarily addicted them selves) it
would seem but a very small thing: and that God would set forth his glory
by the diversity and discord in opinions, to the end every one might
therefore the more stand in awe of his majesty, because it was not easy for
every one to know him perfectly. Although he began to be somewhat the meeker
after these and other such like persuasions which the philosopher used, yet
laid he not aside all his venomous spyte and anger: for in steed of death he
punished the clergy men with exile and banishment so long, until that his
mischievous enterprise was stopped upon such occasion as follows. Cap. 33. in
the greek.
The Barbarians inhabitinge beyond Istrum, commonly called Gotthes, by reason
of civil wars, were divided into two parts: the one side was lead by
Phritigernes, the other by Athanarichus. When that Athanarichus seemed to get
the upper hand, Phritigernes fled for aid against the enemy unto the
Romans. Valens the Emperor understanding of this, commanded the soldiers
of Thracia to aid the one side against the other. The soldiers puttinge the
enemy to flight, foiled Athanarichus, and got the victory. Which was a cause
that many of the Barbarian nations received the faith of Christ. For
Phritigernes to requite the Emperor for the courtesy showed unto him,
embraced his religion, and persuaded his subjects to the same. Wherefore many
Gotthes, who then addic^ed them selves into the Arian opinion, partly for to
feed the Emperors vain, and fully to please him, never left it unto this
day. Then also Vlphilas bishop of the Gotthes Vlphilas translated the Bible
into his own tongue.
found out the Gotthicke letters, and as soon as he had translated holy
scripture into that tongue, he determined with him self, that the Barbarians
should learn the blessed word of God. Immediately after that Vlphilas had
instructed in the Christian religion, as well the faction of Athanarichus, as
the followers of Phritigernes, Athanarichus tormented the difference between
Arius and the Aria^ Gotths
grievously many that professed the Christian faith, as if his country laws
and ordinances had been corrupted by their means: so that diverse Barbarians of
the Arian sect then suffered Martyrdom. Arius because he could not withstand
the error of Sabellius the Aprick fell from the right faith, saying that the
son of God was but lately created: but these men receiving the Christian
faith with simplicity of mind, sticked not to spend their lives in the
quarrel. Thus much of the Goths converted as before unto the faith of Christ.

CAP. XXVIII. Cap. 34 in the greek.

How the Goths being driven out of their own country fled unto the Roman
dominions, who being entertained of the Emperor fell out to be the overthrow
of the empire, and the destruction of the Emperor him self and how the wars
with the Goths wrought quietness to the true Christians.

IN a short while after, the aforesaid Barbarians being reconciled and at one
among them selves, were overcome by other Barbarians their own neighbors
called Hunni, and driven out of their own country, so that they were feign to
fly unto the Roman empire, they crooched unto the Romans, they protested
loyalty and subjection. Valens understanding of this not soreseeing what was
like to ensue thereof, commanded they should courteously be entertained, and
herein only showed him self clement. Wherefore he appointed them certain
contreyes of Thracia to inhabit, and thought him self happy for their
coming. he thought to have of them at hand always ready an exercised army
and speedy host against the enemy: Moreover that the Barbarian watch would be
a greater terror unto the adversary then the Roman soldier. Thenceforth be
neglected the trayning of Roman soldiers in feats of arms: he set at
naught old wether beaten warriers, valiant and courageous captains. In steed
of the soldiers which were mustered and pricked throughout every village of
the several provinces he required money, commanding that for every soldier
they should pay fourscore crowns. This he did when that he had first
released them of their tribute. This was the original cause that ye Roman
affairs prospered not in a long time after. Cap. 35. in the Greek. Thus dealt
the Saxons with the Britains.
For the Barbarians now possessing Thracia, and enjoying with ease and security
the Roman province, were immoderatly puffed up and swollen with prosperity:
they took armor against the Romans which had been their dear friends, and
benefitted them diversely: they began to ouerrunne and destroy all the
contreyes about Thracia. When Valens heard of this, it was high time for him
to leave exiling of the true christians, and to turn him self unto these
rebels. Now mused he, and cast doubts with him self, immediately he left
Antioch and got him to Constantinople. By this means the heat of persecution
kindled against the Christians was wholly quenched. Then also died Euzoius the
Arian Bishop of Antioch, the fifth Consulship of Valens, the first of
Valentinianus the younger: in whose rowme Dorotheus succeeded.

CAP. XXIX. Cap. 36. in the greek.

How the Saracens under the raygne of Mauia their Queen, took one Moses a
Monk, a godly and a faithful man to their Bishop and embraced the Christian
faith.

WHen the Emperor had left Antioch, the Saracens who before time were
fellows, friends, and in league with the Romans, then first began to
rebel: being governed and guyded by a woman called Mauia, (whose husband had
departed this life a little before) they took armor against them. Wherefore
all the provinces of the Roman dominions that lay toward the East had then
wholly been ouerrunne by the Saracens: if the divine providence of God had not
withstoode their enterprises. The means were these. Moses a Saracene borne,
lead in the desert the monastical trade of life: for his zeal and godliness,
for his constant faith, for the straung miracles wrought by him he was famous
among all men. Mauia Queen of the Saracens required of the Romans this Moses
to be her Bishop, and in so doing she would cast of armor and join in league
with them. The Roman captains hearing of this, thought them selves happy if
peace were concluded upon such a condition: laying all delays aside, they bid
the Queen bring her purpose to pass. Moses was taken from the wilderness and
sent to Alexandria for orders. When Moses was come in the presence of Lucius
who then governed the Churches of Moses the Monk reasoned thus with Lucius the
Arian Bishop.
Alexandria, he refused his ceremonies and laying on of hands, reasoning with
him in this sort: I think my self unworthy of the priestly order, yet if it
be for the profitt of the common weal yt I be called unto the function, truly
thou Lucius shall never lay hand upon my head. for thy right hand is imbrued
with slaughter and bloodshed. When Lucius said again that it became him not so
contumeliously to revile him, but rather to learn of him the precepts of
christian religion, Moses answered: I am not come presently to reason of
matters in religion, but sure I am of this that thy horrible practices against
the brethren prove thee to be altogether void of the true principles of
Christian religion. For the true Christian strikes no man, reuileth no man,
fights with no man: for the servant of God should be no fighter. but thy
deeds, in exiling of some, throwing of others to wild beasts, burning of
some others, do cry out against thee: yet are we ever surer of the things we
see with our eyes then we hear with our ears. When Moses had uttered these
and other such like sayings, his friends brought him unto a certain mountain
to be made Priest of such as were there exiled. After that Moses had thus been
consecrated, the Saracen war ended. Mauia thenceforth was in league with the
Romans, and married her daughter to captain Victor. Thus much of the Saracens.

CAP. XXX. Cap. 37. in the Greek.

When Valens was gone from Antioch, the Catholics throughout the East,
specially of Alexandria, thrust out Lucius and placed Peter in his rowme which
came with Damasus the Bishop of Romes letters.

ABout that time as soon as Valens had left Antioch, as many as were tossed
with the grievous storm of persecution, specially at Alexandria were comforted
exceedingly and greatly refreshed, because that Peter was come thither with
Damasus the Bishop of Romes letters, confirming both the religion of Moses and
the creation of Peter. The people boldning them selves upon the sight of these
letters, thrust Lucius out of the bishopric and placed Peter in his rowme.
Lucius being deposed got him in all the have to Constantinople: Peter
prolonging his life but a short time died, and left his brother Timothee to
succeed him in the bishopric.

CAP. XXXI.
After the return of Valens into Constantinople, being reviled of the people
because of the Goths, left the city and went against the Barbarians, He ioynsd
with them at Adrianoplis a city of Thracia, and was slain the fiftieth year
of his age, and the sixteeneth of his reign.

THe Emperor Valens entering into Constantinople in his sixth Consulship and the
second of Valentinianus the thirtieth of May found the citizens in great
heaviness. For the Barbarians who lately had ouerrunne Thracia, now began to
set upon the suburbs of Constantinople, because there was then no power
already prepared to repel their violence. When the Barbarians were come nigh
unto the walls, the city was wonderful sorry, they lamented their case: and
forthwith they step unto the Emperor and charge him that he entertained
within his own dominions such as now were ready to cut his own throat: they
blame him that he withstoode them no sooner: they condemned him because he
proclaimed not open wars against them. As they run at tilt and exercised
such warlick and triumpha^t game, all with one consent run unto the Emperor
and cried out against him that he had set such exercise at naught, saying: give
us armor and we our selves will deal with them. While they exclame in this
sort, the Emperor began to boil within him self for anger, he left the
city the eleventh of June, threatening them that if he returned home again
safe and sound, he would plague the city of Constantinople, partly because they
reviled him, and partly also for the treason they committed against the empire
in ayding the rebel Procopius. When he had threatened he would utterly destroy
the city, make it even with the ground, turn it to eareable land for the
plowe to pass through the bowels thereof: he took his voyage against y^
Barbarians, made them recoyle and give back far from y^ city: he drove them
as far as Adrianople a city of Thracia lying in the confines of Macedonia.
As he joined there with the enemy he was flayne the nynth of Augustine and the
aforesaid Consulship, the fourth year of the two hundredth eyghty and nynth
Olympiade. Yet some say that as he fledd into a certain village the which was
set on fire by the Barbarian enemy, he was burned to ashes. Some other say
that he threw aside the imperial robe and thrust him self among the thronge
of footmen, and when the horsemen had yielded without any great fighting, the
footmen after the breaking of the raye as they stood confusely to have been
all slain, the Emperor also after throwing away of the princely habit, when
none could discern who he was, to have layen among them and not known. He
departed out of this life the fiftieth year of his age, after that he had
raygned thirteen years together with his brother and three years after his
desease. This Anno Dom. 381.
book contineweth the history of sixteen years.

The end of the fourth book of Socrates.
THE FIFTH BOOK OF THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORYE OF SOCRATES SCHOLASTICVS.
The Proeme.
BEfore that we enter into the discourse of our fist book of ecclesiastical
history, This fifth book contains the history of sixteen years and eight
months ending Anno Domini 397.
our will is first to forewarne the reader not to blame us, for all our
special drift was to deliver the posterity in writing the ecclesiastical
affairs after our simple ability and as far forth as we could learn:
that we have mingled therwithall battles and bloody wars at several times
waged in sundry parts of the world. We have so done for diverse causes. First
that the noble and valiant feats of arms should not be hid from the
posterity in time to come: again lest the Reader by perusing continewally of
the Bishops affairs and the practices of the one against the other inculcated
every where, be overcome with tediousnes and loath some tying together of one
matter: last of all that we may understand when the common w^^le has been
tossed and turmoyled with troublesome dissension and discord, the Church of
God likewise as infected with the same contagious disease has been altogether
out of quiet. For whosoever with diligent observation will remember the
aforesaid times, without doubt he shall perceive that when the common weal was
on hurlyburly, the Church in like sort was shaken with the storms of
adversity. Either he shall find that both at one time were out of square, or
that the ones misery ensued immediately after the others misfortune: and
sometime when the Church began to vary about religion, the common wealth
immediately followed after with rebellion, and some other times of the
contrary: so that I am easily brought to believe that the interchangeable
course of these calamities comes not to pass by happ hazard but by reason of
our horrible sin: that these mischiefs are sent in steed of punishments: or
as the Apostle writes: some men's sins are open before 1. Timoth. 5.
hand hastening before unto judgment, and in some they follow after. for the
aforesaid causes we have mingled temporal with ecclesiastical, profane with
divine stories. And though we could not attain unto the knowledge of such
battles as were waged in the reign of Constantine by reason it is so long
ago: yet have we enterlaced such acts as befell since that time, as well as we
could learn of aged and long liude men. We have therefore throughout our
history made mention of the Emperors because that since they began to
embrace christian religion, the ecclesiastical affairs seemed very much to
depend of them: so that the chiefest counsels were in The counsels were
summoned by Emperors and not by Popes.
times past and are at this day summoned through their consent and procurement.
We have therefore also remembered paganisine and the Idolatric all service of the
Ethnicks because it wonderfully molested the quiet estate of the Catholic
Church. Thus much I thought good to lay down by way of preface, and now to the
story.

CAP. I.
How that after the death of Valens when the Goths marched toward
Constantinople, the city went out to meet them together with a few Saracens
whom Mauia their Queen had sent to aid them.

WHen the Emperor Valens was dispatched out of the way in such sort as no man
was certain of, the Barbarians marched apace toward the walls of
Constantinople, and began to destroy the suburbs thereof. The people being
moved with this went forth of their own accord to withstand the Barbarian
enemy, and every one took that weapon which came first to his hand. Dominica
the Empress gave hyre unto every one that went forth to battle Dominica*
Mauia.
out of the Emperors treasory as the covenant was with the soldiers. Mauia
also the Queen of the Saracens (of whom we spoke a little before) being in
league with the Empress sent of her subjects to aid them. Thus y^ people gave
them battle and drove back y^ Barbarians far from y^ city.

CAP. II.
How Gratianus the Emperor called home from exile the godly Bishops, banished
the Heretics, and made Theodosius his fellow Emperor.

GRatianus governing the empire together with Valentinianus the younger,
condemned the Anno 383.
cruelty which his uncle Valens practiced against the Christians: called home
again such as he had exiled: made a law that every sect and opinion should
thenceforth freely without any molestation frequent their wonted assemblies,
except the Eunomians, Photinians and Manichees. And when he foresaw that the
Roman empire daily diminished, and the Barbarians waxed strong and multiplied
exceedingly, and that he stood in great need of a valiant and worthy man to
govern the common wealth, he joined with him Theodosius, a noble man of
Spain, trained up Theodosius was Emperor together with Gratianus and
Valentinianus the younger.
in feats of arms, one that was by the uniform consent and common voice of
all men thought fi^t to rule, yea before Gratian him self was created
Emperor. He proclaimed him Emperor at Sirmium a city of Illyrium in the
Consulship of Ausonius and Olybrius the sixteenth of Ianuarye, and divides
with him the charge of the battle against the Barbarians.

CAP. III.
Of the Bishops which then governed the Churches.

AT that time Damasus the successor of Liberius was Bishop of Rome and Cyrill
of Jerusalem. Damasu^. Cyrill. Dorotheus. Paulinus. Meletius. Lucius. Timothee.
Demophilus
The Church of Antioch as I said before was divided into three parts. for
Dorotheus the Arian bishop which succeeded Euzious, governed the Arian
Churches, the rest were partly under Paulinus and partly under Meletius who
then was lately come from exile. Of the Churches of Alexandria the Arians were
under Lucius who then was a banished man, such as embraced the faith of one
substance had Timothee the successor of Peter to their Bishop. The Arian Church
at Constantinople had Demophilus to their Bishop who was chosen immediately
after the desease of Eudoxius. They that detested his doctrine and opinion
frequented private and several conuenticles.

CAP. IIII.
How the Macedonians who a little before sent legates unto Damasus Bishop of Rome
for the establishing of the faith of one substance fell again into their
former error.

THe Macedonians for all the embassy sent unto Liberius, and for all they
communicated a good while throughout every church without difference and
exception with such as cleaued from the beginning unto the Nicene creed: yet
when the Emperor Gratians law gave liberty unto every sect to frequent their
several assemblies they severed them selves from y^ church. Wherefore after
that a company of them had met at Antioch in Syria, they decreed that
henceforth A council of Macedonians.
for altogether the clause of one substance should never be received: and that
they ought no more to communicate with the professors of the Nicene faith. but
their wavering mind attained not unto so prosperous a success as they hoped
it would: for many of their own sect, seeing that they did say and unsay,
that they ratified and abrogated the self same constitution, condemned them in
their own opinions, fell from them and embraced the faith of one substance.

CAP. V.
Of the stir at Antioch by reason of Paulinus and Meletius, how that Gregory
Bishop of Nazianzum by the consent of all the Catholic Bishops was translated
unto the seae of Constantinople.

AT Antioch in Syria about that time there was raised a great tumult and
sedition about Meletius, the occasion was as follows. We said before how
that Paulinus Bishop of Antioch because he was a grave and a godly father was
not exiled: y^ Meletius was first called home from banishment in the reign of
Julian, afterward being exiled by Valens returned in the time of Gratian.
After his return into Antioch he found Paulinus so old y^ he seemed ready to
lie in his grave. Immediately all y^ friends of Meletius endeavored to join him
fellow bishop with Paulinus. when Paulinus affirmed it to be contrary unto the
canons of the Church that any being created of A^ian Bishops should be made
college in any Bishopric: the people endeavored to compass it by force. In the
end they make preparation to stall him Bishop in a certain church of the
suburbs. When it was done all the city was on an uproar. In process of time
the people were reconciled upon such conditions as follow. All that stood for
the Bishopric were six in number whereof one was Flauianus, being called
together they deposed them upon a book that none of them should aspire unto
the Bishopric during the lives of Paulinus and Meletius, and when either of
them departed this life, the Bishopric to remain unto the suruiuer of them
both. When the oath was ministered the people were quiet and thenceforth made no
stir at all. The favorers of Lucifer were offended with this manner of dealing
and fell from the church because that Meletius being ordered of the Arians was
admitted to the gouernemente of that seae. At that time when the affairs of
Antioch were thus out of frame Gregory by uniform consent of all the
Catholic Bishops was translated from the Bishopric of Nazianzum unto the
seae of Constantinople. Then Meletius got him in all the have to
Constantinople.

CAP. VI.
How Theodosius the Emperor after the foilinge of the Barbarians came to
Thessalonica, where being sick he was baptized of Ascholius the Bishop.

BY that time Gratianus and Theodosius had gotten the victory of the
Barbarians, whereupon Gratianus immediately made expeditio^ into France,
because the Germans had destroyed part of that country: but Theodosius after
the erection of the sign, in token that the enemies were vanquished, made have
toward Constantinople and came to Thessalonica. There after y^ he fell into a
dangerous disease he was very desirous of baptism, for of old he was trained
up in Christian religion and addicted himself wholly unto the faith of one
substance. Being sore sick and speedinge to baptism he gave charge that the
Bishop of Thessalonica should be sent for to minister the sacrament. Being
come first he demau^ds of the bishop what faith he was of? when the bishop made
answer that the opinion of Arius prevailed not throughout Illyrium and that
the newefounde invention of his pestilent brain was not planted in the
churches of y^ country but that all the christians throughout those coasts
retained and ever observed continewally y^ autentick and ancient faith
delivered of the Apostles and confirmed by the council of Nice: the Emperor
with willing mind was baptized of Ascholius for so was the bishop called. A
few days after when that he had somewhat recovered he went toward
Constantinople the four and twentyeth of November in his first Consulship and
the fifth of Gratian.

CAP. VII.
How that Gregory Nazianzen understanding that diverse Bishops did stomach
him refused the Bishopric of Constantinople. The Emperor sent unto
Demophilus the Arian Bishop that either he would subscribe unto the faith of
one substance or depart the city the which he did. Sozomenus lib. 7. cap. 5.
says that the church was called the (...) surrectio^ because the faith which
of a long time seemed to be suppressed b^ the Arians for dead, wa^ the^ revived.


Gregory being then translated from the city Nazianzu^ governed a certain
little church within y^ walls of Constantinople. unto y^ which y^ Emperor
afterward annected a goodly temple and called it the resurrection. Gregory a
famous man excelling in virtue and godliness all y^ flourished in his time, when
he perceived y^ some did murmur and object unto hi^ y^ he was a country bishop
and a forainer, for all y^ he reioiced at y^ Emperors coming, he refused
utterly to continue longer at Constantinople. the emperor seeing y^ church out
of square endeavored with all means possible to reduce it unto peace to establish
unity and to enlarge y^ churches. wherefore immediately he gives Demophilus y^
Aria^ bishop to understand of his pleasure and in plain words demau^deth of
hi^ whether he would embrace y^ Nicene creed, set y^ people at unity and e^brace
concord himself. when he refused so to do y^ emperor said unto him: if thou
refuse to embrace peace and unity I co^mau^d thee to void y^ church. Demophilus
hearing this, advised himself that it booted not for him to withstand the
berdure of the higher power, he assembled together a great multitud in the
church, stood up in the midst and brake out into these words: brethren it is
written in the Gospel, if they persecut you in one city fly into an other.
In so much y^ the Emperor banisheth us the churches, I would have you know
Matthew. 10.
that tomorowe you must meet together out of the city. When he had made an
end of speakinge he went forth. He understood not that such as fly the trade
of life, which worldlinges follow after (for so must we take the words of the
Gospel) have to seek the higher Jerusalem. He meante it otherwise and
thenceforth raised conuenticles without the walls of the city. There departed
together with him Lucius, who us I said before was banished Alexandria,
enjoined to live in exile, and then lead his life at Constantinople. Wherefore
the Arians which held the churches for the space of forty years, refusinge
the unity and concord which Theodosius the Emperor exhorted them unto,
departed the city in the fifth Co^sulship of Gratian and the first of
Theodosius the sixth and twentieth of November. Then such as were of the faith
of one substance came in their rowmes and took possession of the Churches.

CAP. VIII.
Of the hundredth and fifty Bishops which at the commandment of the Emperor
Theodosius met at Constantinople, their decrees and how they created
Nectarius Bishop of that seae.

THe Emperor without long deliberation summoned a council of such Bishops as
were of The counsel of Constantinople Anno Dom. 385
his faith: to the end the canons of y^ Nicene council might be confirmed and
a Bishop chosen of Constantinople. And in hope to reconcile the Macedonians
with the Bishops which embraced the faith of one substance, he cited also the
bishops of the Macedonian sect. Wherefore there met there of them which
embraced the Nicene Greede: T^^otheus Bishop of Alexandria: Cyrillus Bishop of
Jerusalem, who the^ after his late recantation, addicted him wholly unto the
faith of one substance: Meletius who was called thither in a while before to
the stalling of Gregory Nazianzen: Ascholius Bishop of Thessalonica with many
others, to the number of a hundredth and fifty Bishops. The chief of all the
Macedonian Bishops was Eleusius Bishop of Cyzicum and Marcianus Bishop of
Lampsacum. The number of that sect came to a thirty and six whereof the
greater part came out of Hellespontus. The council met together in the
Consulship of Eucharide^ and Euagrius and the month of May. The Emperor
together with the Bishops of his opinion first used all means possible with
Eleusius and the rest of the Macedonians for to reconcile them with the
catholic church: they not only bring them in remembrance of the embassy which
Eustathius together with many others did in their names to Liberius late Bishop
of Rome: but also that not long before without exception they communicated
throughout every church with such as professed the faith of one substance: and
that they behaved themselves neither godly, neither religiously, sithence that
aforetime they ratified the self same opinion, and faith with them, if now
again they endeavored to overthrow such things as they had advisedly decreed
before. for all they could do, it was neither fair means neither foul
means that would prevail. They said flatly rather then they would
subscribe unto the faith of one substance, that they would hold with the
Arians. When they had made this answer they left Constantinople and sent their
letters abroad into every city that they should in no wise consent unto the
faith of the Nicene council. The Bishops that were of the other side
continewing at Constantinople co^sulted together about the election of a
Bishop. For Gregory as I said before had refused that seae and returned to
Nazianzum. Nectarius ^hose^ by the ^ouncell Bishop of Con^^antinople.
There was at that time one Nectarius of noble lineage whose auncetors had been
Senators, a man he was of good life and godly conversation, who though he were
by office a Praetor, yet did the people choose him to their Bishop, in the end
by the consent of a hundredth and fifty Bishops then present he was stalled
Bishop of Constantinople. Then was it decreed that the Bishop of Constantinople
should have the next prerogative after the bishop of Rome, the reason was The
canons ^f the council held at ^onstanti^ople.
because that city was called New Rome. Again they ratify the faith of the
Nicene Council: they divide provinces and ordain Patriarchs: they decree
that no Bishop shall leave his own diocese and intermedle with foraine
churches, for unto that time by reason of the great heat and storm of
persecution it was sufferable at every ones choice and liberty. Nectarius
Bishop of Constantinople had that great city together with all Thracia
allotted to his jurisdiction. The Patriarckship throughtout Pontus was assigned
unto Helladius Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia after Basil: unto Gregory the
brother of Basil who was Bishop of Nyssa a city also in Cappadocia and unto
Otreius Bishop of Meletina a city of Armenia. Amphilochius Bishop of Iconium
and Optimus Bishop of Antioch in Pisidia took the Patriarckshippe of Asia. The
province of Egypt fell unto Timothee bishop of Alexandria. Pelagius Bishop of
Laodicea and Diodorus Bishop of Tarsus are appointed over the Eastern
diocese, reserving the prerogative of honor unto the church of Antioch the
which the^ presently they granted unto Meletius. They decreed moreover that if
necessity did so require that a prouincial synod should determine provincial
affairs. The Emperor gave his assent unto all the aforesaid, and thus the
council was dissolved.

CAP. IX.
How the Emperor Theodosius caused the corpse of Paulus late Bishop of
Constantinople to be brought from exile with great honor: at what time Meletius
Bishop of Antioch departed this life.

ABout that time the corpse of Paulus the Bishop (whom as I said before Philip
the Emperors Liuetenant throught the procurement of Macedonius sent to exile
unto Cucusum a city of Armenia and there stifled to death) was conveyed by the
Emperors commandment from Ancyra to Constantinople, and there received with
great honor in the church which bears his name unto this day: the which
church was unto that time frequented of the Macedonians who severed themselves
from the Arians, but then were thrust out by the Emperor because they refused
to be of his faith and opinion. At that time Meletius Bishop of Antioch fell
sick and died, Gregory the brother of Basil preached at his funeral. His
corpse was carried of his friends into Antioch and there interred. Again the
favorers of Meletius would not be under Paulinus jurisdiction but chose
Flauianus to their bishop in the rowme of Meletius. Whereupon the people again
were at discord and fell to raising of tumults and dissentio^. And because of
that, the church of Antioch was divided again, not about the faith but about
their fond contention in choosinge of Bishops.

CAP. X.
How the Emperor when his son Arcadius was created Augustus summoned
together a Synod of all sects and opinions: He banished all heretics the
Nouatians only excepted because they embraced the faith of one substance.

WHen the Arians were banished the churches the flame of tumult and schism
flashed about in every congregation. I can not choose but wonder at the
Emperors advise and policy therein. For he suffered not this sedition to
reign very long throughout y^ cities, but with speed he summoned a council
charging that all sects and opinions whatsoever should meet together,
supposinge verily that by conference and communication had between them selves
they would at length be brought to establish one faith and opinion. The which
drift and good meaning of his as I suppose was cause and directer of all his
prosperous successes. For then it fell out through the providence and
procurement of almighty God that all the Barbarians were at peace within his
dominions, rebelled not at all but yielded themselves unto the Imperial
seepter, for example Athanarichus the valiant captain of the Gotthes came in
withal his power and shortly after died at Constantinople. The Emperor
created Arcadius his son Augustus in y^ second Consulship of Merogandus and
the first of Saturninus the sixteenth of January. shortly after all bishops of
every sect out of all provinces came thither in y^ said Co^sulship but the
month of June. The Emperor sent for Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople,
reasoned with him how he might rid y^ Christian religion of y^ discord and
dissension, how it were possible to reduce y^ church unto unity: he said
further that y^ controversies and quarells which molested y^ quiet state of y^
church and rent asunder y^ members of Christ were to be sifted out and y^
punishments to light upon their pates y^ were found the authors of schism and
disturbers of peace and quietness. Nectarius hearing of this was wonderful sadd
and pensive: he called unto him Agelius the Nouatia^ Bishop who embraced
together with him y^ faith of one substance and opened unto him y^ mind and
purpose of y^ Emperor. He although otherwise a rare and singular man yet was
he no body in controversies of religion and disputation of ecclesiastical
matters but appointed Sisinius a reader of his church to reason with them in
his stead. Sisinius an eloquent man, well experienced in all things,
askilfull interpretor of holy Scripture, a notable Philosopher, knowinge full
well that disputations would not only not reconcile schisms, but also fire
the slymie matter of contention raygning in the rotten bowels of heretics:
therefore he advised Nectarius in this sort: that it was not best to deal
with them logical wise with the frubushinge of school points, but to lay
flat before them the forms of faith established by our auncetors (he knew of
a surety that the Elders had taken heed lest they should assign unto the
son of God a begininge of essence, because they were of the opinion that the
son of God was coeternall with the father) and that the Emperor should
demand of the ringleaders of the heretics whether they made any account of
those aunciente fathers who governed the church godly and prudentely before the
schism and division, or whether they condemned the^ as aliens and far
estraunged from the Christian faith? If they reject them, then let them boldly
pronounce them accursed: and if they presume so bold an enterprise, then will
the common people cry out against them. This being done the truth after such
trial no doubt will prevail. If they reject not the ancient fathers the^ let
us allege their works and wrytinges and confirm the matter in controversy
out of them. Nectarius being thus counseled by Sisinius got him with speed
unto the Emperoures palace, made the Emperor priuey unto these circumstances.
He thinks well of the advice and compasses the matter circumspectly. At the
first he concealed his drift and required of them to tell him whether they
esteemed and allowed of the fathers which governed the church before the
division, or no? When as they confessed as much in effect and said that they
highly reverenced them for their masters: the Emperor demanded of them
again whether they would be tried by their testimonies toutchinge the true
and right faith? the sects and factious Bishops together with the Logicians
then present (for they had brought with them many well prepared for
disputation) hearing this, knew not what answer to make. They were divided
among themselves, while that some held with the Emperor and some other
affirmed that it was altogether contrary to their mind and purpose, for y^
diverse opinion they conceived of the ancient fathers distracted their minds
one from the other. So that not only the opinion was diverse among contrary
sects, but such as were of one opinion were divided among themselves. Wherefore
their linked malice was no otherwise then the confuse language of those
ancient Giaunts and the turret of their spiteful (...). 11.
muention was turned down to the ground. When the Emperor understood of
their manifold dissentio^ and that they builded not upon y^ ancient fathers
exposition of the faith, but trusted to their sophistical quirckes of Logic,
dealt an other way with them, and bad every sect lay down their faith and
opinion in wrytinge. Then the principal of every sect took pen in hand
and wrote his opinion. There was a day appointed for the purpose. All the
Bishops being called met at the Emperors palace. There came thither
Nectarius and Agelius fauoringe the faith of one substance: Demophilus of the
Arians: Eunomius himself in the name of the other Eunomians The zeal of the
Emperor Theodosius for the siftinge out of the truth.
and Eleusius Bishop of Cyzicum for the Macedonians. First of all the Emperor
saluteth them rurteously: next he received every ones writing: then he went a
side and locked in himself: sell down upon his knees and prayed unto God that
he would asist him in the choice and revealing of the truth. Last of all
having perused every ones opinion he condemned and tore in pieces all such
Creedes as derogated from the unity which is in the blessed Trinity: he
allowed and highly commended only of all the rest, the Creed containing the
clause of one substance. This was the cause that the Nouatians were favored and
thenceforth suffered to celebrate their wo^ted assemblies within the walls of
the city. The Emperor wonderinge at their consent and harmony toutching y^
faith, made a law that they should enjoy their own churches with security, and
y^ their churches should have such priuiledgs as the other churches of the same
opinion and faith were wont to have. The Bishops of other sects because there
reigned among themselves mutual discord and dissentio^ they were set at
naught of the people committed to their own charge. Who though at their
departure they were all soroweful and pensive, yet fell they a co^forting of
their charge by letters: exthorting them not to shrink at all from them
because many had left them and fell to embracinge the faith of one substance.
For many were called but few chosen. This they uttered not when y^ greatest
part of the people cleaued unto the higher power and zealously embraced their
faith. Yet for all this were not they which held the faith of one substance
void of disturbance and molestation. For the controversy that sell out in the
church of Antioch divided such as were of the council into two, factions for
the Egyptians, Arabians, and Cyprians held together, and thought good to
remove Flauianus out of the Bishops seae of Antioch: but the Palaestinians,
Phoenicia^s, and Syrians took his part. The issue and end of this
controversy I will lay down in an other place.

CAP. XI.
How that Maximus the tyrant through wiles sle^e the Emperor Gratian. And
how that Iustina the Empress the mother of Valentinianus the younger left
persecutinge of Ambrose Bishop of Myllain^ because she feared Maximus the
tyrant.

WHen the council was held at Constantinople we have learned such a broyle as
follows to have been in the Weste parts of the world. Maximus a Britain
took armor Maximus a Bryttaine.
against the Empire of Rome and conspired the death of Gratian who now was
weakened together with his power by reason of the battle he waged with the
Germans. Probus sometimes a Consul was chief governor of Italy during the
nonage of Valentinianus who with great prudence ruled the common weal. Iustina
Valentinianus the Emperors mother being infected with the silch of Arianisme
while her husband lived could no kind of way molest such as embraced the
faith of one substance: yet after his deseasse removing to Mediolanum and her
son being of tender years she raised such tumults against Ambrose the Bishop
that in the end he was exiled. But when the people for the singular love and
affection they bare unto Ambrose with stood her act and hindered their force
that went about to conueye him to exile: tidings came y^ Gratianus through the
wiles and sleight of Maximus the tyra^t was put to death. Andragathius the
captain of Maximus hidinge himself in a chariot resemblinge the form of a
licter borne of mules gave his soldiers charge to signify unto the Emperors
guard y^ the Empress rode therein and went to meet y^ Emperor who passed over
Rhodanus a flood y^ runs by Lions a city of France. The Emperor thinkinge
verily that his wife was there in deed aboyded not the conspiracy but fell
unawares into the enemies hand as a blind man falls into y^ ditch. For
Andragathius lighted down out of y^ chariot and slew Gratianus presently. He
died in the Consulship of Merogandus and Saturninus Gratianus the Emperor died
Anno Dom. 387 Maximus the bryttain is made Emperor.
after he had reigned fifteen years and lived four and twenty. The which
news cooled y^ heat of y^ Emperors mother kindled agayust Ambrose. Wherefore
Valentinianus y^ time constrayu^ng him thereunto received Maximus with
unwilling mind to be his fellow Emperor. Probus y^ governor of Italy fearing
y^ power of Maximus determined with himself to remove into y^ East. with all
speed he left Italy and hasteninge toward Illyrium, made his abode at
Thessalonica a city of Macedonia.

CAP. XII.
Theodosius the Emperor left Arcadius his son and Emperor at
Constantinople, went toward Millayne to wage battle with Maximus the
Bryttaine.

THeodosius the Emperor for y^ aforesaid cause was wonderful sorry: he
gathered great power Anno Dom* 388.
to go against the tyrant and feared greatly lest Maximus would conspire the
death of Valeutinianus y^ younger. Then came also legates from y^ Persians to
conclude peace between the^ and the Emperor it was the very same time y^ his
son Honorius was borne by his wife Placilla y^ Empress, in y^ consulship of
Richomelianus and Clearchus the neenth of September. A little before when y^
aforesaid men were consuls Agelius y^ Nouatian bishop finished the mortal race
of his natural life. The year following being the first co^sulship of
Arcadius Augustur and Vadon, after y^ Timotheus bishop of Alexandria departed
this life, Theophilus succeeded him in the bishopric. The second year when
Demophilus the Arian bishop had changed this life, y^ Arians sent for Marinus
out of Thracia a man of their own crew and appointed him their bishop. Marinus
in whose time y^ Aria^s were divided among themselves (as it shall be showed
hereafter) lived not many days after, wherefore they call Dorotheus out of
Antioch in Syria and assign him their bishop. The Emperor leaving his son
Arcadius at Constantinople marched forewards to give battle unto Maximus. As
he came to Thessalonica he found the soldiers of Valentinianus all dismayed
and quite discouraged: because y^ necessity had constrained them to take the
tyrant Maximus for an Emperor. Theodosius showed himself openly to seem of
nere another side. For when Maximus had sent ambassadors unto him he neither
received neither rejected the^: yet was he sorry y^ the Empire of Rome should be
oppressed with tyranny under color of the Imperial title. Therefore he
gathered his power together and made have to Millayne, for Maximus was lately
come thither.

CAP. XIII.
Of the tumult which the Arians raised at Constantinople.

AT the very same time when the Emperor made all y^ expeditio^ he could to
wage this battaill with the tyrant: the Arians raised a wonderful great stur
at Constantinople, y^ manner was as follows. Men commonly are wo^t to fitten
and feign leasings of things they know not and if that by chance they get hold
of any tale forthwith they brute abroad false rumors and reports according to
their fond vain and foolish desires, ever chatting of news and harkeninge
after change. The which then was seen in the city of Constantinople. For of
the wars that were so far of, they blased abroad of their own brain one
this thing an other that thing: hoping in their traitorous hearts that y^
godly Emperor had every day worse success then other. For although there was
nothing as yet done in the wars: nevertheless they auoutch yt tidinges
(being coined in the closet of their gigled brain) they knew not, to be as
true as if they had seen the^ with their own eyes: they reported that y^
tyrant foiled the Emperors power: y^ there were slain so many hundreds and so
many thousands of his soldiers and that the tyrant had almost taken the
Emperor himself. The Arians being very much troubled in mind ready to burst
for grief (that they whom they persecuted aforetime now enjoyed the churches
within the walls of y^ city) scattered sundry false rumors abroad. And because
y^ diverse other reports persuaded the first autors of these false rumors that
their sigments were most true (for others which learned it only by hearesay
affirmed unto the autors thereof y^ it was even as they at y^ first had
reported unto the^) the Arians pluck up their hearts, they begin to venture a
fresh and they set on fire the palace of Anno Dom. 392.
Nectarius y^ Bishop of Constantinople. These things were done in the second
Consulship of Theodosius but the first of Cynegius.

CAP. XIIII.
The victory of Theodosius the Emperor, and the foil of Maximus the tyrant.

WHen the soldiers of Maximus the tyrant understood of the Emperors coming
and Maximus the bryttaine which slew the Emperor Gratian and was crowned
Emperor in his ^^eede is now betrayed of his own me^ and executed by
Theodorus the Emperor. this ^^^ximus ^as highly commended by a consul (...)
Rome which wrote book in is pray^e.
his great power they could in no wise digest the rumor thereof: they were
taken with sudden fear, they bound the tyrant their master and brought him
unto the Emperor who presently executed him in the aforesaid co^sulship the
eight and twentieth of August. But Andragathius who slew the Emperor Gratian,
hearing y^ discomfiture of Maximus, ran headlo^g into the next river and
drowned himself. Wherefore y^ Emperoures now having gotten y^ victory took
their voyage to Rome, Honorius of tender years went together in their company.
For his father after the foil of Maximus had sent to Constantinople for him.
They solemnized y^ triu^phe at Rome. At what time y^ Emperor Theodosius yielded
forth a notable sign of his singular cleme^cy, in the trouble of Symachus the
consul. This Symachus was head Senator of Rome, and for his great skill and
eloquence in Roman literature had in great estimation. He had written many
books among the rest one in the praise of Maximus the tyrant, repeated in his
hearing while he lived the which afterward being exta^t charged the author with
treason. Wherefore he fearing death ran unto y^ church for refuge. The
Emperor according unto the great zeal and godly affection he bare unto the
Christian faith, reverenced not only the priests of his own belief and
opinion: but also entreated courteously the Nouatians who embraced together with
him y^ faith of one substance and to the end he might gratify Leontius Bishop
of the Nouatian church at Rome which made suit for him, he granted Symachus
his pardon. Afterward he wrote an Apology unto the Emperor Theodosius*
Thus y^ wars which at y^ first threatened great calamity to ensue were quickly
ended.

CAP. XV.
Of Flauianus Bishop of Antioch.

AT the same time we have learned such things as follow to have been done at
Antioch in Syria. After the desease of Paulinus the people of that Church
abhorred Flauianus and therefore chose Euagrius a man of their own disposition
to their Bishop. He lived not many days and after him there was none chosen to
y^ rowme: for Flauianus through his devise brought that to pass. As many then
as detested Flauianus for the breakinge of his oath, had their private
conuenticles. But Flauianus rolled (as commonly we say) every stone, put every
devise in ure to the end he might bring them within his jurisdiction, the which
not long after he brought to pass. For the spite and grudge between him and
Theophilus bishop of Alexandria was laid aside and by his means Damasus Bishop
of Rome was reconciled unto him. They had both been offended with him not
only because he forswore himself: but also for that he had broken the league
concluded between them, and the link of peace and unity. Wherefore Theophilus
being now pleased with him sent Isidorus a priest for to appease the
displeasure which Damasus had conceived against Flauianus: and to enstruct him
that it was according unto the use and manner of y^ church, if (respecting the
unity and concord to be retained among the common people) he would not
think amiss of Flauianus for so doing. When Flauianus was thus restored unto
the communion of the faithful the people of Antioch in process of time were
brought to love and amity one with another, and the affairs of Antioch had
such an end as you hear before. The Arians then being thrust out of the
Cyrill. John.
churches raised conuenticles in the suburbs. In the mean space when Cyrill
bishop of Jerusalem* had departed this mortal life, John came in his rowme.

CAP. XVI.
How the Idolgroues and temples of the Ethnickes were overthrown at
Alexandria and of the skirmish between the paganes and the christians.

ABout yt time there was a lamentable stir at Alexandria and the manner as
follows. By the procurement and industry of Theophilus y^ bishop the
Emperor commanded that all the Idolgroues of the Ethnicks within Alexandria
should down to y^ ground, and that Theophilus should ouersee it. Theophilus
being thus autorized omitted nothing, that might tend to the reproach and
contumely of Hethenish ceremonies: down goes the temple of Mithra, his foul
closets Mithra.
being full of Idolatricall filth and superstition are cleansed and rid out of
the way: down goes the God Serapis temple: the embrued and bloody mysteries of
the God Mithra are publicly derided: Serapis.
the vain and ridiculous practices both of Serapis and others are showed forth
unto the open face of the world: he caused such things as among them resembled
the yards of men, to be carried throughout Phalli.
the market place to their utter shame and ignominy. The Ethnikes inhabiting
Alexandria and above y^ rest such as professed philosophy beholding the manner
of the dealinge could no longer contain neither rule themselves: but heaped
new and also far more grievous offenses, unto the former acts of theirs being
both tragical and exceeding in cruelty. For all jointly ran upon a head,
they set upon the Christians, they sought to dispatch them every kind of way:
the Christians went about to withstand their violence, they defend themselves
and so mischief was heaped upon mischief, the skirmish was so sore and the
fraye continewed so long until either side was weary, had their fill of
bloodshed and manslaughter and could now kill no longer. There died but a few
of y^ Ethnicks, yet a great number of the Christians, of either side there was
wounded an infinite number. When all was ended the Ethnicks were wonderfully
afraid of the Emperors displeasure. Wherefore having committed such lewd
acts as their horrible wickedness led them unto: and having quenched their
boiling rage and fury with running streams of blood and wounded bowels they
run away and hid themselves some in one place some in an other. Many gave the
slip out of Alexandria and being dispersed led their lives thenceforth in
diverse other cities: of which number were Helladius Socrates was the scholar
of Helladius and Ammonius. The Aegyptia^s worshipped the Ape.
and Ammonius both Grammaria^s, whose scholar I my self was at Constantinople
in my youthly years. Helladius was said to be the priest of Jupiter and
Ammonius the priest of the Ape which they worshipped for God. Therefore the
slaughter being thus ended the governor of Alexandria and the captain of the
host came to aid Theophilus in the overthrow of their temples* the temples went
down, the Idols of the Gods were turned into cawdrons and into other
necessary vessel for household stuff. For the Emperor had given the images
of the Gods throughout all the Idolatrical temples of Alexandria to the relief
of the poor. Theophilus going about to deface all the pictures of their Gods
commanded that one of some certain God should be reserved and set up in some
public place of the city to the end the Ethnickes in process of time should
not be able to deny but that sometimes they worshipped such Gods. I have known
Ammonius the grammarian to have been very much offended with that act and to
have said that the religion of the Graecians sustained great injury and reproach
because y^ one image was not in like sort translated, but kept of set purpose
to the contumely of their religion. Helladius boasted in y^ hearing of many how
y^ in y^ skirmishe he slew nine men with his own hands. These were then the
broils at Alexandria.

CAP. XVII.
Of the hieroglyphicall letters found engraven in the temple of Serapis,
letters they were which yielded no sense by conjunction of syllable or knitting
of sentence, but were to be construed by the signification of the beasts which
they resembled.

IN the temple of Serapis now overthrown and rifled throughout there were
found engraven in the stones certain letters which they call Hieroglyphicall.
The manner of their ingrauinge resembled the form of y^ cross. The which when
both Christians and Ethnicks beheld before them every one applied them to his
proper religion. The Christians affirmed y^ the cross was a sign or token of
the passion of Christ and the proper cognizance of their profession: the
Ethnicks auoutched that therein was contained something in common belonging as
well to Serapis as to Christ: that the sign of the cross signified one thing
unto the Ethnicks an other unto the Christians. While they contend thus about
the interpretation of the letters many of the Ethnicks became Christians for
they perceived at length the sense and meaning of the Hieroglyphicall letters,
that they prognosticated salvation and the life to come. The Christians
perceauing that this made very much for their religion made great account
thereof and were not a little proud of it. When as by other Hieroglyphicall
letters it was gathered that the temple of Serapis should go to ruin when the
sign of y^ cross therein ingraue^ came to light (by that, life to come was
foreshewed) many more embraced Christian religion, confessed their sins and
were baptized. Thus much have I learned of y^ cross But verily I am not of
the opinion, that the Egyptian priests foreseeing that which should come to
pass of Christ should ingraue in stone the sign of the cross (for if the
mystery of Christ's incarnation was hid from the beginning of the world and from
many generations as the Apostle writes Coloss. 1.
and concealed from the deuell the prince of all impiety, how much more from
the Egyptian priests his ministers) but that in sifting out of y^ sense and
understanding of those characters it came to pass by the providence of God as
in times past with the Apostle Saint Paul. For he being endued from above with
the spirit of wisdom dealt with the Athenians in like sort and converted
many of them unto the faith, while he read the sen^ence that was engraven upon
the altar unto the Act 17. Numb. 22. 23 24. John. 18.
vnkowen God and applied it to his purpose. Unless that peradventure some man
will say that the word of God wroughte so forcibly in the Egyptian priests as
it did in Beldam and Caiphas. For they were constrained against their wills to
prophecy of good things. So far of these things.

CAP. XVIII.
How the Emperor Theodosius duringe the time of his abode at Rome did the
city much good by remouinge the theeuishe dens of the bakehouses and the
infamous ringing of bells at the deed doing in the stews.

THe Emperor Theodosius although he continewed but a little while in Italy,
yet in that space did he much good unto the City of Rome, partly by geuinge
that which was good and taking away that which was ill. For as he showed
himself bountiful and liberal toward her in many things, so has he
removed two things which were great blemishes unto that City. The one was
in this sort. There was at Rome a huge and a great house A bakehouse under
ground.
of aunciente buyldinge where all the bread that served the City was baked.
The masters of this house the Romans called in their own tongue Mancipes,
such they were as served all with bread by Great, who in process of time
turned those large rowmes to dens of thieves. For by reason the bakehouse
that belonged unto that buyldinge was under ground and because that on every
side there were vittailers, tauernes and tippling houses full of harlots and
naughtypackes: Blind alehouses.
many that resorted thither partly for food and vittails and partly also for
the satisfieng of their filthye lust were craftily spoiled of all they had and
most commonly dispatched, so that their friends could never hear tidinges
of them again. A certain privy conueyance there was devised to throw the^
down headlong from those bawdy tauernes into the blind bakehouse, by this
means many especially of the strangers which inhabited Rome were cast away.
For above they were spoiled and beneath they were made bondslaues and
constrained to grind in yt bakehouse: most of them were never permitted to
depart but continewed their life time in drudgery making their friends believe
they were not in this world. It fell out that one of the Emperor Theodosius
soldiers was thrown into this hole, being in the close bakehouse, and
couldnot get license to depart, he drew out his dagger and slew them which
stopped his passage, the rest being afraid of their lives, let the soldier
go. The Emperor understanding all the circumstance, sent for the millers and
bakers, punished the masters with extreme torment, ouerthrewe those blind
houses which were receptacles of thieves and harlots. and thus ryd he the
princely city of this one shameful Theodosius took away this filthy law,
and suppressed the stews.
dealing. The other was as follows. If a woman were taken in adultery, the
Romans used such a kind of punishment as removed not the sin, but
increased the vice. For they shutt her up in narrow stews, and compelled her
beastly without all shame to play the harlott, yea they procured ringinge
while the deed was adoing, that the neighbors might understand of it, and
that by the sound of the tinglinge bells all might be made privy to that
filthy and shameful kind of correction. When the Emperor heard of this
horrible custom, he thought it in no wise to be winked at, but caused Sestra
(for so were the stews called) to be overthrown and suppressed, and made
other laws for the correction of adulterers. Wherefore Rome by the benefit of
Theodosius y^ Emperor was delivered from both these beastly and foul acts.
After that he had set other things in order, he left the government of that
city unto Valentinianus, took thence his voyage together with his son
toward Constantinople, and came to his iourneys end at that time, when
Tatianus and Symachus were Consuls, the tenth of November.

CAP. XIX.
Of the Priests appointed to hear confession, and why shriuing was forbid in
the church.

ABout that time it seemed good unto the church to take away the office of
such priests as were appointed throughout every church to receive penitents
after the confession of their sins into the company of the faithful, and
that for this occasion. Since the time that the The original of confession.
Nouatians divided them selves from the church, and refused to communicate with
such as fell in the persecution under Decius, y^ bishops added unto y^
ecclesiastical canon y^ in every church there should a priest be appointed for
y^ admissio^ of penitents: to y^ end such as had fallen after baptism should
in hearing of the priest appointed for the purpose, confess their sin and
infirmity. This Canon is as yet of force among other sects: only the true
Christians embracing the faith of One substance, together with the Nouatians
which therein hold with them, have banished this peneten^^all function out of
the church. Neither did the Nouatians at the beginning allow of this
addition: yet the bishops which now adays govern the churches, although they
retained this custom of a long time, notwithstanding removed it out of the
church in the time of Nectarius bishop of Constantinople, by reason of an
heinous offense committed in the church in such sort as follows. A noble
woman came unto the Priest whose office was to hear penitents, and confessed
orderly The removing of confession and shriuing out of the church
the sins she had committed after baptism. The Priest enjoined her to give
her self wholly to fasting and continewall prayer, that together with her
confession in word, she might show forth the works of repentance in deed.
As she continewed a while longer a shriuinge, she accuses her self of an
other crime, and declares that a certain deacon of that church had abused her
body* for which offense by this means come to light, the Deacon was banished
the church, and A deacon abused a certain matron of Constantinople.
thereupon there was much ado among the people. They were wonderfully
incensed, not only because of the heinous offense that was committed, but also
that thereby the church was blemished with reproach and infamy. When the
priests were sharply rebuked, and the aforesaid crime objected unto them,
Eudaemon minister of that church by birth of Alexandria, counseled Nectarius
the bishop to take away the function of the shriuinge Priest, and grant free
liberty unto every one as his conscience served him, to become partaker of the
holy mysteries. For in so doing there was hope that the church should no
longer be sclaundered. Insomuch that I heard these things of Eudaemons own
mouth, I doubted not to annexe it unto this our history. For as I have often
admonished the reader, it was ever my dryft and purpose to learn the histories
of such as knew them very well, and diligently to syfte out the truth, lest
that at any time my pen should pass the bounds of a faithful
historiographer. I of late reasoned thus with Eud^mon: Thy advise and counsel,
O priest, whether it shall avail the church or no, God knows: yet I see
plainly that thou have ministered occasion, that one may not reprehend an others
vice, neither observe the advice of Paul: Have nothing to do with the
unfruitful works of darkness, but rather rebuke them. Of these things thus
much shall suffice.

CAP. XX.
How that Arians with Arians, Nouatians with Nouatians, together with other
heretics fell out among them selves. This title is specially handled in the
22. and the 23. chapiters followinge.

I Think it necessary to lay down in writing such things as fell out
among others also, I mean the Arians, Nouatians, Macedonians, and Eunomians.
For the church being once divided, rested not upon one schism and division,
but men fell out among them selves, one severed him self from an other, upon
light and tryflinge occasion they brake asunder the bond of love and amity.
Wherefore how, when, and upon what occasion they varyed, I am now about to
declare. First of all we have to learn, that Theodosius molested none of all
the aforesaid sects, Eunomius only excepted: whom the Emperor exiled
because he raised conuenticles at his private house with in Constantinople,
published abroad certain lewd books of his own, and infected many with the
filth of his heretical opinion. He disquieted not the rest, neither
constrained them to his communion, but licenced every of them to frequent
several conuenticles, to embrace what opinion liked them best in christian
religion. And as he gave leave unto all other sects for to erect them churches
without the walls in the suburbs: so he commanded that the Nouatians (as we
said before) maintayninge together with him the faith of One substance,
should freely without disturbance and molestation, enjoy and recover their
former churches within the cities of whom now occasion is ministered to utter
a few lines, the which I will briefly run over. Cap. 21. in the greek.
Agelius.
Agelius was bishop of the Nouatian church at Constantinople the space of
forty years, that is (as I said before) from the raygne of Constantine, unto
the sixth year of Theodosius. At his last end he appointed Sisinius to
succeed him in the bishopric, a priest of his own church, and a man very
well seen in profane literature, trained up in philosophy together with
Julian the Emperor under Maximus the philosopher. And when the Nouatians
charged Agelius for appoynting them Sisinius and not Marcianus, who was a godly
man, by whose means they were rid from trouble and Marcianus.
molestation in the time of Valens: he for to pacify their heat, and to
satis^^e their mind, assigned Marcianus unto them. In a while after, although
he was very weak, yet went he into the church, and said thus unto the people:
Immediately after my desease you shall have Marcianus to your bishop, after
Marcianus, Sisinius. When he had said thus, he took his leave of them, and
not long Sisinius.
after dyed. But Marcianus being bishop of the Nouatians, their church was
divided upon such Sabbatius.
an occasion as follows. Sabbatius a certain Jew embraced Christian
religion, whom Marcianus preferred to the function of priesthood,
notwithstanding his conversion and preferment he sauored of the old infection,
and addicted him self unto Jewishe observations, neither was he only
contented with this, but needs he would be made a bishop. Wherefore after that
he had gotten of his side a coople of priests, men of like disposition and
aspiring minds, by name Theoctistus and Macarius, he went about to revive the
time and manner of solemnizing the feast of Easter, even as (according unto our
former relation) the Nouatians attempted under Valens at Pazus, a peltinge
village of Phrygia. And though at the first he severed him self from the
church, under pretense and color of the monastical trade of life, affirminge
that certain men were stumbling blocks unto his conscience, whom he thought
unworthy of the holy mysteries: yet in process of time whilst that he raised
private conuenticles, his drift was manifestly perceived. Marcianus
understanding of this, misliked very much with him self that he had not taken
better aduisement in giving of orders, y^ he had preferred such vayneglorious
persons and aspiring minds unto the function of priesthood: he fretted within
him self for anger, and wished that his hands had been set upon pricking
thorns A Council of Nouatian bishops at Angaris.
when they were laid upon Sabbatius head. To be short, he summoned a council
of Nouatian bishops at Angaris the mart town of Bithynia* adjoining unto
Helenopolis: he cited Sabbatius to appear before them, and expostulated with him
in presence of the council, the cause that gave him occasion of offense. As
soon as he had pleaded for him self, the variance toutchi^g y^ celebration of
Easter to have layen upon his stomach (for he was of yt opinion yt therein it
behooved the^ to observe the Jewishe custom, and the order prescribed by such
as before that time met for the same cause at Pazus) the bishops suspecting that
he had enterprised the same in hope of a bishopric, made him swear that he
would never take upon him to be bishop. When he had taken his ^th, they read to
him the Canon contayninge a matter of indifferency, that it was not a
sufficient cause to part asunder the unity of the church about the celebration
of Easter: and that their assembly at Pazus, was no prejudice unto the
general canon. They said moreover that the elderswhich immediately succeeded
the Apostles, varied among them selves about this feast, yet brake not asunder
y^ bond of unity: and that the Nouatians inhabitinge the princely city of
Rome, for all they never retained the manner of the Jews, but always kept
Easter after the Aequinoctiall space, yet communicated notwithstanding with
such as were of the same faith, and observed a contrary custom. When they had
used these and other such like reasons to the same purpose, at length they
concluded, that the canon of Easter was an indifferent matter: that it was
lawful thenceforth for every one to celebrate that feast even as he had
aforetyme determined with him self: moreover there was a prouiso laid down
for the remouinge of dissension, that if some varyed about the celebration of
Easter, notwithstanding they should be at unity and concord in the church
of God. These things were then in this sort laid down of them for the
rootinge out of variance from among them about the celebration of Easter.
Sabbatius being bound with an oath, for all the celebration of that feast was
variable and diverse, was before hand with them alone for fasting and vigils,
for he kept Easter upon the saturdaye: yet met he the day followinge with
others in the church, and was partaker together with them of the holy
mysteries. That did he for the space of many years, and therefore could not
be concealed from infinite multitudes of men. By occasion whereof many simple
and ignorant souls, especially in Phrygia and Galatia, hopinge verylie to be
justified thereby, became earnest followers of him, and observed in secret his
celebration of Easter. In the end Sabbatius raised private conuenticles, and
forgetting the oath he had taken, was chosen bishop (as hereafter shall more
manifestly appear) of such as addicted themselves to his kind of discipline.

CAP. XXI. Cap. 22. in the greek.

The diversity of observations in diverse places, toutching Easter, fasting,
mariadge, service, with other ecclesiastical rites.

PResently me thinks fit opportunity serves to discourse of Easter. For
neither had the Easter.
elders of old, neither the fathers of late days, I mean such as favored the
Jewishe custom sufficient cause, as I gather, so egerly to contend about the
feast of Easter: neither weyed they deeply with the^ selves, that when Jewishe
forms and figures were translated into christian faith, the literal
observation of Msoes law, and the types of things to come wholly vanished away.
The which may evidently be gathered, when as there is no law established by
Christ in the Gospel, which allows of the observation of Jewishe rites: nay
the Apostle has in plain words forbidden it, where he abrogated
circumcision, and exhorted us not to contend about feasts and holidays. For
writing unto the Galathians he says in this sort: Tell me you that desire
to be Galat. 4.
under the law, do ye not hear what the law says? When that he had
discoursed a while thereof, he concludes that the Jews were become servants
unto the law, and that such as were called unto the Christian faith, were
thereby made free: he admonishes us further not to observe days, neither
months, nor years. And unto y^ Colossians, he is as plain as may be, saying,
that y^ observation Coloss. 2.
of such things was nothing but a shadow: his words are these: Let no man
therefore judge you in meat or in drink, in a piece of an holidaye, or of the
new moon, or of the sabbath, which are but shadows of things to come. And
in y^ epistle to y^ Hebrews he confirms the same, where he says: In so much
the priesthood is translated, of necessity there must be a translation of Heb.
^.
the law. Wherefore neither does y^ Apostle, nor y^ Eua^gelists press y^
Christians with the yoke of bondage and servitude: but left y^ remembrance of the
feast of Easter, and the observation of other holidayes to their free choice
and discretion, which have been benefited by such days. And because me^ are
wont to keep holidaies for to refreshe their wearisome bodies already pining
with toil and labor: therefore it comes to pass, y^ every one in every place
of a certain custom do celebrate of their own accord y^ remembrance of y^
Lords passion* for neither our savior, neither his Apostles have commanded us
any where to observe it, neither have they laid it down as a law: neither have
y^ Eua^gelists and apostles threatened us, or enjoined us a penalty or
punishment as y^ law of Moses has done unto y^ Jews: but only y^ Eua^gelists
make me^tio^ of this fest, partly to y^ great shame of y^ Jews, who defiled
their bodies, and profaned their solemn feasts with blood and slaughter, and
partly also to signify that our savior suffered death for the salvation of
mankind in the days of unleavened bread. The drist of the Apostles was not to
lay down canons and decrees concerning feasts and holy days, but to become
paterns unto us of piety, of good life, and godly conversation. I am of the
opinion, that as many other things crept in of custom in sundry places: so the
feast of Easter to have prevailed among all people of a certain private
custom and observation, insomuch that (as I said before) not one of the
Apostles has any where prescribed to any man as much as one rule of it. The
success and events have manifestly declared unto the world that of old time
it was observed not by canon, but of custom. The greater part throughout the
lesser Asia have solemnized this feast of old upon the fourteenth day of the
month, without any account made, or heed taken of the sabbath day. For all
that, while they did so they were not at discord with such as retained a
contrary observation of that feast, before that Victor bishop of Rome through
boiling heat and choler had excommunicated all Asia. I mean such as observed
the feast of Easter the fourteenth day of the month. For which act Irenaeus
bishop of Lions a city in France, inueyed bitterly in his letters against
Victor, rebuked him for his fu^^ishe dealing and furious rage, put him in
remembrance that the elders and ancient fathers, who varyed among them selves
about the observation of this feast, communicated nevertheless one with
another: and also that Polycarpus bishop of Smyrna, which Eusebius. eccles. hist.
li. 4. ca. 15 says that Polycarpus suffered martyrdom under Verus the
Emperor.
suffered martyrdom under Gordianus, communicated with Anicetus bishop of Rome,
neither fell he out with him at all (as Eusebius reports in the fifth book of
his ecclesiastical history) for all that he kept the fourtienth day of the
month as the custom of Smyrna, where he abode, did prevail. Some (as I said
before) in the lesser Asia, do celebrate that feast the fourteenth day of the
month: some again inhabiting the farthest parts of Asia eastwards, vary in
the month, yet hold the feast upon the saturday: they think that the Jews
are herein to be followed, for all they curiously mark not the time of the
feast: these men do solemnize it after the Aequinoctiall space, yet do they
detest the time limited by the Jews for the celebration thereof: for they
think that Easter is ever to be kept when the sun is in Aries, after the
Antiochians in the month Xanthicus, but with the Romans in April. That also
therein they followed (as Josephus writes in his third book of Judicial
antiquities) not the Jews of the later age, who foully erred therein, but the
eldest and most ancient. And as these men varied thus among themselves about
the observation of the feast of Easter: so is it manifest that all other
contreys throughout the west parts of the world, whose banks are beaten with
the surging waves of the Ocean sea, of old tradition and prescribed custom
have celebrated this feast after the Aequinoctiall lime. And for all that these
contreyes, these nations, and languages thus varyed one from the other, yet
they never divided the communion of the church, neither brake they asunder y^
bond of unity. Neither is y^ true which is rife in the mouths of malicious
men, that the council summoned in the time of Constantinus Magnus, perverted
and set quite out of order the manner and custom retained about the celebration
of this feast. For Constantinus him self wrote unto such as varied from
others, exhorting the fewer multitude to follow the greater number, the which
epistle of the Emperor thou shall find wholly in Eusebius third book of the
life of Constantine. But some portion thereof, which specially concerns the
feast of Easter, is read in this sort. In my simple judgment that is a
notable custom, the which ^he epistle ^f Constan^ne. Euse. lib. de vita
^onstant.
all the churches, West, South, and North, together with many contreyes of
the East do retain: and therefore it comes to pass, that all presently do
think very well of it. I my self have presumed so much upon your discrete
wisdoms, that what custom so ever is observed with uniform consent in the
city of Rome, Italy, Aphricke, and all Egypt, Spain, France, Brittayne,
Libya, and all Greece, in the provinces of Asia, Pontus, and Cilicia, you most
vvyllingly vvoulde approve the same: vveyinge with your selves aright that
there are not only more churches, but a greater number of people in those
parts, and that all of duty should vvishe and earnestly desire that thing
to be most religiously established which right and reason requires, which
also has no fellovvshippe with the open perjury of stubburne and stifnecked
Jews. This is a piece of the Emperors epistle. They that keep Easter the
fourteenth day of the month, bring forth John the Apostle for their author:
such as inhabit Rome, and the west parts of the world, allege Peter and
Paul for them selves, that they should leave them such a tradition. Yet there
is none that can show in writing any testimony of theirs for confirmation and
proof of their custom. And hereby I do gather, y^ the celebration of y^ feast
of Easter came up more of custom the^ by any law or canon. Every sect and
religion has sundry and diverse rites and ceremonies, yet conceive they no
worse opinion of others therefore the^ of the^ selves. for they which are of
one faith and opinion, varye among them selves in rites and observations.
Wherefore occasion is now ministered to discourse of the diversity of
ceremonies and customs throughout all contreyes and Christian congregations.
The manner of fasting usually Lent.
observed before Easter as it appears unto the whole world has diversely
been observed. Such as inhabit the princely city of Rome do fast three
weeks together before Easter, exceptinge the Saturdaye and the Sundaye:
Illyrium, all Greece together with Alexandria, begin their fasting days six
weeks before Easter, and that space they call forty days fasting or Lent.
Others some contrary to the aforesaid customs begin to fast seven weeks
before Easter, yet in all that while they use abstinence but only fifteen
days, pausing between every of them, and these few days they call forty
days fasting or Lent. so that I can not choose but marvel for all that they
differ in the number of days, yet all jointly do call every of their
observations forty days fasting or Lent. Others some have derived the
Etymology of this word as it pleased them best, and according unto the
invention of their own brain. Neither is this difference only about the
number of the days, but also a great diversity Diversity of meares in
fasting.
in the kinds of meat. For some do abstain from every living creature:
some other, of all the living creatures feed only upon fish: others
together with fish, feed upon the fowls of the air, affirminge as Moses
does write, that their original is of the water: others Genesis 1.
some eat neither nutts, neither aples, neither any other kind of fruit, nor
eggs neither: some feed only upon dry bread, some other receive no not
that. There are some that when they have fasted until nine of the clock, they
refreshe nature with diverse sorts of meats. Other nations have other
customs, the manner and causes are infinite. But in so much there is no man able
to show a president or record thereof in writing: it is plain that the
Apostles left free choice and liberty unto every man at his own discretion
without fear, compulsion and constraynte to addicte him self unto that which
seemed good and commendable. We know for most certain that this diversity
of fasting is rife throughout the world. Again The communion
toutching the Communion there are sundry observations and customs. for though
in manner all the Churches throughout the whole world do celebrate and receive
the holy mysteries every Sabbath day after the other: yet the people
inhabitinge Alexandria and Rome, of an old tradition do not use it. The
Egyptians adioyninge unto Alexandria together with the inhabitours of Thebais,
use to celebrate the Communion upon the Sundaye, yet do they not receive the
Communion as the manner is among the Christians. For when they have banquetted
and crommed them selves with sundry delicate and daynty dishes, in the Eueninge
after service they use to communicate. Again at Alexandria upon the Thursdaye
and Frydaye the Scriptures are read, the Interpretours expound them, all the
solemnity for the Communion is accomplished, yet the Communion then not
received. And this is an old and an ancient custom at Alexandria. It is well
known that Origin flourished in those days in the Church, who being a wise
and discreet Doctor and Expounder of holy Scripture, perceauing that the
precepts of Moses law could in no wise be literally understood, gave
forth of the Passover a mystical and more divine kind of interpretation:
that there was but one only true Passover or Easter, the which our Savior
effectually solemnized at his naylinge to the tree, when he encountered with the
power of darkness, and triumphed over the Devil and Readers.
all his works. Again the Readers and Interpreters of holy Scripture at
Alexandria be they Cathecumenists or baptized it forces not: when as the
custom in other contreyes and Churches is to admit none into that function
unless he be first baptized. I remember my self an other custom which
preuayleth and is of force in Thessalia: that if there he which is a Priest
after the receauinge of orders do keep company with his wife the which he
married being a lay man he is forthewith deposed of the ministerye: yea when
as all the famous Priests The lawful marriage of Priests.
througheout the Eastern parts of the world, and the Bishopes also refrain
the company of their wives at their own choice without law or compulsion. For
many of them notwithstanding the administration and government of their
Bishoprics, begett children also on their lawefull wives. The author and
ringeleader of that custom in Thessalia was Theodorus a Priest of Triua a
city of that country, the writer of those wanton and amorous books the which
he made in the pryme of his florishinge youth, and entitled Aethiopica. They
retain the same observation and custom at Thessalonica, Macedonia and Hellas
in Achaia. I remember they have an other custom in Thessalia, that is, they
baptize only on the Baptism.
Easter holidays and therefore very many die without baptism, The Church of
Antioch in Syria The altar standing west ward. Eu^ning prai^^ by candle.
is situated contrary to other Churches, for the altar stands not to the East
but toward the West. In Hellas, Jerusalem and Thessalia service is said with
candell light after the manner of the Nouatians at Constantinople. In like sort
at Caesarea in Cappadocia and at Cyprus, the priests and Bishops do preach and
expound holy Scripture at evening prayer on the Saturdayes and Sundays by
candle light. The Nouatians of Hellespontus have not the same order and manner
Diversity of service.
of service as the Nouatians of Constantinople, yet for the most part they
imitate the chief churches among them. To be short among the customs and
observations of all sects and religions, we shall not be able to find two
which follow and retain one order of service. Moreover at Alexandria An
inferior Priest without license does not preach. Saturday fast The Nouatian
opinion ^etayned Second^ marriages.
the inferior priest does not use to preach, that order first began when
Arius turned vpside down the quiet estate of the Church. At Rome they fast
every Saturdaye. At Caesarea in Cappadocia after the manner of the Nouatians
they receive not into the communion such as sin after baptism. Even so do
the Macedonians in Hellespontus, and such as throughout Asia do celebrate the
feast of Easter the fouretenth day of the month. The Nouatians throughout
Phrygia allow not of second marriages: such as of them inhabit
Constantinople, do neither receive it neither reject it: again such as are in
y^ West parts of y^ world admit it wholly. The originalls and autors of so
great a diversity were Bishops which governed the Churches at diverse and
several times. such as like of these rites do commend them unto the
posterity for laws. But to pen in paper the infinite and diverse ceremonies
and customs throughout cities and contreyes would be a very tedious piece of
work and scarce nay impossible to be done. This much already laid down may
seem a sufficient treatise for to prove that the celebration of the feast of
Easter began every where more of custom then by commandment either of
Christ or any Apostle. Wherefore their talk sauoreth not of the truth, their
report is to no good purpose which say that the Nicene Council set the manner
of celebrating this feast out of square. For the bishops of that assembly
endeavored with all might possible to reconcile the lesser number with the
greater which varied from them. Neither were the Apostles times without such
broils and dissentions, neither were they themselves ignorant hereof as it
appears by the Acts of the Apostles. for when the Apostles understood of the
tumult and stir raised among the faithful through the variety and
contention of the Gentiles, they all assembled together: they laid down a
certain holy law the which they published unto the world in form of an
epistle, delivering the faithful from the heavy yoke of bondage, from the
vain and frivolous contention rising thereof. They have taught them a sure and
a certain rule for the direction of good life, prescribing them only such
things as were necessary to be observed. And for all the epistle is to be
seen in the Acts of the Apostles, yet there is no cause to the contrary but
that the reader may find it among these our histories. The Apostles* the elders
and brethren unto such brethren as of the Gentiles inhabit Antioch, Syria and
Act 15*
Cilicia send greetings. Whereas we are given to understand that some which
departed from us have troubled you with words and cumbred your minds saying
ye must be circumcised and keep the law, to whom we gave no such
commandment: it seemed therefore good unto us being gathered together with
one accord for to send chosen men unto you, with our well-beloved Barnabas
and Paul, men they are that have ioperded their lives for the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Therefore we have sent unto you Judas and Silas, who by word
of mouth can declare unto you the same. For it seemed good unto the holy Ghost
and to us to charge you with no more then with these necessary things to
vvete: that ye abstain from things offered to Idols, from blood from
strangled and fornication, ye shall do well in keeping your selves undefiled
from these things. Farevvell. These things were agreeable with the will of
God, for so the epistle testifies: It pleased the holy Ghost not to burden
you further then with the observation of these necessaries. But some
neglecting these things account of fornication as a thing indifferent, yet they
contend about holidays as it were for life and death: they despise the
commandments of God and establish them Canons of their own: they set at
naught, they make no account of the law published by the Apostles, and so
unadvisedly they put in practice contrary decrees unto the will of God him
self. Furthermore although I could presently discourse more at large of the
feast of Easter and prove with manifest demonstrations that the Jews them
selves observed not diligently neither as they ought, either the time or the
manner of the celebration, and that the Samaritans a sect of the Jews, kept it
always after the Aequinoctiall space: yet because it requires a several
title and a long treatise, I will here cut it of. Only this I will add that
whosoever they be yt are so much in love with ye imitation of y^ Jews, and so
curious in observation of Socrates inueyeth against such Nouatians as fell to
Jewish apostasy. Luc. 5. Mar. 14. Matthew. 21.
types and figures, it behooves them to vary from them* no (as commonly we say)
not the breadth of a nail. for if they addict them selves unto such precise
observations, of necessity they must not only observe days, and months, and
years: but also whatsoever Christ did after the Jewish manner for the
fulfilling of the law, or the injuries he unjustly sustained of the Jews, or
the things he uttered in figures and parables to please all generally. For
example, he taught in the ship, he commanded the Passover should be prepared
in an upper chamber or parlour, he charged them to loose the ass that was
tied, he gave the man bearing the pitcher of water in his hand for a sign
unto such as went to provide the Passover, and infinite other such like
examples written in the Gospel. Yet they that hope them selves justified by
the observation of this feast, endeavor not at all to fulfill any of these
after the external manner and literal understanding. Not one of them ever
preached out of the ship unto the people: not one celebrateth the Passover in
a parlour: not one first tyeth a she ass, then loses her again: not one of
them appointed the carriage of a pitcher of water for the fulfilling of all
circumstances appertaininge unto these mysteries. They think that these
things belong rather unto the Jews then unto the Christians. For the Jews
retain such ordinances more with the outward and corporal observation, then
with the inward and spiritual understanding. Wherefore they are held
accursed because they think that Moses law consists rather in figures and
types then in truth and the things them selves. Such as favor the Jews
although they conceive these things after a mystical and divine kind of
interpretation, yet raise they a foul stir about days and months, and
tread under foot, nay they drown of wilful ignorance the undoubted and
ghostly truth ingraffed within them, and therefore of necessity they are in
this point to be condemned alike with the Jews, for they purchase unto them
selves the sentence of curse and condemnation. But of these things enough and
enough.

CAP. XXII. Cap. 23. in the Greek.

Of the stir between the Arians at Constantinople, and how they were called
Psathyriani.

NOw let us return unto our former purpose and drift mentioned a little before,
that is to discourse how the Church being once divided rested not with the
first division, but such as were severed into sundry sects and schisms fell
from their fellows and upon light and trifling occasions disagreed among them
selves. The Nouatians as I said before were divided about Nouatians.
the observation of the feast of Easter, neither yet were they content with one
division. for throughout sundry provinces they sometimes iarred and sometimes
joined together not only about the month, but also the day of the week, and
other such like matters of small importance. The Arians Arians.
were divided upon such an occasion as follows. Continewall arguing and
broching of intricate quircks, brought their disputations to very absurd and
horrible opinions. Whereas y^ church believes that God is the father of the
son who is the word, they call into controversy whether God might be called
a father before the son had his being. And because they were of the opinion
that the word of God was not begotten of the father but had his being of
nothing, erring in the chief and principal, no marvel though they plunged
into absurd opinions. Dorotheus whom they had translated thither from Antioch
said, that the father could be neither in essence neither in appellation, if
the son had no being. Marinus whom they had called out of Thracia before
Dorotheus time (stomacking that Dorotheus was preferred before him) supposed
now y^ it was high time for him to work his feate, set him self opposite and
maintained y^ contrary opinion. Wherefore they were divided and by occasion of
the vain and frivolous question proposed among them they parted companies:
Dorotheus with his followers continewed in their former rowmes, Marinus with his
Marinus the aria^ thought that the father was a father when there was no son.
P^athyri^ns.
train erected them chapels and there had private meetings, their conclusion
was y^ the father was ever a father yea before the son had his being. These
followers of Marinus were called Psathyriani because that one Theoctistus a
wafrer, borne in Syria was an earnest maintainer of y^ side. Of y^ opinion was
Selenas bishop of y^ Gotths, a mungrell, by father a Gotth, by mother a
Phrygian, and therefore was he able to preach in y^ Church in both those
languages. This sect also not long after was divided: for Marinus contended with
Agapius, one, whom he him self had lately advanced to the bishopric of
Ephesus. The controversy was not of religion but of primacie, they strove
whether of them should be chief. The Gotths went of Agapius side. Wherefore many
clergy me^ under these Bishops jurisdictions, perceauing the ambition, the
rankor and malice of these proud Prelates forsook quite the Arian opinion and
embraced the faith of one substance. the Arians being divided among them selves
the space of thirty and five years, in the end as many as were Psathyrians
through persuasion which prevailed with them, made an end of brawling in the
Consulship of Theodosius the younger and Plinthus the Praetor. Who after their
reconciliation and agreement made a law that the question which was the
principal cause of that stir should never again be called into
controversy. Yet for all they could do, that decree of theirs could take no
place save at Constantinople* for in other cities where the Arians do raygne
the stir is rife. So far of the division among the Arians.

CAP. XXIII. Cap. 24. in the Greek.

How the Eunomians were at discord among them selves and called after
sundrynames. Likewise of the Macedonians.

THe Eunomians were also divided. for Eunomius him self first fell from
Eudoxius who had Eunomians.
chosen him bishop of Cyzicum, the occasion he took was because he would not
admit his master Aetius lately excommunicated into the Church. others also
called after his name parted them selves into sundry sects. And first of all
one Theophronius a Cappadocian, trained up Theophronius.
in captious fallacies and quircks of logic under Eunomius, had Aristotle's
praedicaments and perihermenias at his fingers ends, wrote books and entitled
them the exercises of the mind. Wherefore he was hated of his own sect and
counted of them an Apostata: he raised thenceforth private conuenticles and
left behind him an heresy entitled with his appellation. Again at
Constantinople one Eutychius upon light and trifling occasion fell from the
Eunomians, and unto this day Eutychius.
frequenteth several meetings. The followers of Theophronius were called
Eunomothephroniani, and such as were of the sect of Eutychius were termed
Eunomieutychiani. what vain and fond things they brawled about, I think it
not needful to lay down in writing lest we should digress from the
history we have in hand. Yet in so much they have corrupted baptism, I must in
no wise run that over with silence. They baptize not in the trinity but in
the death of Christ. Among the Macedonians also on a certain time there rose a
schism, for Eutropius a Priest of the Macedonia^s.
Macedonians gathered a several company of such mates as he thought good to
follow his tail. Carterius likewise of the same sect divided him self from
him, and of these there rose other schismatics throughout other cities. I of
mine own part, in so much I lead my life here at Constantinople, Socrates
where and when he flourished.
where I was borne, bred and brought up, no marvel though I write more at
large of the famous acts done within this city: partly seeing that I saw most
of them with mine eyes* and partly also in so much they are more famous and
thought far worthier of memory then many other acts. These sects and schisms
raygned not at one but at sundry times, whosoever is disposed exactly to learn
the several names of all sects, let him peruse the book of Epiphanius Bishop
of Cyprus, entitled Anchyrotus. So far of these things.

CAP. XXIIII. Cap. 25. in the greek.

How Eugenius the traitor and rebel procured the death of the Emperor
Valentinianus the younger, and in the end was slain of Theodosius the Emperor.

THe state of the common wealth was then very troublesome, the occasion was as
follows. Eugenius.
In the West empire there was one Eugenius a Grammarian and a Sch^^lemaister,
he left school and became a Courtier, first he was appointed to guard the
Emperors person, next he was made his treasurer. And because he was a
politic man, therefore was he preferred into honor, yet prosperity puffed
him up with pride and caused him to work treason: he made Arbogastes
Arbogastes.
of his advise and council, one by birth of the lesser Galatia, by office a
captain, in condition barbarous, and in behavior cruel. They both conspired
the Emperor Valentinians death, and wrought means to allure the Eunuchs of
the Emperors chamber on their side. These men gaping after promotion and
dignities being promised fair, fell upon the Emperor as he slept and
Valentinianus the Emperor was stifled Anno Dom. 396.
stifled him to death. Eugenius having got the supremacy in the west parts of
the world, behaved him self after the wonted guyse of tyrants. Theodosius the
Emperor understanding of this was sorry at the heart: he thought it high time
for him now to make expedition for the second battle, for the first he had
waged with Maximus. Wherefore gathering together a great army, and creating
Emperor his son Honorius in his third Consulship and the first of
Abundantius, the tenth of January, he took his journey toward the West parts
of the world, leaving both his sons the Emperors at Constantinople. As he
went to wage battle with Eugenius, many of the Barbarian nations inhabiting
the contreyes beyond Istrum, came of their own accord to aid the Emperor
against the tyrant. shortly after he came into France with great power, for
there the tyrant had gathered infinite multitudes of soldiers and fortified
him self. the camp was pitched and the battle was fought by a certain river
called Phrigdus. Here the greek was imperfect.
As the battle was doubtful where the Romans dealt hand to hand with the
Romans, so again of the Barbarians which came to aid the Emperor
Theodosius, Eugenius had the upper hand. The Emperor seeing the Barbarians
foiled and overthrown was wonderful pensive, he fell down prostrate upon the
The Emperor Theodosius prays unto god for aid.
ground, prayed unto God for aid and asistance and obtained his suit. for
Macurius his captain put on venturous and valiant courage got him to the side
where the Barbarians were foiled, came to the standard, joined with him the
chief captains, encountered with the enemy and brake the array, In the end
made them to fly which pursued after the flight. Immediately after there ensued
this an other strange act. for there rose such blustering blasts of wind as
turned the darts of Eugenius the usurpers soldiers to light in their own
sides, and drove with forcible and violent flight the arrows of the Emperors
soldiers to pearce the armed peltes of the rebels. Of such force and
efficacy were the Emperors prayers. Wherefore the variable course of that
bloody battle being brought to that pass, the rebel came groueling at the
Emperors feet and craved for mercy, but as he kneeled the soldiers of
Theodosius came and stroke his head of his shoulders. These Anno Dom. 396.
things were done the sixth of Septembre in the third Consulship of Arcadius
and the second of Honorius. Arbogastes the author of so great a slaughter, two
days after the end of the battle, seeing that by flight there was no way
possible for him to save his life, ran upon a naked sword and dispatched him
self.

CAP. XXV.
How immediately after this battle the Emperor Theodosius sickned and departed
this life before the triumphs were fully ended.

THe Emperor Theodosius by reason of the travel and great toil he had taken
about those wars, began to be very ill at ease. And when that his disease
gave him to understand that the mortal race of his natural life was then to
be finished, care and doubts appertayning unto the government of the common
weal troubled him more then the frail departure or the fear of death, yea
when he considered with him self how many calamities do commonly happen unto
the empire when the Emperor and the scepter be parted asunder. Wherefore he
sent in post have for his son Honorius to Constantinople, purposing to
establish through him peace and tranquillity in the West parts of the world.
At the coming of the son to Millayne the father was somewhat recovered and
began to celebrate exercise of triumph for joy of the victory gotten of the
tyrant. In the morning he felt him self so well that he honored the triumph
with his presence. In the afternoon he was so suddenly taken with his disease
that he was not able to go and behold the solemnity, but charged his son
to see all the royalty accomplished, the night Theodosius died Anno Domini.
397.
following he departed this life. It was when Olybrius and Probinus were
Consuls the seuenteneth of January, the first year of the two hundredth nynety
and fourth Olympiad. This Theodosius the Emperor lived three score years and
raygned sixteen. This book contains the history of sixteen years and
eight months.

The end of the fifth book of Socrates.
THE SIXTH BOOK OF THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORYE OF SOCRATES SCHOLASTICVS.
The proeme of Socrates signifying that now he begins the history of his
time.
I Have performed (most holy Theodorus) in the former five books the promise I
This sixth book contineweth the history of twelve years and six months ending
Anno Domi. 412.
made, and the task you have enjoined me as touching the continewing of the
ecclesiastical history from the raygne of Constantine unto these our days
after my sclender skill and the simple talente bestowed upon me. But I would
have you know before ye read them, that I have not curiously addicted my self
unto lofty style, neither unto a glorious show of gay sentences: for so
peradventure in running after words and phrases I might have mist of my matter
and failed of my purpose and intent, had I attained, yet was it not in my
reach to lay down that forcible kind of style used of ancient writers
wherewith they amplify and diminish, they extol and debase at their pleasure.
Again such a penning profits very little the vulgar and ignorant sort of
people who desire not so much the sine and elegant phrase as the furtherance of
their knowledge and the truth of the history. Wherefore lest that our story
should halt of both sides and displease the learned in that it does not
counteruade the artificial skill and profounde knowledge of ancient writers:
the unlearned in that their capacity can not comprehend the substance of the
matter by reason of the painted Rhetoric and picked sentences, I have tied my
self unto such a mean, for all the handling is simple, the truth is soon
found and the effect quickly understood. Furthermore now entering into
discourse of our sixth book I must needs tell you the truth that I am even in
manner dismayed when He begins the history of his time.
I take pen in hand to paynt for the unto the posterity the famous acts of
these our florishinge days, lest it fall out that we lay down in writing
such things as may offend some kind of men, or (as commonly we say) lest
truth be constrained to try her friends: when as we publishe not with
praises and commendations the names of such as they like well of, or extol not
unto the skies the fame of their noble and famous acts. The favorers of Prelates
and patrons of clergy men will blame us for not intitling the Bishops, most
godly, most holy, and such like epithetons. Other sorts of men, somewhat more
curious then the rest, will misconstrewe our meaning for not calling the
Emperors Lords, and most virtuous, with other such like honorable titles
usually given them of men. But seeing that I am able to prove and justify out
of ancient writers that the servant in their books has called his Lord and
Master no otherwise then after his christened name: I will lay aside these
lofty titles and tie my self as my bounden duty requires unto the truth of
the history: and keepinge my self within the compass and limits of faithful
Historiographers which covet a simple and a plain kind of style, I will now
to the matter and write of such things as I have partly seen, and partly
learned of such as saw them with their eyes, the which I have better liking of
because the reporters varied not among them selves. I had much ado and great
labor in sifting out the truth, because that sundry men of diverse fortes made
relation thereof unto me: whereof some affirmed that they had been present, some
other that they had occasion to search out all circumstances.

CAP. I.
How that after the death of Theodosius the Emperor his sons parted the
empire. Of the Bishops then flourishing. and how that Arcadius meeting the army
at the gates of the city had Russinus a Magistrate of his slain at his feet
by the soldiers.

WHen y^ Emperor Theodosius had departed this life in y^ Consulship of
Olybrius and Probinus y^ seuententh of January his sons took in hand the
government of the Roman empire. Arcadius ruled the East and Honorius the
West. then was Damasus bishop of the princely city of Rome: Theophilus of
Alexandria: John of Jerusalem: Flauianus of Antioch: and of Constantinople
otherwise called new Rome Nectarius was Bishop as I remembered in the former
book. The eight of Nouembre, he being Consul him self the corpse of Theodosius
was brought to his resting grave and solemnly interred with noble funeral by
his son Arcadius. Shortly after being the eight and twentieth day of the same
month, the Emperor Theodosius army which ouerthrewe Eugenius with all his
host was come thither. When the Emperor Arcadius went forth as the manner is
unto the gates of the city to meet the army, the soldiers presently laid
hands upon Russinus the Emperors Ambassador, and beheaded him, for he was
suspected Ruffinus
. of treason, and the report went of him that he procured the Hunnes a
barbarous nation to invade y^ Roman dominions, at the same time also they
destroyed Armenia with other contreyes of the East. The same day when Russinus
was beheaded, Marcianus the Nouatian Bishop departed Marcianus. Sisinius.
this life, in whose rowme Sisinius (of whom we spoke before) succeeded.

CAP. II.
The death of Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople, whom John Chrysostom
succeeded.

SHortly after Nectarius bishop of Constantinople departed this life in the
Consulship of Caesareus Anno Domi. 401.
and Atticus, the eight and twentieth of Septembre. immediately there was much
ado about the election of a Bishop. And when some thought on this man some on
that man, after long aduisement and deliberation, in the end it seemed good
unto them to send for John a priest of Antioch: for the report went of him
that he was a profounde Interpretor and a notable Rhetorician. Wherefore not
long after the Emperor Arcadius with the general consent both of Priest and
people sent for him. And to the end his consecration might be of more
authority by the commandment of the Emperor there were present many other
Bishops and namely Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria, who went about by all
means to discreditt John and to prefer unto the bishopric one Isidorus a
Priest of his own Church. Theophilus made very much of this Isidorus, because
that for his fake he had taken a perilous piece of work in hand. And what the
same was I am now about to declare. When the Emperor Theodosius waged battle
with Maximus the tyrant, Theophilus sent presents by Isidorus unto the Emperor
together with two letters, charging him with all to present him that had the
upper hand with the gift and one of the letters. Isidorus being careful of
his business went diligently about this feate, got him to Rome, and harkneth
after the victory. but his fetch was not long ere it was found out. for his
Reader that kept him company stole away his letters. Whereupon Isidorus being
afraid to be taken with the manner, took his heels in all the have to
Alexandria, this was it that made Theophilus to labor so earnestly for
Isidorus. but all that were of the Emperors court preferred John to the
Bishopric. And afterward when as many charged Theophilus with heinous crimes
and presented unto the Bishops then present libells and articles against some
for this thing and some for that: Eutropius one of the Emperors chamber came
by the articles and enditements, showed them to Theophilus, bad him choose
whether he would create John Bishop or stand at the bar and hold his hand
to the crimes that were laid to his charge. Theophilus was so affrayde with
this, that by and by he consented to the stalling of John. He was consecrated
to execute the priestly function of a Bishop and stalled in the seae of
Constantinople, the six and twentieth of February, the Consulship following
when as the Emperor Honorius governed the common weal of Rome, and
Eutychianus the Senator in the Emperors steed ruled Constantinople.

CAP. III.
The lineage and education of John Chrysostom Bishop of Constantinople.

IN so much that John was a famous man partly for the books he penned and left
unto the posterity, partly also for the great perils and persecution which
befell unto him: it seemed very necessary unto us not to run over with
silence, but briefly to rehearse such things as of him might largely be
entreated, and so to declare out of what country he came, what parents he had,
The country and parents of Chrysostom.
how he came by Priesthood, and wherefore he was thereof deprived, last of
all how that after his death he purchaced more fame and renown then ever he
did in his life time. John was borne in Antioch a city of Caelosyria, his
father was cleped Secundus, his mother Anthusa, he descended of the noble race
of Senators, he was the disciple of Libanius the Sophist, and the auditor also
of Andragathius the Philosopher. When that he purposed with him self to apply
his mind unto the law and public affairs of the common weal, and
perceived how lewd and how unrighteous a trade of life they lead which
busy them selves therein: he left that troublesome trade and transformed him
self unto a quiet and solitary kind of life. the example of Euagrius as I
think allured him thereunto, who being brought up under the same teachers and
school. masters, addicted him self a little before unto a solitary life void
of all trouble and molestation. Immediately he changed both habit and
behavior and gave him self wholly to the study of the sacred Scriptures: he
devised with him self how by all means possible be might become a profitable
member in the Church of God: he persuaded Theodorus and Maximus his fellow
students, Theodorus Maximus.
who together with him frequented the school of Libanius, to forsake that
trade of life which was wholly set on lucre and gain and to follow that
which was satisfied with a little: of these men the one was afterward Bishop of
Mopsiestia a city in Cilicia, the other was bishop of Seleucia in Isauria.
These men being then wonderfully inflamed with godly zeal and desire of virtue
learned Diodorus. Carterius.
the trade of worshipers of Diodorus and Carterius who then were overseers of
the religious conuenticles, but afterward Diodorus being made Bishop of Tarsus
wrote many books and while he addicted him self only unto the bare and naked
letter of holy Scripture, he erred foully in the sense and mystical
understanding thereof, but of these things so much shall suffice. John, when
that he had of a long time accompanied Basil who then was made Deacon of
Meletius, but afterward Chrysostom a reader. A Deacon.
Bishop o^ Caesarea in Cappadocia, was made Reader in the Church of Antioch by
Zeno bishop of lerusalem. being Reader he wrote that book which he entitled
against the Jews. In a while after Meletius made him Deacon at what time he
wrote the books entitled of priesthood, with them also which he made against
Stagirius. Moreover the books of the incomprehensible nature with the tracts
he made of closely kept women. In process of time when that Meletius had
departed this life at Constantinople (the election of Gregory Nazianzene had
driven him thither.) John forsook the Meletians left also the communion of
Paulinus, and for the space of whole three years he led a solitary life
severed from all the troublesome affairs of the world. Again in a while
after that, Euagrius who succeeded Paulinus in the seae of Antioch made him
Priest. His ^ Priest.
manner of living and behavior before he was made Bishop as I may use in few
words was in such sort as follows. He was a man by reason of his marvelous
great temperance, in life very austere and (as one that knew him from his
youth up did report) more ruled by choler then given to courteous civility. A
man he was of no great forecast, he made no account of the world, and because
of his plain and simple meaning he was soon deceived. He was very copious and
free of speech with all such as had conference with him, and as he was very
painful to the end by teaching he might reform the manners and lives of his
auditors: so again of such as were not acquainted with his behavior he was
accounted in his exhortations very arrogant and insolent.

CAP. IIII.
How that by the procurement of his Deacon Serapion, John was greatly hated of
his clergy.

John being thus conditioned and preferred unto the bishopric of
Constantinople purposing to ^ Bishop.
reform the lives of his clergy (for so he had determined with him self)
practiced greater severity toward them then right and reason did require. so
that immediately after his stalling in the Bishops seae because of his great
austeritie, he was hated of his clergy: many of them were offended with his
dealing and began to setle them selves out of his danger as one that was
altogether out of square. And in few words to confess the truth Serapion
deacon of that church made him incur all that displeasure, who in presence of
all the clergy said thus unto him. O Bishop thou shall never be able to rule
all these as thou would, unless thou make them all taste of one whipp. the
which saying of his procured great hatred unto the Bishop. The Bishop shortly
after thrust many out of the Church some for one thing and some for an other.
they as it commonly falls out where such Lordely Prelates put such devises in
ure, conspyred against him and of spyte discredited him with the common people.
The reports that went of him, to wete: that he would never eat or drink
with any man, and being laued to a banquette he would not come, persuaded the
herers. So that the sclaunder raised of him increased more and more Why and
wherefore he would not feed in company with other men there was no man that
knew certainelye. Some that endeavored to excuse him therefore, affirmed the
cause of his several and private feedinge to be infirmity, y^ he was a sickly
man and could hardly away with whatsoever were laid before him. Other some
affirmed that it was because of his straict and austere kind of life. But how
soever it went these excuses were of force not sufficient to wipe away the
hainousnes of the crimes wherewith he was charged of the adversaries. For all
that, the people were wonderfully affectioned toward him and loved him
entirely, because of the notable sermones he made in the open audience of the
church, wherefore they made no account of the accusations and sclaunders that
were laid to his charge. The sermones he made being penned of swift
scriueners as he uttered them out of the pulpit, what they were, how
excellent, and with what force they persuaded I need not presently to
rehearse, in so much they are extant abroad in the world for every man to
peruse and thereof to gather great profit.

CAP. V.
How he reprehended not only the clergy but also such as were of great honor
among the laytye. and of Eutropius the Eunuch^.

AS long as John inueyed only against the Ecclesiastical order, the
co^spiracy and sclaunders raised of him prevailed not very much: but when that
he fell a taunting of the Magistrates then heaped he on his own head great
spite and malice. And first many reports and sclau^ders were bruted abrod of
him, next they were increased, for a tale is not twice told but is twice as
long: at length his auditors conceived an ill opinion of him: last of all the
inuectiue he made against Eutropius augmented the sclaunder. For Eutropius the
Eunuche and chief of the Emperors chamber made great suit unto the Emperor,
for to have a law made by the Emperors y^ none might take the church for his
sanctuary but that such as fled thither for refuge might be pulled out by the
ears. The taste of which law he himself first tried, for as soon as the new
found law was enacted and published abroad in the heating of all the people of
Constantinople, Eutropius incurred the high displeasure of the Emperor and
took the church for his sanctuary. John the bishop seeing Eutropius lie along
at the foot of the altar and as it were besotted or amazed for fear, sitting
in his pulpit where he was wont to preach to the end his boyce might be the
more audible made a whole sermon in the disprayse and reprehension of him. For
so doing many misliked of him very much that be not only not pitied the man
lienge in that lamentable plight but also inueyed against him bitterly. The
Emperor commanded Eutropius who then was consul for certain heinous crimes
Here is a lesson for them that pull down sanctuaries.
to be beheaded: that his name should be blotted out of the Catalogue of
consuls, and that the title of his honor or dignity should only be given
unto his college and fellow Eunuche Theodorus. The report goes moreover that
John the bishop rebuked freely after his wonted guise Gainas the cap taine
because that he went about to beg of the Emperor one of the churches within
the city for the Arians his fellow herreticks. Again for other matters he
inueyed freely against other magistrates of the common weal which turned in the
end to his great displeasure. Theophilus also Bishop of Alexandria immediately
after he had consecrated him bishop began busily to devise how he might
work him mischief. And as in presence he practiced privately by word of
mouth: so in his absence he wrote and signified by letters unto such as dwelled
in far and foraine countries what he wished might be brought to pass. The
wonderful boldness and liberty of speech that John used, fretted Theophilus
and vexed his mind: neither only that but also because his malicious
practices took no prosperous success, for he had purposed to place Isidorus a
priest of his church in the bishops seae of Constantinople. Thus went the
affairs of John the bishop who was continewallye hated ever since he began
to enjoy the bishopric. But of him we shall have occasion to speak more
hereafter:

CAP. VI.
The tyranny of Gainas the Gotth, the sedition raised of him at Constantinople
and of his end.

Now I go about to declare a certain history of that time which is worthy
of memory among all posterity in time to come, I will (declare how the city
of Constantinople it self and the prosperity of the Roman Empire were
delivered out of extreme peril and utter overthrow by the wonderful
providence of almighty God. Now harken to the circumstance. One Gainas by
birth a Barbarian yet a subject of the Empire of Rome, was so trained up in
warlike exercise, and feats of arms, that at length through the daily
creditte he purchased by valiant acts he was of the Romans made captain
both of the horsemen and footmen. When he had got unto his person such honor
and so great a power at his beck and commandment he forgate himself, he
could not moderate the aspiring pride of his swelling stomach, but devised
every way and rolled as commonly we say every stone for to bring the
Romans under his girdle. And therefore he sent for all the Gotths out of
their country determininge with himself to entertain and stay with him as
many as were fit for feats of arms. Tribigildus tribune of the soldiers in
Phrygia being somewhat a kin unto him and also of his conspiracye subdued all
the Phrygian nation: Gainas then made earnest suit unto the Emperor in his
own behalf that he would make him Liuetenant of Phrygia. The which Arcadius
the Emperor without foresighte of that which was like to ensue, granted unto
him with a willinge mind. He immediately (as they reported) went to give
battaill unto Tribigildus, but as truth was to play the tyrant Tribigildus.
and brought at his tail thousands of the barbarous Gotths. He was no sooner
entered into Phrygia but all the country yielded unto him. The Romans were in a
woeful plight partly because that Phrygia sub dued.
so great a multitude of Barbarians followed after Gainas, and partly also
because that the Eastern parts of the empire were in great danger of
invasion. Then the Emperor yelding unto y^ necessity of y^ time, advised
himself, dealt subtlely with y^ Barbaria^, sent unto him Ambassadors, and
sought by all fair means to pacify him. And when that he requested the
Emperor to send unto him Saturninus and Aphelianus who were Consuls and head
Senators whom he suspected to be hinderers of his enterprised conspiracy: the
Emperor though unwilling, yet because of y^ time yielded unto his request. They
being of a noble and valiant courage, desirous also of death in the qua rell
and defense of their country obeyed the Emperors commandment. To be short
they met the Barbarian in a plain green, where they used to just and run at
tilt a good way of Chalcedon, and ready they were to endure what torment so ever
were laid upon them. But he did them no harm, for he dissembled his drift and
got him to Chalcedon, there Arcadius the Emperor met him. The Emperor and
the barbarian being together in the temple where the corpse of Euphemia the
martyr lies interred, swear one to the other that nere another would conspire
neither procure the others death. But although y^ Emperor a man both godly and
zealous made great account of his oath and kept it vnuiolably: yet Gainas
forsware himself, brake the league and ceased not to Gainas^ (...) person and
a t^^^e breaker.
proceed on in his former treason and conspiracy: But devised with himself
how he might settt the city of Constantinople on fire, and ouerrunne the
whole Empire of Rome. Wherefore Constantinople up reason of the infinite number
of Barbarians which abode there became in manner a Barbarian city, of the
citizens and inhabitants there was no other account made then of captives and
bondeslaues. The city was in so great a danger that a wonderful great Comet
reaching A comet.
in manner from y^ sky unto y^ earth (the like whereof was never remembered to
have been seen before) prognosticated the same. Gainas first of all laing
shamefastnes aside and steeling his face with impudencye purposed in his mind
to rifle the shoppes of the bankers and exchaungers. But when as the report
thereof prevented his lewd purpose and the bankers removed their exchaunginge
tables and conveyed away their money: he endeavored to compass an other
mischievous act, for he sent in the night season a multitude of Barbarians to
fire the palace of the Emperor. At what time it appeared unto the wholl
world how careful God was over that city. For an iufinite number of Angels
resembling men of monstrous bodies all in glisterng armor were seen of these
rebels Constantinople was saved by Angels.
that went about to set the palace on fire: the Barbarians supposing they had
been a great army and a mighty host, were astonished and ran away. Gainas
hearing of this thought it a thing incredible. He knew for certainty yt so
great a power of Roman soldiers could not possibly be there, for they were
appointed severally throughout every city. The night followinge he sent
thither others and that not once neither twice when as y^ soldiers being often
sent of him reported y^ same (for the Angels of God were alike in the sight of
the traitors) at length he went thither himself with great power for to know
the certainety of the wonderful sight. He perceauinge of a surety that it was
an army of soldiers, hiding themselves in the day time and withstanding his
violence in the night season, went about to compass a crafty feate as he
thought, whereby he might greatly hurt the Romans, but as the event declared,
it auayled them very much. He fained himself to be possessed of a Deuell and
therefore he got him to the Church of Saynct John the Apostle which was not
far from the city there for to pray. The Barbarians went forth with him
conueying armor privily in tons and vessels, coueringe them also with other
sleyghtes and devises. When the watch and porters of the city gats perecaued
their wile and treason, they commanded them to carye forth no weapons: the
Barbarians hearing this drew their swords and dispatched the^ every one.
Immediately all the city was on an uproar and death seemed to stand at every
man's door. Yet for all that, the city was safe the gates on every side being
shut and well fortified. The Emperor aduisinge himself in time proclaimed
Gainas a traitor and an open enemy ^ he commanded that the Barbarians which
remained in the city should be slain every one: this was the day after the
death of the porters: the soldiers within the walls of the city nigh the
Gotthicke church (for there all the Barbarians were assembled together) dealt
hand to hand with the Barbarians set the Church on sire and slew many of
them. Gainas hearing that as many of his accomplices as he left behind with in
the city were executed, and perceauing that his traitorous conspiracye had no
prosperous success, left his hypocritical prayers and got him to the coasts
of Thracia. And coming into Cherronesus he took shippinge thence in all the
have to Lampsacum for to subdue from that place forewards all the Western
parts of the world. When the Emperor had prevented him in those countries
by sending thither great power both by sea and by land: it fell out y^ God of
his providence showed there his wonderful power the second time. For when the
Barbarians wanted ships, they fell a framinge of new vessels and so to
transporte soldiers in them. The Romayne nauye came thither and arrived at the
very pinche or as commonly we say in the nicke for they had wind and sail at
will, the Western Zephyrus blewe on their side. And as the Romayne power
conveyed themselves thither with ease and pleasure: so the greater part of the
Barbarian nauye, both horse and man ships and all were tossed to and fro,
scattered one from the other and suncke in the deep gulphes of the surginge
waves of the seaes. Diverse also of the Romans were drowned alike. And thus
there was then an infinite number of the Barbarians destroyed. Gainas was
slain Anno Dom. 404.
But Gainas remouinge thence taking his flight by Thracia lighted by chance
into the hands of the Roman soldiers which dispatched both him and also as
many Barbarians as were in his company. This much by the way of Gainas. If
any be disposed to know all the circumstances of that battle let him read
the book of Eusebius Scholasticus entitled Gainias, who at that time was the
disciple of Troylus the Sophiste. This man being present in the wars wrote
in Hexameter verse all that there in was done and divided it into four books.
And because the acts thereof were fresh in memory his poem was of great
price and estimation. Ammonius also the Poet of late days wrote the same
argument in verse, the which he read in the hearing of the Emperor about
the eleventh Consulshippe of Theodosius the Younger the which he enjoyed with
Faustus, and therefore was highely commended. This battle was ended in the
Consulshippe of Stilichon and Aurelianus. The year followinge Phranitus was
made Consul, who though he were a Gotth borne, yet was he greatly beloved of
the Romans, he behaved himself so valiauntly in that battle that the
Romans thought him worthy the dignitye of a Consul. The same year and the
tenth day of April the Emperor Arcadius had a son to wit: the good
Theodosius. So far of these things.

CAP. VII.
Of the schism between Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria and the religious men
inhabitinge the deserte: and how Theophilus condemned the books of Origin.

WHile the common weal of yt Roman empire was tossed with these troublesome
storms of rebellion: such as were promoted unto y^ reverent function of
pristehood were at dissension The heresy of the Anthropomorphits began Anno*
Dom. 40^.
among themselves to y^ great sclaunder of christian religion. then was one set
against yt other, the original of which pestilent schism came from Aegipt and
the occasion was as follows. There was a question broched a little before,
whether God were a body and made after the likeness and form of man? Or
whether he were without body and not only without the form of man, but also
(as I may utter the wholl in one word) void of all corporal shape? Hereof
there rose sundry contentions and quarells whilst yt some affirmed this, other
some that. Certain of the rudest and unlearned sort of religious me^ thought y^
God was corporeal and that he was of the form and figure of man, but the
greater part condemned them with their heretical opinion, affirming that God
had no corporeal substance, that he was void of all bodly shape. Of the which
opinion was Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria so that in the hearing of the wholl
congregation he inueyed bitterly against such as attributed unto God the form
of man where he proved that he had no body at all. The worshippers of Egypt
understanding of this left their religious houses, came to Alexandria,
flocked about Theophilus, condemned him for a wicked person and fought to
bereave him of his life. Theophilus being made priueye unto their conspiracy
was wonderful pensive, devised with himself how he might escape their
hands and save his life. As soon as he came into their presence he saluted
them curteouslye and said thus unto them: When that I lasten mine eyes upon
you me thinks I do see the lively face of God. With these words the rash heat
of the unruly monks was delayed. Again they reply in this sort: If that be
true that thou say that the countenance of God is no otherwise then ours,
why then accurse the works of Origin. For diverse of his books do impugn
our opinion. But incase thou refuse to do this, assure thy self to receive at
our hands the punishment due unto the impious and open enemy of God. Nay says
Theophilus I will do that which shall seem right well in your ^^^e makes
Theophilus to (...) him self.
eyes. I pray you be not offended with me for I hate the books of Origin and
think them worthy of great reprehension which allow of them. When he had
thus appeased the monks he sent them away quietly. This question peradventure
had layen in the dust unto this day, had it not been blown up and revived
upon an other occasion in such sort as follows. The religious houses in
Egypt were ouerseene of four worthy men, Dioscorus, Ammonius, Eusebius and
Euthymius. These men were natural brethren and by reason of the goodly
stature of their taule bodies they were called Long. Men they were of great
fame for their doctrine and godly trade of life. And therefore at Alexandria
they were much spoken of. Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria loved them entirely
and made much of them. Wherefore one of them whose name was Dioscorus he in
manner constrained to leave the deserte and made him Bishop of Hermopolis, two
of the other he entreated to lead their lives with him. The which he could
hardely with fair means obtain yet as Bishop he compelled them. The men
making a virtue of necessitye in so much they could not otherwise choose
applied themselves about the ecclesiastical affairs: yet it grieved them very
much that they could not at their pleasure adict themselves unto the sollitary
life and the wonted exercise of true Philosophy. When that in process of time
their conscience was prieked, This Bishop ^^th more ^s in the world.
perceauinge that the Bishop was set upon heapinge and hurdinge up of money
and that all his labor tended to gatheringe, they would no longer dwell with
him but got them into the deserte, assirminge the sollitarie life to be far
better then the trade and conversation used in cities. Theophilus all the while
he knew not the cause that moved them to depart entreated them earnestely to
continewe with him: but as soon as he understood they abhorred his manner of
living he was wonderfullye incensed and promised to work them a displeasure.
When they had made light of his threats and departed into the deserte:
Theophilus as it seemed being prone of nature to anger and reuengemente
besturred himself against them, endeavored by all means to work them
mischief. And moreover he began to spite Dioscorus their brother whom he
had made Bishop of Hermopolis. It grieved him to the guties that the
worshippers made so much of Dioscorus and reverenced him so highly. Remembering
with himself that he could no kind of way molest those godly men unless
that he alienated and withdrewe the minds of such monks as were subject unto
their gouernemente from fauoringe of them: he wrought such a kind of feat
Theophilus to revenge himself of his enemies ^ers^^^^ed ^^s own opinion. this
(...) a sin against the holy Ghost. This heresy was the original that God
the father has ^ene painted the man.
as follows. He called to memory that in conferring with the^ they had
affirmed that God was without body and void of humane form or figure: for had he
y^ shape of man it would follow necessarily that he could suffer after the
manner and guise of man: and that Origin with other ancient writers had
exquisirely sifted out the truth thereof. But Theophilus for all that he was
himself of that opinion: yet to the end he might revenge him of his enemies
sticked not to oppugn their sincere opinion and sound doctrine: yea he
persuaded many Monks simple and plain souls such as were idiotes and diverse
also of them which were altogether unlearned to cleave unto his side. He sent
unto the religious houses of the desert that they should obey neither
Dioscorus neither his brethren in so much their opinion was that God had no
body. For God (says he) as holy scripture does witness has eyes, ears,
hands and feet even as men have. Dioscorus and his followeres (says he) are
of a wicked opinion: they deny with Origin that God has eyes, ears, feet
and hands. With this subtle and crafty sleighte he allured to his side many of
the religious men: so that there rose much ado and great dissension among
them. Such as were not be witched but guided themselves aright cleaued unto the
opinion of Dioscorus and Origin: but the simpler sort which in deed were the
greater number, being kindled with the fiery flame of contention, and set
against their brethren, Anthropomorphits be those heretics which attribute
corpereall substance unto God the father.
fell for altogether from their sound opinion. Wherefore they were divided, and
reviled each other for lewd and impious persons. The co^federats of Theophilus
called their brethren Origenists and wicked men: again, the accomplices of
Theophilus were called Anthropomorphits, by interpretation such as attribute to
God the form of man, so that there rose no small bickering among the monks,
nay it fell out to be a deadly battle. Theophilus perceauinge that his
fetches framed at length after his will, went with great power toward the
mount Nitria, where their religious houses stood, and aided the monks both
against Dioscorus, and also against his brethren. The religious men being beset
with great danger, had much ado to save their lives.

CAP. VIII.
Of the conuenticles and hymns which both the Arians and the professors of one
substance, song ^. the night season, and their skirmishing: also how the
singing of Antemnes was first ordained by Ignatius the disciple of Saint John
the Evangelist and Apostle.

John bishop of Constantinople was altogether ignorant of the aforesaid great
stir and contention raised in the deserts of Egypt: he was a man that
excelled in those days for the gift of utterance, he was also of great
estimation. He him self augme^ted evening prayer, I mean such Chrisostom^
made Antemnes. An. Dom. 404.
service as usually is said in the night, and that upon such an occasion as
follows. The Arians as we said before, had their conuenticles without y^
walls of the city in the suburbs. Wherefore when the festival meeting
throughout every week was come, I mean the Saturday, and the Sunday, upon
which days the Christians are wont solemnly to assemble in the church, they (I
mean the Arians) gathering the^ selves together in the porche of y^ city
gates, song interchaungeably such songs as they had made them selves, and
sauoured of the Arian opinion, and this they did almost throughout the whole
night. First of all they were wont at the dawning of the day to go out at the
gates, and to singe Antemne wise such lewd songs through the midds of the
city, until they came to the place of their assembled congregation. But in so
much they ceased not to sound out contumelious sentences against such as
favored the faith of One substance, (for among diverse others this was one:
Where be these fellows which affirm three to be but one power?) John fearinge
lest any of the simpler sort should be snared, and lest these opprobrious
rymes would be stumblinge blocks and occasions to fall from the faith:
ordained of the contrary certain of his own people, which in like sort
should occupy them selves in the night in singinge of hymns, partly for to
quell the insolency of the Arians, and partly also for to confirm their own
side in the faith. And for all the meaning of John was good, and his dryft
auaylable, yet the end proved very troublesome and perilous. For when the
hymns extolled the faith of One substance, and purchased great majesty and
reverence, because of the melodious concent and sweet harmony in the night
season (for there were silver candlesticks after the manner of crosses, devised
for the bearinge of the tapers and wax candels, all which Eudoxia the Empress
found unto them) the Arians flocked together, burned with emulation, and for
to revenge them selves, set upon their adversaries. And because that a little
before their side had prevailed and got the upper hand, they were then
swollen with pride, and egerly bent to take armor, and made no account at all
of such as favored the faith of One substance. Wherefore without further
deliberation, on a certain night they made an uproar. In this skirmishe Briso
an Eunuch of the Empress, and a favorer of the hymns that were song in the
commendation of the clause Of one substance, was taken in the forehead with a
stone. diverse of the common sort were slain of either side. The Emperor
understanding of this stir, was wonderfully incensed, gave the Arians
straight commandment they should openly singe no more hymns. These things
were then in this sort. Now let us record whence the hymns that are song
interchaungeably in the church, commonly called Antemnes, Ignatius the disciple
of S^ John was the first author (...) Antemnes.
had their original. Ignatius bishop Antioche in Syria, the third bishop by
succession from Peter the Apostle, who was conversant and had great
familiarity with the Apostles, saw a vision of Angels, which extolled the
blessed Trinity with hymns that were song interchaungeably: and delivered
unto the church of Antioche the order and manner of singing expressed in the
vision. thereof it came to pass, that every church received the same
tradition. So much of Antemnes.

CAP. IX.
Of the Monks that were called long, and how that about them Theophilus
bishop of Alexandria pursued John bishop of Constantinople with deadly hatred,
and fought to depose him: how Epiphanius bishop of Cyprus, being won through
the wiles of Theophilus, called a Council at Cyprus, condemned the works of
Origin, and reprehended John for perusinge of them.

SHortly after the Monks left the desert, and came together with Dioscorus and
his brethren unto Constantinople. There came thither also with them Isidorus,
the great friend sometime of Theophilus, but then his deadly foe, and so became
upon such an occasion as follows. Theophilus conceauing great displeasure
against one Peter head priest in the church of Alexandria, determined to
banishe him the church: he charged him that he had received into the communion
a woman of the heretical sect of the Manichees, before he had converted her.
But when Peter auoutched that he both withdrewe her from that heretical
opinion, and admitted her also into the church with the consent of Theophilus,
making him priuye thereunto: Theophilus stomaked the dealing, as if Peter had
done it in spite of him. For he said that he knew nothing of it. Wherefore
Peter called Isidorus to witness, that Theophilus the bishop knew of the
woman's admission. Isidorus then was at the princely city of Rome, for
Theophilus had sent him unto Damasus bishop of Rome, for to reconcile unto him
Flauianus bishop of Antioche. For as many as were of Meletius side, fell from
Flauianus, because he kept not his oath, as we said before. Isidorus then
immediately after his return from Rome, being called of Peter to bear
witness, affirmed plainly that the woman which had been of the Manichees
opinion, was received by the consent of Theophilus the bishop, and that he him
self had ministered the communion unto her. Theophilus hearing this, fretted
within him self for anger, and thrust them both out of the church. This was y^
cause that made Isidore to accompany Dioscorus into Constantinople: that both
in presence of the Emperor and John the bishop, the sleyghts and wyles which
Theophilus practiced against them might be revealed. John understanding these
circumstances of them, entertained the men with great reverence, made them
partakers of their common and public prayers, but he would not receive them
into the communion, before that first he had thoroughly examined their cause.
When these things were thus come to pass, it was falsely reported unto
Theophilus, that John both received them into the communion, and was also ready
to take their part. Wherefore Theophilus endeavored with might and main, not
only to revenge him of Dioscorus and Isidorus, but also to thruste John
besides his bishopric, and thereupon he sent letters unto the bishops
throughout every city, where he concealed his principal drift, pretending
only unto them, that he misliked with the works of Origin, whence Athanasius
before his time borrowed testimonies to the confutation of the Arians. Cap. 10.
in the Greek. Epiphanius some time thought that God had a body.
Moreover he reconciled and lynked him self with Epiphanius bishop of
Constantia, a city of Cyprus, with whom aforetyme he had iarred and been at
variance. For Theophilus had charged him a little before, that he thought of God
basely and abiectly, attributing to him ye form or shape of man. And for all
that Theophilus was of this opinion, and accused them which believed that God
had the figure of man: yet for the hatred and spite he owed unto others, he
denied openly in word that which he believed secretly in mind: and linked unto
him Epiphanius in the league of friendship, who lately had been his foe, but
then as it were repented him of his folly, joined with A Council held in
Cyprus, where of spite through the procurement of Theophi^ the books of Origin
were cende^^ed. A Synod at Alexandria to ^he same purpose.
him in one faith and opinion of God. Through his aid and furtherance he
purposed to summone a Council at Cyprus, for the condemning and rooting out of
Origens works. Epiphanius being a virtuous and a godly man, was easily
persuaded thereunto by the letters of Theophilus. To be short, the bishops of
that Isle assembled together, and decreed that thenceforth none should read
the works of Origin: moreover they write unto John bishop of Constantinople,
exhortinge him to abstain from perusinge the books of Origin, requesting him
also to summone a Council, and to ratify the same with uniform consent of
them all. When Theophilus had snared Epiphanius (a man of great fame and
renown) to his side, and perceived that his fetches now framed according unto
his own desire, he dealt more boldly, and summoned a synod within his own
province, where (even as Epiphanius had done before) he condemned the works of
Origin, which had departed this life about two hundred years before him, this
was not his principal drifte, but he purposed verily to revenge him this way
of Dioscorus and his brethren. John made small account of the things which
Epiphanius and Theophilus had signified unto him by their letters, for he
occupied him self to the furtherance and profit of the churches, and therein he
excelled: as for the conspiracy and mischief intended against him, he made
very light of it. As soon as it was openly known and manifestly perceived,
that Theophilus bent all his might to depose John of his bishopric, diverse
that bare John ill will fell a deuisinge and a forginge out of false crimes and
accusations against him. Many of the clergy, sundry also of the magistrates
which were in great favor with the Emperor, supposing now they had gotten fit
opportunity to revenge them of John, determined with them selves partly by
writing of letters, and partly also by sendinge of messengers to summone
together at Constantinople a great Council of bishops.

CAP. X. Cap. 11. in the greek.

Of Seuerianus and Antiochus the Syrians: how, and upon what occasion they
fell from John.

AN other thing gave occasion to increase the hatred and ill will owed unto
John, in such sort as follows. There were two bishops by birth Syrians,
which flourished at one time, the ones name was Seuerianus, the other Antiochus:
the one was bishop of Gabale in Syria, the other of Ptolemais in Phoenicia,
both excelled in the gift of vttera^ce, but Seuerianus although he were
learned, yet pronounced he not the Greek tongue distinetly neither skilfully,
for he spoke An old custom to take money for preaching, if the gain were not
sweet I warrant you at this day the custom would be lest
Greek as a Grecian, yet pronounced it like a Syrian. Antiochus coming from
Ptolemais to Constantinople, continewed there a while, and preached with great
diligence: after that thereby he had got unto him self good store of money, he
returned home to his own church. Seuerianus hearing that Antiochus had got
much money by preachinge at Constantinople, was very desirous to do the like
him self. He exercised him self diligently, he patched together a great
company of boosome sermons, and came to Constantinople. Being there friendly
and lovingly entertained of John, he applied him self craftily for a while to
please John, and got great favor by flattery. He was much set by, and in
great estimation: and as he was highly commended for preaching, so in like
manner purchased he unto him self great credit with the chief magistrates and
with the Emperor. In the mean space because that the bishop of Ephesus was
departed this life, John of necessity was constrained to take his voyage into
Ephesus for to choose there a bishop. After his coming thither when that some
would have this man, and some that man preferred to the rowme, and thereupon
fell to bitter words and contention, whilst that every one would have his
friend advanced to the dignity: John perceauing that they were all set on
tumults, and that by no means they would be ruled Heraclides. b. of Ephesus.
by him, endeavored to end the quarrel without offending of either side. He
assigned one Heraclides a deacon of his church, yet borne in Cyprus, to be
bishop. With that both parts were pleased, and gave over contention. John was
feign for this matter to continewe a great while at Ephesus. In his absence
Seuerianus had brought his auditors at Constantinople to bear him far better
good will then ever they did before, neither was John ignorant of this, for it
was told him quickly. When Serapion, of whom I spoke before, had signified
unto John, that Seuerianus had divided the churches, he forthwith was kyndled
with the flame of contention. Wherefore when as he had not fully ended all such
things as he determined with him self (for he had deprived ^oth the
Nouatians, and such as celebrated the feast of Easter the fourteenth day of the
month, of many churches) he returned to Constantinople, and applied him self
after his usual manner unto the oversight of the ecclesiastical affairs. The
insolent disdain and hautie stomach of Serapion was intolerable, for he
bouldened him self upon John, and inueyed contumeliously without all modesty
and shamefastness against all men, which turned to the increase of the spite
and hatred borne unto John. Moreover when Seuerianus on a certain time came to
the place Several functions have several reverence.
where Serapion sat: Serapion gave him not the honor and reverence dew unto a
bishop, neither rose up, in so doing he declared that he regarded not the
person of Seuerianus. This contempt and disdain of Serapion was not taken
patiently of Seuerianus, for he exclaimed against him in these words: If
Serapion dies a Christian, then was Christ never incarnate. Serapion took
this as a fit occasion ministered unto him, made John to become his foe,
whilst that he concealed the first sentence, to wete, If Serapion dies a
Christian, and repeated the later, to wete, that Christ was never incarnate,
affirming y^ he heard it of Seuerianus own mouth. And to the end he would
justify the report, he brought forth men of his own degree and calling to
testify that they heard the words. To be short, John without any more ado
banished Seuerianus the city. Eudoxia the Empress understanding of the
circumstance found great fault with John, caused Seuerianus to be sent for out
of Chalcedon in Bithynia, who came immediately. John kept him self ont of his
company, he would not be brought with any man's entreatie and persuasion to
become friends with Seuerianus. At length when that Eudoxia the Emperors
mother in the Apostles church, had thrown her son Theodosius the Emperor
(who though he were then of tender years, yet governed he ye common wealth
with good success, and prosperous oversight) at the feet of John, and craved
of him with solemn protestations, that of all love and friendship he would
not deny her request: with much ado he was won to embrace Seuerianus
again. But for all that outwardly they bare a show and a countenance of
friendship: nevertheless inwardly they continewed their spite and hatred one
toward the other. The cause that divided John and Seuerianus was in such sort.

CAP. XI. Cap. 12. in the Greek.

How that Epiphanius coming to Constantinople, celebrated the communion, and
gave orders without the license of John, therein to gratify Theophilus.

SHortly after, Epiphanius the bishop came from Cyprus to Constantinople, at
the request of Theophilus, and brought thither with him the decree of the
bishops, where he had not excommunicated Origin, but only condemned his
books. Wherefore after his coming into the church of Saint John, which was
not far from the walls of the city, he celebrated the communion, made a
deacon, went forth out of the church, and came to Constantinople. When that
John had invited him, requesting he would take a piece of a lodging with him,
he for to feed the humor of Theophilus, refused his courtesy, and took up an
Inn by him self. After that he had called together the bishops which then by
chance were at Constantinople, he read in their hearing the decree, where he
had condemned the works of Origin. Of the books I have nothing to say, but
thus much, that it pleased Epiphanius and Theophilus to condemn them. Of the
bishops some for reverence of Epiphanius subscribed unto the decree: some other
denied it utterly. Of which number Theotimus bishop of Scythia made Epiphanius
this answer. I of mine own part, o Epiphanius Theotimus bishop of Scythia.
will not so much injury the man, who is departed to rest many years ago:
neither dare I presume once to enterprise so heinous an offense, for to
condemn the books which our auncetors have not condemned, specially seeing I
understand not as yet, neither read any parcel of the doctrine within
contained. And when that a certain book of Origin was brought forth, he read
it, and showed there the interpretation of holy scripture, agreeable unto the
faith of the catholic church: last of all he concluded with these words:
They that reprehende these things, do no less then mislike with the matter
whereof these books do entreat. This was the answer of Theotimus unto
Epiphanius, a man he was of great fame both for sound doctrine, and godly
conversation.

CAP. XII.
A kind of Apology in the behalf of Origin. Cap. 13. in the Greek.


IN so much that many were drawn headlong through the procurement of malicious
sclaunderers, much like a blast of hurlwinde, to revile Origin, it shall not be
amiss to say somewhat of In the marge of the greek copy there was written
as follows: We have to learn that the fifth general Council condemned both
Origin and his works. But this historiographer was before the third.
them. Obscure men, odd fellows, such as have no pythe or substance in them,
to the end they might become famous, go about most commonly to purchase unto
them selves glory and renown by dispraysing of such men as far excel them
in all rare and singular virtues. Of which sort of backebiters first I remember
Methodius bishop of Olympus, a city of Lycia: next Eustathius, who for a while
was bishop of Antioch: thirdly Apolinarius: last of all this Theophilus. This
mess of raylers (if I may so term them) fell a sclau^dering of Orige^,
neither yet all for one thing. One charged him with this, an other with that,
whereby they all severally declared unto the world, that they allowed wholly all
such things in him as they had not reprehended by name. For in as much they
blamed him severally for several doctrine, it appears they took that for
truth in him, which they concealed and misliked not withal: and they approved
in very deed that which they denied not in word. Methodius though at the
beginning he inueyed bitterly against Origin, yet afterward as it were by way
of recantation he extolled him unto the skies in that dialogue, which he
entitled Zeno. Their reuiling in mine opinion increased the renown and fame of
Origin. For while they charged him with heinous crimes, as they thought, and
yet findinge no fault with him as toutching the blessed Crinitie: they are
witnesses them selves that he was of y^ right and sound faith. Even as these
men being not able justly to accuse him, bear witness with him of his true
belief: so Athanasius void of all parcialitie, a zealous maintayner of the
clause Of one substance, alleges him for a witness of his faith in the
orations which he wrote to the co^futation of Athanasius testimony of Origin.
the Arians, cites his words for testimonies among his works, and says thus
of him. That notable man and that paynfull writer Origin, confirms in plain
words the faith and opinion we have of the son of God, in that he auoutcheth
him to be coaeternall with the father. Wherefore such as go about to revile
Origin, they unawares do sclaunder Athanasius, which hyghly commended him. Thus
much by the way of Origin, and now again to the story.

CAP. XIII. Cap. 14 in the greek.

How that John sent for Epiphanius to come unto him, and charged him that he
had behaved him self contrary to the canons of the church: after they had
brawled a while together, Epiphanius returned homewards.

John at the first took not the matter very grievously, for all that
Epiphanius contrary to the canon had made a Deacon in his church: but requested
him to accept as a simple lodging a piece of the bishops palace. Epiphanius
answered him in this sort: I will neither lie with thee, neither pray
together with thee, unless thou both banishe Dioscorus with his brethren out
of the city, and also subscribe with thine own hand unto the decree which
condemns the works of Origin. When that John paused upon the matter, and
said that he ought not rashly, neither without good aduisement determine any
thing of that matter, before that he had generally examined, and that narrowly,
the whole circumstance: the adversaries of John set Epiphanius otherwise on
work. For at the celebration of the blessed and holy Communion in the church
commonly called the Apostles, they set Epiphanius in the myddest: they cause
him in the open audience to condemn the works of Origin, to excommunicate
Dioscorus and his brethren, last of all to rebuke John for taking of their
part. When John heard of this, he sent unto Epiphanius, who the day
followinge was at church, this message by Serapion: Epiphanius, thou do The
message which Chrysostom sent unto Epiphanius. The contention between two
ancient fathers, Epiphanius. b. of Co^stantia in Cyprus, and John Chrysostom.
b. of Constantinople.
many things contrary to the Canons: first in that thou have presumed to
make ministers within my Diocese: secondly in that thou have ministered the
Communion of thine own head without my license: again in that thou dyddest
refuse it when I requested thee, and now thou do it of thy self.
Wherefore take heed lest the people stomach thy dealinge, and be set on an
uproar, if ought come amysse thou have thy remedy in thy hand. Epiphanius
receauinge this message, was stricken with sudden fear, left the church,
inueyed bitterly against John, and took shippinge toward Cyprus. The report
goes, that as he went down to the rode to take shipping, he prophesied thus
of John: I hope thou shall never dye a bishop, and that John answered him thus
again: I hope thou shat never come alive into thy country. Whether they that
told me these things, reported truly, I am not able to say: but sure I am
that it fell to either even as each one wished to the other. For neither came
Epiphanius alive to Cyprus, (he dyed on the seas by the way) neither dyed John
a bishop, for he was deposed and banished the church, as hereafter shall more
manifestly appear.

CAP. XIIII. Cap. 15. in the greek.

How that after the departure of Epiphanius, John made a sermon against
allwomen, which made both the Emperor and the Empress to summone a Council
at Chalcedon, where John was deposed: In his absence the people made much ado,
and to appease them John is called home to Constantinople again.

AS soon as Epiphanius had hoysed up sail, report came unto John that
Eudoxia the Empress Chrisostom made a sermon agains all women.
had bolstered Epiphanius against him, he being very hot and a hasty man of
nature, ever ready, for his gift of utterance did so serve him, immediately went
up into the pulpitt, made a whole sermon in the dispraise of all women. The
multitude took it in the worst part, as if thereby he had determined secretly
to pay home y^ Empress. The sermon was borne away of illwillers and brought to
the Emperor: the Empress also hearing thereof, complained unto the Emperor,
that therein she was contuineliously dealte withal, and that the reproach
thereof redounded also unto him. Wherefore she works through Theophilus to
summone a council against John, Seuerianus likewise went about the same,
neither was the dealing of John toward him as yet gone out of his stomach.
Shortly after Theophilus came thither, who called together at the Emperors
commandment many bishops out of diverse cities. But above all other men they
came thither apace, which for diverse quarells owed John a displeasure. They
also came thither whom John had deposed and put by their bishoprics* for he
had deprived many of the bishops in Asia in the voyage he made to Ephesus, at
what time he made Heraclides bishop. wherefore with one consent they The counsel
of Chalcedo^ for the deposing of Chrysostom.
meet all at Chalcedo^ a city of Bithynia. At that time Cyrinus an Aegyptia^
borne, being bishop of Chalcedo^, inueyed bitterly against John in presence of
all y^ bishops, he reported of him y^ he was a wicked man, that he was an
arroga^t and a sollyne bishop. the rest of y^ bishops were glad of that. But
Maruthas bishop of Mesopotamia trod against his will on Cyrinus foot, and
hurt him sore. The broise so increased and pained Cyrinus so much, y^ he could
not go with the rest of the bishops to Co^sta^tinople, but tarried behind at
Chalcedo^, the rest sailed to Constantinople. When as none of y^ clergy of
Constantinople went forth to meet Theophilus, neither exhibited unto him the
accustomed honor and reverence, (for then all began to hate him) the matiners
of Alexandria, who then by chance were there, and had brought corn to
Constantinople, went to meet him, and received him with gladsome shoutes. He
went not to the house of prayer, but unto the Empress palace called Placidia.
Then the adversaries of John went about to forge many false accusations against
him, they brabble no longer about the books of Origin, but they take other
absurd matters in hand. When these things were thus adoynge, the Bishops
assembled together in the suburbs of Chalcedon in a place called the Oak:
immediately they cite thither John for to answer unto such crimes as he was
charged withal. Beside him they charge Serapion, Tygris the Eunuche priest,
and Paulus the reader (for they were also accused) to appear before them. When
John had excepted against such as had cited him thither, as his open enemies,
he appealed from them unto a general Council: they without any other
circumstance called him four times. And seeing that he would not come, but
sent them still the same answer: they proceeded against him, they condemned
and deposed him of his bishopric, for no other crime but because he being
cited would not appear. When tidings thereof about euentyde were brought to
Constantinople, the whole city was on an uproar. Wherefore they watched all
night, they would not suffer him to be thrust out of the church, they
exclaimed that his cause ought to have been heard in a greater assembly of
Bishops. But the Emperors commandment was, that as soon as he were removed,
he should be conveyed to exile. This being known for certayntie, John the
third day after his deposition, about noone vnknowinge to the multitude (for
he was loath there should be any ado for Chrylostome e^^l^d.
his lake) yielded him self voluntarily into the hands of his adversaries,
and so went away. Cap 16. in the Greek.
The people were all set on fyrie sedition, and as it commonly falls out in
such hurlyburlies, many of them which aforetyme pursued him with deadly
hatred, then chaunginge their mind, pitied his case: many others who lately
desired to see his deprivation, reported then that he was craftily dealt
withal, and falsely accused. Many cried out against the Emperor, and
exclaimed at the Council: but above all others they inueyed against
Theophilus, who was known to have been the author of all that treachery and
malicious sclaunders raised of John. For the co^spiracie and wait he laid for
John could do longer be concealed. and though it was diversely found out, yet
specially in that he communicated with Dioscorus and his brethren called Long,
immediately after the deposition of John. Seuerianus also as he preached in the
church, thought now he had fit opportunity given him to inuey against John: he
said plainly though John were convicted of no crime, yet was he justly
deposed for his insolent and hautie behavior: that all sins were to be
forgiven, yet as holy scripture bare witness, that God resisted the proud.
With the hearing of these and such like contumelious phrases recited, the
people was the more prone to contention. Wherefore the Emperor in all the have
caused John again to be sent for, and to return to Constantinople. Briso
being the messenger (he was an Eunuche of the Empress) found him at Prenetum a
mart town over against Nicomedia. and brought him to Constantinople.
Chrysostom ^turneth from ^xile.
But for all he was thus called home from exile, yet purposed he with him self
not to tread within the city, before he were proved and found innocent by the
censure of the higher Judges, therefore he continewed a while in the suburbs
called Marianae. When that he lyngered from returning into the City, the
multitude took it grieuouslye, and forthwith fell a reuilinge of the
Magistrates. Wherefore of necessity he was constrained to come home: the
people went forth to meet him, they bring him to the church with great
reverence, they request him to continue their bishop, and thenceforth after the
usual manner to pray for the peace and prosperous estate of the church of God.
When that he refused so to do, and pleaded for him self, that it must not so
be before his cause were heard of indifferent Judges, and the deposers had
changed their mind and absolved him: they were the more desirous, for they
longed to see him stalled again in the bishops seae, and preach afreshe unto
the people. To be short the people compelled him so to do. When that John was
placed in the bishops seat, and prayed after the accustoined manner for peace
unto the people and congregations throughout the world: he was constrained
also to preach. The which thing ministered occasion unto the adversaries to
accuse him again, although for a while they suffered it to lie for dead.

CAP. XV. Cap. 17. in the Greek.

How that when Theophilus would have Heraclides matter heard in his absence,
and John resisted it: the citizens of Constantinople and Alexandria went
together by the ears, so that Theophilus with other bishops was feign to leave
the city and fly away.

IN the mean space Theophilus went craftily about for to call into question
the consecratinge of Heraclides: to the end he might thereby, if it were
possible, find matter to charge John afreshe, and so to depose him the second
time. Heraclides for all he was not present, yet they proceed against him:
they lay to his charge, that he had iniustly punished certain persons,
imprisoned them, last of all lead them throughout the open streets of Ephesus
to be ignominiously derided. When John made answer, that of right no man ought
to be judged in his absence, without the presence of the party, and the
hearing of his own cause: the people of Alexandria brged very earnestly that
the accusers of Heraclides were to be heard, for all he him self were absent.
Hereupon there rose great strife and contention between the citizens of
Constantinople, and the inhabitants of Alexandria. And while they skirmishe one
with the other, many were sore wounded, and diverse also presently dispatched.
When the head of this combatt was past, and the truth come to light,
Theophilus got him in all the have to Alexandria, the other bishops ran
likewise away, few only excepted which held with John, and repaired every
one to his own bishopric. After that these things were thus come to pass,
every man was ready to speak ill of Theophilus. The hatred grew and increased
against him daily, because he sticked not studiously to peruse the works of
Origin secretly, though openly he condemned them. And being demanded why he
made so much of the books he had lately condemned: his answer was, that the
books of Origin were like meddowes clad with every kind of flowers: therefore
(says he) if I find in them ought that is good, I cull it out, if otherwise
briars or brambles, I set naught by them, because of their pricks. This was
the answer of Theophilus, when he called not to remembrance the saying of the
wise man: that the words and counsels of sages resemble very much prickinge
Ecclesiastes. 12
thorns, and that such as are toutched therewith, ought not to kick against
the prick. The aforesaid causes made Theophilus to be hated of all men.
Dioscorus Bishop of Hermopolis, one of these religious men which commonly were
called Long, departed this life shortly after the departure of Theophilus into
Alexandria, and enjoyed an honorable funeral at the Church called the Oak,
where the Council was summoned for the hearing of John's cause. John gave him
self wholly to teach and to preach unto the people: he made Serapion, who
had procured unto him great hatred, bishop of Heraclea a city of Thracia.

CAP. XVI. Cap. 18. in the Greek.

How the picture of Eudoxia was erected all of silver with plays and
spectacles: John reprehended the authors that did the whole, and was therefore
banished.

SHortly after such things as follow ensued. A silver picture (covered with a
mantell) of Eudoxia the Empress was set up upon a pillour of redd marble. The
place of this erected pillour was not very nygh the church called VVisdome,
neither very farte of, only the broad street went between the picture and
the church. There were common plays and shows (as the manner was) celebrated.
John supposing verily that these things redounded to the great sclaunder and
infamy of Christian religion, not forgetting his wonted audacitie and liberty
of speech, prepared him self for the authors thereof: and in steed of the
exhortation he should have used to the persuasion, or rather the reformation of
the princes and magistrates, he skoffed with nipping tauntes at such as had
caused those vanities to be solemnized. The Empress likewise applying these
things to her self, supposing that all was uttered to her disgrace and
reproach, procured an other Council of bishops to be called together against
him. John understanding of this, made that famous and notable sermon in the
church, which begins in this sort: Herodias rages afreshe, stomacketh A
Council assembled at Constantinople for the deposition of Chrysostom
anewe, daunceth again: seeks as yet the head of John in a platter. This
sermon made the Empress mad, set her on fire against him. Not long after the
bishops met there together, Leontius bishop of Ancyra in Galatia the lesser:
Ammonius bishop of Laodicea a city in Pisidia: Briso bishop of Philippis in
Thracia: Acacius bishop of Beroea in Syria, with diverse others. The accusers
which lately charged John with heinous crimes, are now brought forth before
these bishops. John trusting to the just dealing of the bishops, requires of
them that the accusations may indifferently be examined. By that time the seast
of our saviors nativity was come on which day y^ Emperor went not to the
church after the wonted manner, but sent John this message: that he would not
communicate with him, before he had cleared him self of the crimes laid to his
charge. And when as the accusers seemed to mistrust them selves, and that John
through the vprightnes and equity of his cause boldened him self: the bishops
then present affirmed they ought not to examine any other offense save only
whether he of him self had taken possession of the bishopric after he was
deposed, without the sentence and admission of a council. When John made
answer y^ he had the consent of fifty bishops which communicated with him,
Leontius replied against him. but more (says he) in the counsel withstoode
thy admission. Again when John said that the canon which contained such a
clause appertained not unto their church, but was to be executed where y^
Arians did reign (for such as assembled at Antioch to root out y^ faith of
one substance, laid down y^ canon against Athanasius) they nevertheless
making no account of his answer, proceeded and gave sentence against him, not
weying with themselves that such as were authors of this canon were also
deposers of Athanasius. These things were done a little before Easter. Then also
the Emperor sent unto John, y^ he had no authority to go into the church,
insomuch he was deposed and condemned in two several counsels. Wherefore John
gave over executing of the ecclesiastical function, and refrained from going
into the church. Immediately also such as favored him departed y^ church, they
keep Easter in the common Such as cleaned to John Chrysostom were called
Iohannits.
bathes called Co^stantianae, together with many bishops, priests, and other
ecclesiastical persons, who thenceforth because of their several conuenticles
were called Iohannits. For the space of two months John was never seen
abroad, until y^ by the Emperors commandment he was brought to exile. and
so at length being banished the church, he was bereaved of his country soil.
The same day certain of such as were called Iohannits, set the church on fire,
with that the eastern wind being up, blew the flame into the senators court,
and cessed not from burning, until all was consumed to ashes. This was done
the twentieth of June, in the sixth Consulship of Honorius, the which he enjoyed
together with Aristanetus. For which conspiracy and treason what heavy penalties
and grievous punishments Optatus governor of Constantinople, in religion a
pagane, and therefore a sore plaguer of Christians made them endure, I think it
best to ouerskip them with silence.

CAP. XVII.
How that after the deposition of John, Arsacius was made bishop of
Constantinople. Cap. 19. in the Greek.
of Cyrinus bishop of Chalcedon, that was payned with the sore foot, and of
the death of Eudoxia the Empress.

ARsacius an old man above the age of fourscore years, who sometime governed
the bishopric of Constantinople before the days of John, was shortly after
made bishop of that seae. In his time when as the church enjoyed great ease
and quietness, by reason of his singular modesty and meek behavior: Cyrinus
bishop of Chalcedon, whose foot Maruthas bishop of Mesopotamia had trod on
and hutt against his will, had such unfortunate success, yt his foot rotted
of the broise, and therefore of necessity he was constrained to saw it of.
Neither suffered he that once, but twice and oftenner toe. For the putrefaction
ran over his whole body, and fell at length into his other foot: then was
he feign to lose both. I have therefore remembered these things because it was
rife in every man's mouth that Cyrinus suffered this plague or punishment
Cyrinus was plagued for reuiling of Chrylostome. Great hail in token of Gods
wrath.
for reuiling of John, and terming him (as I said before a stuburne Bishop.
Again when as great hail (the bigness whereof was not remembered to have been
seen before) fell in the suburbs of Constantinople y^ thirtieth day of
Septembre and the aforesaid Consulship: y^ report likewise went that it was a
token of Gods wrath for the deposition and banishment of John. The death of the
Empress which followed immediately after confirmed this rumor, for she departed
this life the fourth day after the fall of this hail. Some there were also
which said that John was justly deposed: because that in the voyage when he
made Heraclides Bishop of Ephesus, he thrust many out of their Churches, namely
the Nouatians, and such as celebrated the feast of Easter the fourteeneth day
of the month with many others both in Asia and in Lydia. But whether John was
justly deposed as they said which bare him ill will: whether Cyrinus was
plagued for his opprobrious languages and sclaunderous reports: last of all
whether the hail and the death of the Empress were signs of Gods high
displeasure for banishing of John: or whether they happened for some other
causes God alone knows which searches the secrets of man's heart, and
pronounces here of the right sentence of just judgment. I of mine own part
committed to writing such things as then were rife in every man's mouth.

CAP. XVIII. Cap 20 in the Greek.

How that after the desease of Arsacius, Atticus was chosen Bishop of
Constantinople.

ARsacius continewed not Bishop very long, for the year following to wit in
the second Consulship Arsacius.
of Stilicon, but the first of Anthemius and the eleventh of Nouembre he
departed this life. When that the election of a bishop fell out to be a
troublesome piece of work, and the contention endured a very long time: the
next year after in the sixth Consulship of Arcadius, and the first of Probus,
Atticus a godly man, by birth of Sebastia in Armenia, by order a religious man,
Atticus.
trained in the monastical discipline from his youth up, of mean knowledge
yet of singular wisdom naturally ingraffed in him, was chosen bishop of
Constantinople. but of him more hereafter.

CAP. XIX. Cap. 21. in the greek.

How that John Bishop of Constantinople died in exile,

John being banished his Church and bereaved his country soil dyed in exile
at Comanum situated Chrysostom dies in exile Anno Dom. 412
upon the sea Euxinus the foureteeneth of Nouembre, the seventh Consulship of
Honorius, and the second of Theodosius: a man he was (as I said before) more
lead with heat of burning choler then ruled by civil courtesy, and because he
was a man of wonderful boldness he used liberty of speech and had tongue at
will. I can not verily but wonder at him, why he addicting him self so much to
temperance, taught in some sermons that temperance was in manner to be set at
naught. for when as by the council of Bishops there was admission left and
pardon granted for such as had once fallen after baptism to be received
again after repentance into the Church: he sticked The saying of Chrysostom.
not to say, If thou fall a thousand times and repent thee of thy folly come
boldly into the Church. for which doctrine besides that he was misliked of many
his familiars: yet was he ratled of Sisinius the Nouatian Bishop which wrote a
book against that saying of his. but these things were done a little while
ago.

CAP. XX. Cap. 22 in the Greek.

Of the conference had between John Bishop of Constantinople and Sisinius the
Nouatian.

HEre occasion is offered to say somewhat of Sisinius. A man he was (as I have
remembered often times before) very eloquent and a profounde Philosopher: and as
he was a skillful disputer so was he also a cunning interpretor of holy
scripture, so that for his notable wit Eunomius the heretic refused
oftentimes to reason with him. He was no spare man of diett but liberal and a
great spender, yet with good order and temperancie. He seemed riotous and to
exceed in sensuality partly in that he arrayed him self in white, and partly
for bayning him self twice a day. When he was demanded on a certain time why
he being a Bishop bayned him self twice a day, his answer was: because I can
not do it the third time. At an other time going of reverence to visit
Arsacius the Bishop, one of Arsacius familiars asked of him why he used such
atyre as was uncomely for a Bishop? and where he found written that a Priest
ought to wear white? tell thou me (says he) first where it is written that a
Bishop should wear black. And when as the other muzed what answer he should
make, Sisinius prevented him and said: thou art not able to show me that a
Bishop ought to go in black, but I am able to alleadg Solomon for my self
where he says: let thy garments be white. Again our Savior as we read in
the Gospel wore E^^^^^iasie^. 9. Iu^^. 9.
white, and moreover he showed unto his Apostles Moses and Helias clad in
white. With these and other such like answers he brought all that heard him
into great admiration. When that Leontius Bishop of Ancyra in Galatia the
lesser had deprived the Nouatians of a certain Church and then as it fell out
remained at Constantinople, Sisinius went unto him requesting him to restore
them their Church again: Leontius in a great chafe made him this answer: It
is pity that you Nouatians should enjoy ere a Church insomuch you take away
repentance and deprive men of the benefitts which God has bestowed upon them.
After that Leontius had uttered these with other such like sentences to the
reprehension of the Nouatians, Sisinius replied: no man repents more then I.
why says Leontius and how do thou repent? because says Sisinius that ever
I saw thee. Again when John the Bishop had taunted him and said that one
city could not hold two Bishops, his answer was, no more it does not. John
taking this answer in ill part said again, I see thou will be Bishop alone:
Not so (says Sisinius) but with thee alone I am not Bishop though others do
so take me. John being grieved with this answer told him again: I will
forbid thee to preach for thou art an heretic. Sisinius replied mearily in
this sort: then will I do thee a good turn if thou ease me of so great a
labor. John was somewhat pleased with that answer and said: Nay then I will
not stay thee from preaching if it be a grief unto thee. so witty and so
pleasant was Sisinius in his answers, it were to long to rehearse all his
pithye sayings and sage answers. Wherefore I think it sufficient in these
few lines to declare what kind of man he was. Thus much further I am able to
auouteh that by the report of all men he excelled for learning all the Bishops
which succeeded him, count all one after an other: and therefore was he much
made of and in great estimation, yea the chief Senators made great account of
him and had his virtues in admiration. And for all he wrote many books and
furnished them with rhetorical phrases and poetical sentences: yet was he
commended more for pronouncinge then for penning. for he had a notable grace in
his countenance, voice, behavior, and look, with all other his bodily gestures
for the which he was honored of all seets and religions, but above all others
of Atticus Bishop of Constantinople. So far by occasion of Sisinius.

CAP. XXI.
Of the death of Arcadius the Emperor.

SHortly after the death of John, the Emperor Arcadius departed this life, a
quiet and a courteous man he was, who in the latter end of his life was thought
to be a very godly man, upon such an occasion as follows. In Constantinople
there is a great palace called Carya, and in the porche there stands a hazell
on the which, report goes that Acacius the Martyr was hanged. Wherefore there
was a Church erected at that tree: the Emperor passing by was desirous to see
it, went in, and after he had said his prayers came forth again. All the
parish ran forth to see the Emperor: some left their houses and took up
their standing in the open street, thinking verily to see the Emperors face
as he passed by with all his port and train: other some followed the Emperor
out of the Church until that both men, women and children had all gone out of
the house which adjoined unto the Church. they were no sooner gone but the
house where they had flocked together fell down. Immediately the fame of the
Emperor was spread abroad with great admiration that so great a multitude of
people was saved by the means of his prayers. the Arcadius the Emperor died
Anno Dom. 412.
end of that was in this sort. Arcadius leaving behind him his son
Theodosius of the age of eight years departed this life, in the Consulship of
Bassus and Philip, the first of May, the second year of the two hundredth
nynety and seventh Olympiad. He raygned together with his father Theodosius the
space of thirteen years, and beginning with the one and thirty years of his
age, he raygned fourteen years after the desease of his father. This book
conteyneth ye history of twelve years and six months.

The end of the sixth book of Socrates Scholasticus.
THE SEVENTH BOOK OF THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORYE OF SOCRATES SCHOLASTICVS.
CAP. I.
How that after the death of Arcadius the Emperor who left his son
Theodosius of the age of eight years, Anthemius the Lieuetenant took the
government of the Empire.

AFter the desease of Arcadius the Emperor, being in the month of May and the
Consulship of Bassus and Philip. his brother Honorius took the rule of the
West Honorius.
parts of the empire, and Theodosius the younger the son of Arcadius being
eight Theodosius. Anthemius.
year old governed the East parts of the world by the direction of Anthemius
his chief Magistrate. This Anthemius was Nephewe to Philip, which in the time
of Constantius thrust Paulus the Bishop out of the Church and placed
Macedonius in his rowme. The same man compassed the city of Constantinople
with a strong wall: he seemed and was verily a man accounted among the wisest
sort of that age: he never took any thing in hand without good aduisement: he
would confer with some of his familiers of the business he went about, but
Troilus
above all others he used the advice of Troilus the Sophist, a man very wise,
of great experience and singular policy: he was nothing inferior to
Anthemius, and therefore Anthemius retained him of his counsel in all his
affairs.

CAP. II.
Of Atticus Bishop of Constantinople,

WHen the Emperor Theodosius went on the eight year of his age, the third
year of Atticus bishop of Constantinoples consecration the which he enjoyed
with great commendation was expired: a man he was (as I said before) of mean
learning yet in life godly and of great wisdom and therefore the Churches in
those days increased and flourished exceedingly. He reconciled not only such
as were favorers of his own faith but also made the heretics to have his
wisdom in admiration: whom he would in no wise molest but after that he had
ratled them again he would show him self loving and amiable toward them.
He was a painful student for he bestowed great labor, he spent the greater
part of the night in reading over the works of ancient writers, in so doing
there was no ground of philosophy, no quirck in sopistrie that could blanke
or astonish him. He was gentle and courteous unto such as conferred with him,
and with the sorrowful he seemed to sorrow him self, In few words, he became
(as the Apostle 1. Corinthians. 9.
writes) all unto all men. First as soon as he was made Priest, the sermons
which with great labor he framed together, he learned out of the book and
pronounced in the Church. In process of time by daily exercise and great
diligence he so boldned him self that he preached ex tempore, his manner of
teaching was very plain. his Sermons were so simple that the auditors thought
them not worthy the bearing away, neither the writing in paper to the knowledge
of the posterity following. Thus much of his conditions, behavior, learning,
and gift of utterance, now to the history of that time.

CAP. III.
Of Theodosius and Agapetus Bishops of Synada.

THeodosius Bishop of Synada a city of Phrygia pacatiana was a sore scurge
unto the here Theodosius a covetous Bishop.
ticks (for in that city there were many of the Macedonian sect) he banished
them not only the town but also the country. Neither did he this according
unto the rule of the Catholic Church, which accustometh not to persecute men
neither with zeal of the right and sincere faith, but in hope of fifthy suere
and foul gain for to wringe money from the heretics. Wherefore there was no
way that might grieve the Macedonians left unassayed: he mayntayned his own
clergy against them: there was no devise but he practiced for to afflict them
with: he sticked not to bring them in fetters to hold up their hands at the
bar, but above all others he plagued their Bishop Agapetus with sundry
griefs and vexations. And when as he perceived that the A^^petus ^ M^^^doni^n
^^ll to em b^a^^ the ^aith of one substance.
chief Magistrates within that province were not of authority sufficient and
that their commission ertended not to the punishment of the Macedonians, he
got him in all the have to Constantinople and sued out a commandment of the
Lieuetenant of that province for the sharp correction of them. Whilst that
Theodosius the Bishop made friends at Constantinople for the furtherance of his
suit: Agapetus whom I termed the Macedonian Bishop was converted and fell to
embrace the right and sound faith. For after he had assembled together all the
clergy and layty within his jurisdiction, he persuaded them to receive the
faith of one substance. This being done he went with speed together with a
great multitude, nay with the whole city, into the church where after prayers
and solemn service he got him into the seat of Theodosius. Immediately after
the linking of the people together in the bond of love and unity, thenceforth
he maintained the faith of one substance so that he obtained the government of
the Churches belonging unto the diocese and citte of Synada. Shortly after
Theodosius came home to Synada, and brought with him authority from the
Lieuetenant whereof he bragged not a little, and being ignorant of all the
things that were done in his absence straight way he got him into the Church,
there he found but small welcome for the doors were made fast against him, and
after that he understood of their dealing, again he posteth to
Constantinople. There he be wayled his state before Atticus the Bishop, and
opens unto him how that he was injuriously thrust beside his bishopric.
Atticus understanding that all fell out to the great profitt and furtherance of
the Church of God, began to pacify him with mild and courteous languages,
exhorting him thenceforth to embrace a quiet life void of all trouble and
molestation and not to prefer his own private gain and lucre before the
profit and commodity of the whole Church: he wrote moreover unto Agapetus
willing him to enjoy the bishopric and not to fear at all the displeasure of
Theodosius.

CAP. IIII.
How a lame Jew being baptized of Atticus Bishop of Constantinople recovered
again his lymmes.

EVen as the aforesaid circumstance which fell out in the flourishing days of
Atticus was a great furtherance to the church of God: so likewise miracles with
the gift of healing which raygned in those times turned to the glory of God and
the profitt of his people. for a certain A Jew troubled with the paulsey.
Jew being held the space of many years with a paulsey was feign to keep
his bed, and having tried all the salues and medicens, all the practices and
prayers of the Jews, was not a jot the better, at length he fled for refuge
unto the baptism ministered in the Church of Christ, persuading him self for
suertie that by the means of this being the true physic of the soul, he
might recover the former health of his body. Atticus was immediately made
priuey unto this his devout mind and godly disposition: he instructed the
Jew in the principles and articles of Christian religion, he laid before him
the hope that was to be had in Christ Jesus, he bidds that Jew bed and all
should be brought unto the font and place appointed for the ministration of
baptism. This Jew being grievously taken with the paulsey was no sooner
baptized in the faith of Christ and taken out of the font, but his disease left
him, so that he recovered his former health. This gift of healing being The
gift of ^e^ling in he days of Socrates.
wrought by the power of Christ prevailed in the world among the men of these
our days. Many of the Gentiles hearing the fame of this miraculous power
received the faith and were baptized: but the Jews for all they sought after
signs and wonders, yet could they not with signs be brought to embrace the
Christian faith.

CAP. V.
How that Sabbatius a Jew borne, being Priest of the Nouatian Church fell
from his own sect.

FOr all that Christ the son of God, bestowed the aforesaid graces and
benefitts of his singular love and goodness toward mankind: yet the greater
part weying not thereof (more is the ptty) wallowe still in the pudle of sin
and incredulity, neither were the Jews only they which made light account of
the signs and wonders wrought among men: but others also which are proud of
their rites yea and are proved to be no less then plain Jews in faith and
religion. Sabbatius of whom I spoke a little before could not quiet him self
with the inferior degree Sabbatius a Nouatian ^^^est.
of priesthood but coueted to clime up unto the rowme of a Bishop: took
occasion then of the Iewishe observation of the feast of Easter, and severed
him self from the Nouatian Church. Wherefore as he frequented several and
private conuenticles from his Bishop Sisinius in a certain place of the city
called the dry Hillock, where now the market of Arcadius is kept, he presumed
so heinous an offense that hanging might seem to be to small a punishment for
his labor. For on the day appointed for the celebration of the communion as
he read a certain piece of the Gospel which began with these words: The
feast of sweet bread drew nigh which is called Luck. 22.
Easter, he added of his own that which was never found written, never heard
of before in these words: cursed be every one that keeps Easter without
sweet bread. Which words sticked in the minds of many me^, so that diverse
of the simpler sort of the Nouatian laiety being thus drawn from the faith
adicted them selves unto his fond opinion. But this his craftye and The
corrupters of Gods word have ill ends.
subtle forgery fell otherwise out then he hoped, for such as presume to
corrupt the word of God have ever an ill end and an unfortunate success.
For shortly after when as he kept the feast of Easter according unto the
corrupt opinion conceived in his mind: when as many flocked unto him after
the wonted manner and solemnized throughout the wholl night the accustomed
vigills, they were all set on a furious and frentike kind of tumulte. They
imagined with them selves that they saw Sisinius their Bishop set upon
them with an infinite multitude of men. Wherefore the thronge being great,
and as it is very like in the night season, being shut up in a narrow
rowme smothered one an other, so that there dyed above threescore and ten
persons. This being done many shrinked from Sabbatius but diverse others for
all that, cleaued earnestlye unto the foolish and fond opinion they had
conceived of that celebration of Easter. But how this Sabbatius forswore him
self a little while ago, and aspired unto the calling of a Bishop we will
declare hereafter.

CAP. VI.
Of such as were the captains and ringleaders of the Arian opinion.

DOrotheus an Arian Bishop whom we have remembered before to have been
translated by the Arians from Antioch to Constantinople, departed this life
when he had lived a hundredth and nynteene years, the sixth of November in the
seventh Consulship of Honorius and the second of Theodosius Augustus. After
his desease the Arian sect chose Barbas to their bishop Barbas.
in whose time the Arians had amongst them two notable men by whose means
their heresy began to revive again: the ones name was Timotheus, the other
was called Georgius, but priests both: Georgius excelled in profane
literature, Timothee of the contrary gave himself wholly Georgius. Timotheus.
to the reading of the word of God. Georgius was never seen without Aristotle
or Plato in his hand, Timothee again was a great man in Origin and as he
expounded holy Scripture he showed him self to be well seen in the Hebrew
tongue. Timothee was aforetime of the Psathyrian sect and Georgius was made
priest of Barbas. I my self by conferring with Timotheus perceived how ready
he was to satisfy and resolve every doubt that was demanded of him and
plainly to set wide open the obscure places of holy Scriptures: he was ever
wont to cite Origin for a witness to testify that his sayings were no other
then true. Wherefore I can not verily but marvel why these two men continewed
Arians seeing that the one was a great reader of Plato, the other ever a
perusing of Origin. For Plato affirmed that the second and third cause (so he
was wont to term them) had no begininge of essence: Origin likewise
confesses every where the son to be coeternall with the father. And
although they perseuered in their Church yet priuelye, and by a little and a
little they reformed the Arian opinion and purged their doctrine of many
pernicious and pestilent blasphemies of Arius. Of these men so far. Shortly
after when Sisinius the Nouatian bishop had departed this life in the aforesaid
Consulship Chrysanthus (of whom I mind to speak more hereafter) was chosen to
be their Bishop.

CAP. VII.
How that Cyrillus succeeded Theophilus in the Bishopric of Alexandria.

SHortly after Theophilus bishop of Alexandria being fallen into a lethargy
departed this life ye nynth Consulship of Honorius, the fifth of Theodosius and
ye fifteenth of October. Then there rose a great stur and contention about ye
election of a bishop. some would have Timotheus ye archedeaco^, some other would
have Cyrillus, Theophilus brothers son preferred to ye bishopric. while ye
people were thus at variance for all that Abudatius captain of the garrison in
Alexandria labored for Cy^illus Bishop of Alexandria Anno Dom. 418 The Bishop
of Alexandria both a Bishop and a magistrate.
Timothee and furthered his suit: yet three days after the desease of
Theophilus, Cyrillus was chosen Bishop and enjoyed the bishopric: and withal
he challenged unto himself more authority then ever Theophilus had before
him. From that time forth the Bishop of Alexandria besides the oversight and
jurisdiction of his clergy and ecclesiastical matters took also the
government of temporal affairs. Wherefore Cyrillus immediately after he had
shut up the Nouatia^ churches within Alexandria he not only rified them of
all the treasure but also bereaved Theopemptus their Bishop of all his
substance.

CAP. VIII.
Of Maruthas Bishop of Mesopotamia and how that by his means the faith of
Christ took great increase in Persia.

IT fell out in those days that the faith in Christ flourished in Persia and
that upon such an occasion Anno Dom. 418.
as follows. Between the Romans and the Persians there do commonly pass
many Ambassadors, sundry causes do co^straine each of them to send in
Embassy unto y^ other. That very instant did require that Maruthas bishop of
Mesopotamia (of whom I made mention before) should be sent from the Emperor
of Rome unto the king of Persia. The king perceauing by him y^ he was a godly
man had him in great reverence, was ruled by him as by a rare and singular
man. This grieved the Magicians which were much made of and in great credit
with the king of Persia. For they were wonderfully affrayd lest the king
through the counsel of Maruthas would become a Christian. Maruthas by the
means of prayer, had rid the king of his co^tinewall headache which the
Magicians and Sorcerers could not do. Wherefore they devise a certain slight
for to delude the king withal. And because the Persians worship the fire for
their God, the king is always accustomed to adore in a certain house fire
which continewally burns: under the ground they convey a man, whom they make
to rore and to cry out as follows when the king is at his prayers: The king
must be thrust out of his kingdom, He behaueth himself lewdly in taking the
Christian priest for a godly person. Isdigerdes (for so was their king called)
hearing this dreadful Isdigerdes ^ing of Persia.
voice for all that he reverenced Maruthas, yet purposed he to send him away.
Then Maruthas being a right godly man gave himself wholly to prayer whereby he
found out the fraud and deceate of the Magicians. Wherefore he reasons thus
with the king. Be no longer deceived O king, but get thee into the house,
cause the earth to be dug up and thou shall easily perceive their guile. For
the fire speaks not, it is a certain devise inverted by men for y^ purpose.
The king yeldeth unto the counsel of Maruthas, in he goes again unto the
house where the fire continewally burned. As soon as the voice was heard the
second time, he commanded the earth should be cast up, and there was he found
which spoke, and cried out the which clamor they took to be the commandment
of God himself. The king when he espied their lewd treachery was exceedinge
wroth, and gave forth charge that every tenth of the Magician kindred should be
executed: he turned The M^gi^ians do ^uffer.
him to Maruthas and willed him to build churches where pleased him best. Upon
this occasion it fell out that y^ faith in Christ flourished exceedingly in the
kingdom of Persia. For that time Maruthas left Persia and took his voyage to
Constantinople. Shortly after he went again in embassy into Persia, by that
time the Magicians found out other deceytfull devises, and a fresh they fall a
forging to the end the kings mind might be alienated from him. Of set
purpose they infected the air of a certain place where the king was wont to
frequent, with a stinking savor and with all they sclaunder the Christians
that it was scattered by them. But the king having just cause to suspect the
Magicians for their former wiles, made great inquire who should play so slutush
a part, at length by long sifting it was known that the Magicians themselves
had caused this corrupt odor for the nonce to be spread all over the place,
wherefore again he executed many of them, but Maruthas he had in great
estimation. Thence forth he loved the Romans entirely and embraced the^ in
league of peace and friendship. The king was almost become a christian, when
Maruthas together with Ablaatus the Persia^ bishop published unto y^ world an
other experime^t bl^^^^ b. Persia.
or trial of the Christian faith, for they both being continewally given to
watch and to pray cast a Deuell out of the kings son which tormented him out
of measure. But death prevented him ararancs (...) of Per^^^
and abridged the raines of his mortal rare ere he could fully be instructed
in the Christian faith. After his desease his son Bararanes enjoyed the
crown, in whose days (as it shallbe hereafter more plainly declared) the
league between the Romans and the Persians was broken.

CAP. IX.
The succession of Bishops in the Church of Antioch and Rome.

ABout that time when Flauianus Bishop of Antioch had departed this life
Porphyrius was Flauianus. Porphyrius. Alexander. Damasus. Siricius. Anastasius.
Innocentius.
chosen in his rowme, and after Porphyrius, Alexander was made Bishop of that
seae. In the Church of Rome when that Damasus had governed the Ecclesiastical
affairs the space of eighteen years, Siricius succeeded him in the
Bishopric. Again after that Siricius had continewed there the term of
fifteen years and departed this life, Anastasius was Bishop three years:
after his desease Innocentius (who first drove the Nouatians out of Rome and
deprived them of many Churches) was made Bishop of that seae.

CAP. X.
How that Alarichus took Rome and made it subject unto the Barbarians.

IT fell out in those days that Rome was taken of the Barbarians. For one
Alarichus a Barbarian Alarichus.
being in league with the Romans and sometime aided the Emperor Theodosius
in the battaill against the tyrant Eugenius and therefore was advanced into
great honor by the Romans, when he could not patiently content him self
with the prosperous sail of fortunate successes, although he aspired not unto
the Imperial seepter, yet left he Constantinople and posted in all the have
into the Weste parts of the world. He was no sooner come into lllyrium but he
subdued unto him all that contreye. As he went forewardes on his iorneye the
Thessalians withstoode him about the entries of the river Peneus, the ready
way by Mount Pindus unto Nicopolis a city of Epirus: the sielde being there
pitched the Thessalians slew above three thousand men. After that bloody s
kirmishe the Barbarians which accompanied Alarichus ransackinge and spoylinge
both town and country as they went, took at length the city of Rome. They
ra^sacked the city: They defaced and fired many worthy monuments: they
violently spoiled the citizens of their money, they executed many of the
Senators with sundry kinds of tormente. Alarichus to the end he might bring
the Royal port and majesty of the Imperial scepter into contempt and
derision, proclaimed Emperor one whose name was Attalus: this man by his
procuremc^t Attalus.
walked abroad the space of one wholl day with a guarded troop of soldiers,
the next day after, in the attire and habit of a servant. When these things
prevailed then in such sort as you hear Alarichus took his heels and ran
away: for the report that was bruted abroad of Theodosius y^ Emperors great
power marching to give him battaill, astonished his mind and put him in great
fear. Neither was it a fable or a forged rumor but for most certain truth
that the Emperors host made expedition to wage battaill with him. He when as
he could in no wise away with that fame gave him self to flight. The report
goes that as he went toward Rome a certain monk Alarichus (as it is
supposed) is commanded from above to destroy the city of Rome for their
great sin and iniquity.
met him which admonished him not to delight him self with perpetrating of such
heinous and horrible offenses neither to rejoice in committing of slaughter and
bloodshed. Whom Alarichus answered in this sort. I God knovveth do take this
voyage against my will. There is one which molesteth me daily, nay he
compels me by force and says thus unto me: go on thy journey, destroy the
city of Rome. So far of Alarichus,

CAP. XI.
Of the Bishops which in those days governed the Church of Rome.

AFter Innocentius, Zosimus governed the Church of Rome the space of two
years, after Innocentius. Zosimus. Bonifacius. Celestinus. The bishop of Rome
fell to challenge unto him self seculer power.
his desease Bonifacius was Bishop three years whom Celestinus succeeded.
This man banished the Nouatians out of Rome, deprived them of their Churches
and constrained Rusticula their Bishop privily to raise private conuenticles.
For unto that time the Nouatia^s flourished at Rome, enjoyed many churches and
had under the^ great co^gregatio^s. but they were the^ hated out of measure
when as the bishop of Rome (no otherwise the^ the bishop of Alexandria) passing
the bounds of his priestely order presumed to challenge unto him self secular
power and authority. Therefore those bishops permitted not such as held with
the^ y^ faith of one substance freely to frequent their wonted assemblies: and
although they commended them for their uniform consent as toutching the faith,
yet they deprived them of all their substance. But the Nouatians which
inhabited Constantinople were not so dealt with all. For the Bishops of
Constantinople besides that they embraced them for their uniformity in faith,
they suffered them (as I said before) to have their Churches within the city.

CAP. XII.
Of Chrysanthus Bishop of the Nouatian Church in Constantinople.

AFter the desease of Sismius, Chrysanthus the son of Marcianus, who was the
predecessor of Sismus in the Nouatian Bishopric, was in manner compelled to be
their Bishop. This man almost from his youth up was a soldier in the Emperors
court: afterward in the reign of Theodosius Magnus, Liuetenant of Italy:
again the Emperors vicegerent in the I sles of Bryttaine where he purchased
unto him self great commendation for his politic gouernemente. Being well
stricken in years he came to Constantinople and labouringe to be governor or
Magistrate rather in that city, then in far and forayne contreyes, he was
constrained against his will to be bishop of the Nouatians. For when Sisimus
being at the point of death, made mention of him as a sit man to succeed him
in the rowme: the Nouatian people taking the censure of Sisimus as a canon or
law compelled him to be their Bishop. But when Chrysanthus had conveyed him
self out of the way least he should take upon him y^ function: Sabbatius
thinking verily y^ now he had found fit opportunity for to creep into the
bishops seae: despised the dreadful protestations he had solemnly auowed, and
the oath he had taken: got him a company of obscure bishops to consecrate him,
and forth he steps a Bishop. One of the consecrators was Hermogenes whom he
him self had before time excommunicated for the blasphemous books which he
published unto the world. But all the fetches of Sabbatius framed not aright.
For the people detesting his corrupt and intolerable ambition (there was no
way unassayed of him for to attain unto the bishopric) sought out both
coast and country for Chrysanthus, when they had found him lurking in Bithynia
they forced him thence and stalled him Bishop. He was a man that excelled all
others not only in politic wisdom, but also in modest behavior: by his
means the Nouatian churches in Constantinople flourished exceedingly. He was
the first that of his own substance gave Gold unto the poor: He took
nothing save only two loves every sundaye of the blessed bread: he was a man
that was very diligent in his ecclesiastical function: he took Ablabius the
Rhetorician a very wise man of the Nouatian Church, out of Troilus the Sophists
school and made him minister. There are extant notable and excellent sermons
of this Chrysanthus. Ablabius was afterward made Bishop of the Nouatian
Church at Nice, where also he professed Rhetoric.

CAP. XIII.
Of the stir at Alexandria between the Christians and the Jews: of the
contention between Cyrillus the Bishop and Orestes the Liuetenant.

ABout that time the Jews were banished Alexandria by Cyrillus the Bishop
upon such an occasion as follows. The people of Alexandria above all other
men are prone to schism and contention: for if that any quarrel at any time
rise among them, immediately heinous and horrible offenses are wont to ensue,
the tumult is never appeased without great bloodeshede. It fell out that y^
great throng and multitude of people contended among themselves not about any
Dau^cing used in Alexad^ia on the satturdayes.
necessary matter, but who coalde approach nerest unto the dauncers, which
lewd custom is now crept into all cities. For a great multitude assembled
together on y^ saturday to pastime the^ selves with the beholding of a certene
dauncer. And because the Jews spent not that day in the hearing of their law
being their sabbath day, but gave them selves wholly unto the bearing of
comedies and enterludes, to the beholdinge of shows and spectacles, that day
was the occasion of great schism and dissension among the people. And though
the tumult was partly appeased by y^ Liuetenant of Alexandira yet nevertheless
the Jews gave not over their quarrel nor the spite they owed unto the one
part of the faction. For the Jews as they were always found deadly foes unto
such as prosessed the Christian faith: so then above all other times they were
incensed against them because of the dauncers. Wherefore when as Orestes the
Liuetenante of Alexandria had nailed upon the theater the writ of politic
governance (for so do the people of Alexandria term the public
proclamations of the Liuetenant) some of Cyrillus y^ Bishops familier friends
stepped forth to examine what the Liuetenant had written. Of which number one
was Hierax a schoolemaister and professor of grammar, a dligent auditor of
Cyrillus the bishop and one that was greatly delited with his sermons. The
multitude of the Jews seeing this Hierax upon the stage exclaimed immediately
against him y^he came thither for no other cause, but only to set the people
together by the ears. Orestes although heretofore he enuyed y^ authority of
Bishops because that Temporal and worldly Magistrates are grieved that the
Church should have any authority or preeminence.
the credit and power which the Emperors granted the Magistrates and
Liuetenantes was by reason of them abridged and cut short: yet the^ he spited
him above all other times because that Cyrillus would pry into his wrytings
and curiously sift out the contents and meaning thereof. Therefore he caused
Hierax openly to be apprehended in the midest of the theater and to be punished
extremly. Cyrillus understanding of this warned the chief of the Jews to
appear before him, told them plainly if they would not give over their
rebellion and traitorous conspiracy against the true Christians he would
punish them according unto their deserts. The Jews stomakinge the Bishops
threats, fretted the more and boiled within them selves for anger, they fell
to deuisinge of sleights for to mischief the Christians, which in the end
caused all the Jews to be banished Alexandria. The circumstance was in such
sort as follows. The Jews after consultation layinge down a sign for each
of them to know the other to wit: the carieng of a ring made of the rind or
bark of the palm tree, purposed to set upon the Christians in the night time.
Wherefore on a certain night they sent abroad throughout the wholl city
such as should cry fire, fire, and where should it be but in the church
called Saint Alexanders, The christians hearing of this rose up, left their
houses, ran to save the church from burning, some out of this street, and
some out of that. the^ the Jews stepped forth suddenly from under the
pentises, set upon y^ Christians and slew them. And as they endeavored to keep
their hands y^ their rings might not be seen: so they dispatched out of the
way as many christians as met them. When the day appeared and y^ sun was up
the authors of this horrible murder were known well enough. Cyrillus
understanding of y^ circumstance was wonderfully ince^sed against them: got him
straight with great power into y^ synagoges of y^ Jews (for so were their
churches called) and executed presently some of the Jews, some other he
banished the city, other some he bereaved of their substance. Wherefore the
Jews which inhabited Alexandria since the reign of Alexander king of
Macedonia, were then banished the city and dispersed over all contreyes.
Adamantius a physician one of the scattered Jews got him unto Atticus Bishop
Adamantius. Orestes.
of Constantinople, became a christian and dwelled afterward in Alexander.
Orestes the Liuetena^t of y^ city took in very ill part y^ deed of Cyrill:
was very sorry y^ so noble a city should be deprived of so great a multitude of
men. Wherefore he certified the Emperor of all the doings there: Cyrillus like
wise painted forth in paper the traitorous conspiracy of y^ Jews and sent it
in writing unto the Emperor: yet nevertheless he labored to become friends with
Orestes, for so y^ citizens of Alexandria did advise him. But when Orestes
would not as much as once hear the motion of reco^ciliation between them,
Cyrill reached into his hand y^ new testament supposing verily he would
reverence the book and remember himself the better. When y^ the mind of
Orestes could not be turned neither any good mood found in him but y^ deadly
enmity grew between the^ such a calamity ensued thereof as I mind hereafter at
large to declare.

CAP. XIIII.
How the monks inhabiting the deserts of Nitria came to the city of
Alexandria for to defend Cyrill, and of the stur that rose between them and
Orestes the Liuetenant.

Diverse of the Monks inhabiting the mount Nitria being fervently disposed
and lately also tried when as Theophilus the Bishop had armed the^ against
Dioscorus and his brethren gave themselves contentiously to partakinge and
purposed of their own accord to maintain the quarrel of Cyrill. Wherefore to
the number of fifty Monks leaving their monasteries, came to Ammonius the
Monk wounded the Liuetenant of Alexandria with a stone.
Alexandria, compassed the Liuetenant as he rode in his chariot, conferred
with him, called him a sacrificer, an Ethincke, with sundry other contumelious
languages. He supposing with himself y^ Cyrill had wrought this conspiracy
against him cried out that he was a christian and that Atticus, bishop of
Constantinople had baptized him. But when as the Monks weyed not his words one
of them whose name was Ammonius took the Liuetenant on the head with a stone.
The Liuetenant being sore wounded with the blow, the blood ran about his
cares. The sergeantes and such as guarded the person of the Liuetenant seeing
the stones fly about their ears fled away, few only excepted and held down
their heads among the multitude. In the mean while the people of Alexandria
came about them and in the Liuetenantes behalf set upon the Monks, in the
end these Monks ran all away Ammonius only excepted. Him they took and
brought before the Liuetenant. He openly according unto the laws, reasons with
him of the matter, pronounces against him the sentence of Justice and
tormented him as long as breath remained in his body. All these circumstances
shortly after were opened unto the Emperors, Cyrill also certified him of the
same matter though in an other sort. He took the corpse of Ammonius and
buriedit in a certain church calling him not Ammonius but Thaumasius. In the
church he extolled the noble courage of this man the great combat he endured
for godliness and commanded he should be called a martyr. But the modest and
grauer sort of christians allowed not of Cyrills doings herein, for they knew
yt Ammomus died not in torment because he would not deny Christ, but suffered
dew punishment for his rash enterprises. Wherefore Cyrill him self suffered at
length this heinous offense by a little and a little to fall into the dust of
oblivion, Neither was the contention and quarrel between Cyrill and Orestes put
up as yet, for there ensued an other calamity not much unlike this the which I
am now about to declare.

CAP. XV.
Of Hypatia a woman which excelled in Philosophy.

THere was in Alexandria a woman whose name was Hypatia y^ daughter of Theon
the Philosopher Hypatia a woman of great learning.
which profited so much in profound learning, y^ the excelled all the
Philosophers of y^ time: and not only succeeded in Plato his school the which
exercise Plotinus continewed, but also expounded unto as many as came to hear
her the precepts and doctrine of all sorts of Philosophers. wherefore as many
as gave their study to the knoweledge of philosophical discipline flocked
unto her lessons from every country. Moreover for her grave courage of mind
the which she gathered out of the fountains and bowels of philosophical
literature, for her modest and matronlike behavior she sticked not to present
her self before Princes and magistrates. Neither was she abashed to come into
the open face of the assembly. All men did both reverence and had her in
admiration for the singular modesty of her mind. Wherefore she had great spite
and envy owed unto her, and because she conferred often and had great familiarity
with Orestes, the people charged her that she was the cause why the Bishop and
Orestes were not become friends. To be short certain heady and rash cockbraynes
whose guide and captain was ` Peter a reader of y^ church, watched this woman
coming home from some place or other: they pull her out of her chariot: they
hale her into the church called Caesarium: they strip her stark naked: they
raze the skin and rent the flesh of her body with sharp shells until breath
departed out of her body: they quarter her body: they bring the quarters unto a
place called Cinaron and burn them to asses. This heinous offense was no small
blemishe both to Cyrill and to the church of Alexandria. For the professors of
christian religion should be no fighters, they ought to be far from comitting
of murder and bloodshed with other such horrible offenses. These things came
thus to pass the fourth year of Cyrills consecration, the tenth consulship of
Honorus and the seventh of Theodosius in the month of March and on the ember
dapes.

CAP. XVI.
How the Jews conspired again against the Christians and were foiled.

SHortly after, the Jews for their horrible practices against the professors
of the christian faith suffered punishment dew for their desert, in a certain
place called Inmestar between Chalcis and Antioch in Syria. At the time of
their plays and enterludes they committed many absurd and shameful acts: at
length through frenzy and furious motion they removed reason out of her seat,
much like madd men they contumeliously derided in their plays not only the
Christians but also Christ Jesus him self: they scoffed at the cross and
mocked as many as put their trust in him that was crucified thereon. The manner
was as follows. They lay hold on a child of The Jews crucified a boy in
derision of all Christians.
the Christians, they nayl him to a tree and lift him up on high. When they had
so done, First they deride and laugh at him: immediately after like madd me^
they scurge him as long as breath remained in his body. For this heinous
offense there was much ado between them and the Christians. Moreover the
Emperors were certified what an horrible act the Jews had committed, which
wrote again unto the Liuetenante and Magistrates of that province, that they
should make diligent search and inquisition for the authors and workers of so
great a mischief and punish them severely. Where the Jews inhabiting that
region, for the shameful act they had committed in jest were punished in
earnest.

CAP. XVII.
Of Paulus the Nouatian Bishop and the miracle wrought at the baptisinge of the
deceatfull Jew.

ABout that time Chrysanthus the Nouatia^ Bishop after he had governed such
congregatio^s Chrysanthus
as were under him the space of seven years departed this life in the
Consulship of Monaxia and Plyntha the sixth and twentieth of August, whom
Paulus succeeded. This Paulus a Paulus.
good while ago was schoolemaister and reader of the Latin tongue, afterward
he left that kind of study and framed himself to the Monastical life. He
founded a monastery of such men as gave them selves to the study of virtue and
godliness, not unlike unto the Monasteries of the Monks inhabiting the deserte.
I knew the man my self to be such a one as Euagrius writes the religious
men living in y^ wilderness ought to be. For he imitated his precepts, he gave
him self to co^tinewall fasting: he spoke little: he accustomed to abstain
from living creatures and oftentimes from wine and oil: he was very careful
in relieuing of the poor: he visited co^tine wally such as lay in fetters and
close prison: he was a great futer unto temporal magistrates for the afflicted
and succourlesse, which always with willinge minds grant him his request
for the great reverence, and singular opinion of godliness they conceived of
him. But what need I use many words in the recital of his virtues? one
notable act of his I am now about to declare which shall sufficein stead of
many, and worthy it is to be printed in Marble to y^ memory of all posterity
in time to come. A certain dissembling Jew, fayning he would embrace the
Christian faith was often baptized, through the which wiles he got much money.
After that he had guilefully deceived many men of sundry sects and opinions
(for he had been baptized of the Arians and Macedonians) he had no more whose
eyes he might bleare, at length he commes to ` Paulus the Nouatia^ Bishop and
protests unto him that gladlye he would be baptized and prays him that he
may obtain it at his hand. Paulus likes well of his suit, but he said unto
him that he would not baptize him before he had learned the articles and
principles of the faith, and given him self to fasting the space of many
days. The Jew against his will was constrained to fast, he called upon them
every day to be baptized. ` Paulus seeing that he was so earnest and would
needs be baptized thought best not to displease him with delay, made all
things ready for baptism. When he had provided for him a white garment and
caused the font to be filled with water, he sent for the Jew thither to be
baptized. But all the water by a certain divine power and secret operation which
the outward eye could not attain unto, was suddenly dried up. When as neither
Bishop neither such as were also then present perceived the manner how it was
gone, but thinkinge that it ran through the hole in the bottom of the font
(where at other times they were wont to let the water go) filled the font a
fresh and stopped all the holes and chinkes on every side. But when the Jew
was brought the second time and hanged his head over the font, the water
again vanished away every drop. Paulus seeing this said unto y^ Jew O man
either thou dissemblest egregiously, or else thou have been baptized
unwittingly. In the end when as the rumor and report of this miracle caused
many to run unto the place, one by chance among the rest knew the Jew by
his favor and affirmed that he saw him baptized of Atticus Bishop of
Constantinople. This miracle was wroughte under the hands of Paulus the
Nouatian Bishop.

CAP. XVIII.
How that after the desease of Isdigerdes king of Persia the league was broken
between the Romans and the Persians and how that the Persians in the end
were foiled and the city preserved.

AFter the desease of Isdigerdes king of Persia which in all his life time
persecuted not the Christians inhabitinge his dominions, his son Bararanes
being crowned in his fathers steed, was driven thereunto through the
persuasion of Magicians and southsayers, so that he vexed the Christians out of
measure and punished them with sundry torments after the manner of Persia.
wherefore y^ christians which dwelled in Persia were constrained to fly unto
y^ Romans for refuge, they humbly crave of them that they will pity their
case, that they will not suffer them in such sort lamentablye to be oppressed.
Atticus the Bishop entertained those suitors courteously: furthered their suit as
much as in him lay, and opened unto the Emperor Theodosius their case. The
Romans at the same time were offended with the Persians for an other matter,
the quarrel was as follows. The Persians had borrowed of the Romans certain
searchers and diggers of gold mines, these men they would not only not deliver
back again but spoiled also the Roman marcha^^rs of their wares and
merchandise, the refuge of the christians augmented the unkindness and increased
the displeasure. For immediately after their flight the king of Persia sent
Ambassadors requiring them back again as fugitive persons. The Romans
because they ran unto them for succor would not restore them: nay they
purposed not only to aid the^ which were simple suitors but also with all
might possible generally to maintain the quarrel in the behalf of christian
religion. Wherefore they chose rather to wage battaill with the Persians then
suffer the christians so miserably to perish. To be short the league was
broken and open wars proclaimed, but in mine opinion it shall not be amiss
briefly to run over some things thereof. The Emperor of Rome first of all
sent an host of armed soldiers a part, one from the other against the
Persia^s, whereof Ardaburius was general captain: he passinge through Armenia
entered with force into the Persian dominions and destroyed the province called
Azazena. Narsaeus the king of Persias captain went forth to meet him with
great power of Persian soldiers: they joined together: y^ field was fought:
Narseus was foiled and fled away to save his life. Afterward when he saw his
time he determined to enter unlooked for into the Romayne dominions through
Mesopotamia where there was no power to resist them and purposed so to revenge
him of the Romans. But the Romayne captain was quickly made priuey unto the
policy and fetch of Narsaeus, for he sacked and rifled Azazena with all
speed and got him in post have to Mesopotamia. Wherefore though Narsaeus had
gathered a wonderful great power together, yet could he not invade the Romayne
contreyes. When he came to Nisibis a city of Persia, yet situated just in the
midst between the Romayne and Persian dominions, he sent unto Ardaburius that
he would gladly come to parle with him, toutchinge the time and place, when and
where the battaill should be fought. Ardaburius answered the legates in this
sort: tell Narsaeus from me that the Emperors of Rome use not to wage
battaill at Narsaeus his pleasure. Wherefore the Emperor of Rome understanding
that the king of Persia had gathered a great army together for to wage
battaill with him, put his wholl trust and confidence in God: he sent of the
contrary a great host against him. And hereby it will evidently appear unto
the wholl world that the Emperor enjoyed immediately a singular benefitte for
casting his care and affiance upon God. For when as y^ citizens of
Constantinople were very sad and heavy, mistrusting the doubtful end of the
variable chances incident to wars, a company of Angels appeared unto certain
in Bithynia, whose necessary affairs constrained to travel into
Constantinople and willed them to salute the citizens of Constantinople and bid
them be of good cheer: exhorting them to pray and to put their trust in God:
that the Romans should foil the enemy and become conquerours and that God
had sent them as governors and sovereign captains of the wars. this being
heard not only the city was recreated, but also y^ soldiers hearts were
lighted and the more encouraged to fight. When the camp was removed and y^
wars translated out of Armenia into Mesopotamia, the Romans got the Persian
soldiers into the city of Nisibis and there besieged them: they set to the
walls wodden turrets resembling ladders rolled upon wheels and winded up: they
slew many of them which fought on the walls, defended their city and
withstood their skaling. Bararanes king of Persia understanding that his
country Azazena was destroyed and that his soldiers were shut up of the
Romans and besieged within the city Nisibis, went him self with all his
power against the Romans. But because he feared greatly the force of the
Romayne soldiers, he craved aid of the Saracens, whose governor then was
Almundarus a man of valiaunte courage and noble prowess, which brought with
him an infinite multitude of Saracens and encouraged the king of Persia and
promised moreover that in a short while after he would not only conquer the
Romans, but also take Antioch and Syria and deliver it into his hands. But
his promise was not performed, it prevailed not according unto his desire, for
God upon a sudden so terrified and astonished the Saracens that they imagined
the Roman soldiers were unawares come upon them: and whilst that they
besturred the^ selves for fear and knew not where to fly they cast
themselves headelonge as they were all in armor into the river Euphrates,
where the number of one hundred thousand was drowned. such a misfortune befell
unto the Saracens. The Romans which laid siege to Nisibis, hearing that the
king of Persia was coming against them with a great number of Olyphants, were
wonderfully afraid, gathered together all the engines they had prepared for
siege, and burned them, afterward returned back to their country. But what
battles were afterward fought: how Areobindus an other captain of the
Romans, slew a mighty Persian dealing with him hand to hand: how Ardaburius
dispatched through wiles and stratagemes seven of the nobility of Persia, and
how that Vitianus a third captain of the Romans, foiled the remnant of the
Saracens power: I think it my duty to ouerskip them with silence, lest I seem
to make toe long a digression from the purpose.

CAP. XIX.
Of Palladius the post, and his swiftness.

THe aforesaid news were quickly brought unto the Emperor Theodosius, but
how he could so soon understand of matters done in contreyes so far
distant, I am now about to declare. He had a man whose name was Palladius, one
that had rare gifts both outwardly in body, and inwardly in mind. He was
able in three days to ride in such post, as was to be wondered, unto the
furthest places and bounds of the Roman and Persian dominions, and back
again in so many days to Constantinople. Moreover he went with marvelous
great speed throughout the world whyther so ever the Emperor had sent him,
so that a wise man said once of him: This fellow with his celeritie makes
the Empire of Rome, which is very wide, to be narrow and straight. When the
king of Persia heard the same of him, he could not choose but wonder. So far
of Palladius.

CAP. XX.
How the Persians were again utterly foiled by the Romans.

THe Emperor of Rome abydinge at Constantinople, and understanding for truth
of the victory that was given him, behaved him self so graciously, that he
desired greatly the enioyinge of peace and quietness, for all that his
soldiers had such prosperous success in all their adventures: Wherefore he
sent Helion, one that was in great creditte with him, in embassy unto the
king of Persia for to conclude a league between them. Helion coming to
Mesopotamia, and the place where the Romans had trenched them selves, sent
Maximinus a valiant man, and fellow captain with Ardaburius, as Ambassador
to entreat for peace. As soon as he had presented him self before the king
of Persia, he said that he came not from the Emperor, but from his captains,
to see whether it would ple^^e him to make truce: that the Emperor was
ignorant of all the circumstance and events of that battle* and if
peradventure it were told him, he would make but small account of it. The king
as he purposed with him self to receive this embassy with most willinge mind
(for his army was almost famished to death) the order of the soldiers whom
they call Immortal (the number mounted to ten thousand of most strong and
valiant men) came and persuaded the king that he should not confirm any
league, before that they first of all had assaulted and suddenly set upon the
Romans, who now as they thought, were unprovided. The King yielded unto
their advise and council: delivered the Ambassador in the mean while to be
kept in hold: and sent those Immortal soldiers for to assault the Romans.
They went on their voyage, and divided their company into two armies, purposing
to beset and compass some part of the Roman host. The Romans when as they
might see but one only army of the Persians, set upon them: for the other had
not as yet appeared, but suddenly rushed in upon y^ Romans. But as they
skirmished together, a Roman captain y^ was sent by Procopius for the
purpose, looking down (as God would) from the top of a hill, beheld his fellow
soldiers in great peril, went behind the Persians and kept them in: so y^
they which a little before besett the Romans, were now besette them selves.
Wherefore the Romans when as in short space they had foiled these foremen,
they turned them selves back toward them which rushed in upon them through
wyles, and in like sort dispatched them every one. Thus it came to pass that
they which called them selves immortal, proved them selves mortal: and thus
Christ revenged him of the Persians, because that they had executed many godly
men and holy saints which served him devoutly. The king of Persia understanding
of this slaughter and overthrow, fained he knew of nothing: accepted of the
embassy and reasoned thus with the ambassador: It is not for the Romans
sake that I now assent unto peace, but only to gratify and pleasure thee whom
I have tried by experience to be for policy and wisdom of the chiefest among
the Romans. To conclude by this means the wars which the Romans held
with the Persians in the quarrel and defense of the persecuted Christians, were
ended in the thirteenth Consulship of Honorius, and the tenth of Theodosius,
the fourth year of the three hundredth Olympiad: and also the fiery flame of
persecution kindled there against the Christians, was wholly quenched.

CAP. XXI.
Of the pity and compassion which Acacius bishop of Amida had on the captives
of Persia.

ACacius bishop of Amida, was renowned and much spoken of for a notable work
of mercy which he wrought in those days. When the Roman soldiers purposed
in no wise to restore again unto y^ king of Persia such captives as they had
taken at y^ winning of Azazena, (there were of them about a seven thousand, to
the great grief of the king of Persia) all which were almost starued for
food: Acacius lamented their state and condition, called his clergy together,
and said thus unto them: Our God has no need either of pottingers or of cups,
for he neither Acacius. b. of Amida.
eats neither drinks, these be not his necessaries. wherefore seeing the
church has many precious Jewels both of gold and of silver, bestowed of the
free will and liberality of the faithful, it is requisite that the captive
soldiers should be therewith redeemed and delivered out of prison and bondage,
and that they also perishing with famine, should with some part thereof be
refreshed and relieved. When he had used these and other such like reasons, he
commanded that the treasure should be cast and translated, he made money
thereof, and sent the wholl price partly for to redeem the captives out of
prison, and partly for to relieve the^, that they perished not with famine. Last
of all he gave the^ their costage, to were necessary provision for their
voyage, and sent them back to their king. This notable act of y^ renowned
Acacius brought the king of Persia into great admiration, that the Romans
endeavored to win their adversaries both with wars and with well doing. The
report goes moreover y^ the king of Persia desired greatly y^ sight of
Acacius, and coueted y^ presence of his person: and that the Emperor
Theodosius commanded Acacius y^ bishop to gratify the king therein. When y^ so
famous a victory was given from above, many notable writers laid pen to
paper, and published unto y^ world y^ praises and virtues of y^ Emperor,
extolling his name unto y^ skies, The Empress also being y^ daughter of
Leontius the Athenian sophist, instructed of her father, and trained up in all
kind of good literature, set forth a poe^e of the same argument in heroical
verse. When the Emperor Eudocia the Empress was learned.
took her to his wife, Atticus the bishop which christened her, in steed of
Athenais called her Eudocia at the time of baptism.

CAP. XXII.
Adiscourse in commendation of the virtues of Theodosius the younger.

ALthough many writers as I said before, published abroad the praises of the
Emperor, of which number some endeavored by y^ means to crepe into his
favor, some other desired thereby to blase abroad in the world the fame of
their skill and knowledge, lest the doctrine which they had gotten with long
study should be trode^ in the dust of obliuio^: I of mine own part which
desire not the acquaintance and familiarity of the emperor, neither covet
arroga^tly to give y^ world a taste of my doctrine, have determined with my self
simply without the glorious and painted show of Rhetoric to publishe abroad
the bertues of the Emperor. For if that I should pass them over with silence,
being as they are both noble and fruitful, containing many examples for the
amendment of life, I should in my opinion injury not a little the posterity
in time to come. First of all though he was borne and brought up in y^ very
palace of the emperor, yet was he nothing given for Discretion. sob^etic.
Hardiness.
all y^ trade of life unto light and idle behavior: but so wise and discrete,
y^ he seemed unto such as had co^fere^ce with him, to be a man of great
experience. Again he was a man of such hardines and suffera^ce, both inwardly
in mind and outwardly in body, that he could endure with great patience the
pinching Fasting.
cold of winter, and the parching heat of summer. He was wont often to fast,
but specially on the wensdayes and fridayes, this did he to the end he might
lively express the Christian trade of living. Devotion. Singing of ^almes.
Memory. Knowledge. ^tudie.
His palace and court seemed uo other then a religious house. For at the
dauning of the day his manner was to singe hymns and psalms interchaungeably
together with his listers. He was able to repeat holy scriptures out of the
book, he reasoned of the^ with the bishops, as if he had been a priest of great
continewance, he was more earnest and far more diligent in gathering together
the books of holy scripture, and the works of the ancient fathers, then me
read of old of Ptolomaus Philadelphus. Patience. Courtesy. Clemency.
Furthermore he excelled all men in patience, courtesy and clemency. The
Emperor Julian for all he professed the study of philosophy, yet could he
not put up the hatred of such as reviled him at Antioch, but punished extremely
one of them whose name was Theodorus: as for Theodosius, he laid aside the
subtilities and quircks of Aristotle, and practiced daily in life the
profession and study of Good life.
true philosophy. He learned to bridle anger: to take grief and sorrow
patiently: to revenge him of none that did him injury, nay there is not the
man that ever saw him angry. When that one of his familiars had demanded of
him, why he never executed any y^ had done him injury, his answer was: I
would to God it lay in me to revive them that be dead. Unto an other that
demanded of him the like, he said: It is no hard matter to bereave a man of
his life, but when he is gone, there Mercy.
is no man be he never so sorry for him, that can restore him to life again,
save God alone. He was always of y^ mind, that if any committed treason, he
would not suffer him to go as far as the gates of the city toward the
place of execution, but of his clemency he called him back again. The same
man again, when he published spectacles on a certain time at Constantinople,
with the bickering and fighting of beasts in compass of the theater, and the
people shouted unto him requiring that one of the stro^gest men should be
turned unto the sauadge beast which rainged about, his answer was in this
sort: Do not you know that we can not away with cruel spectacles? When the
Humanity.
people heard this, they learned thenceforth to refrain from cruel shows.
Moreover he was so religious, that he honored all the priests of God, but
specially such as he knew did excel in godlenesse. Religion.
The report goes, that he made search for the sackcloth which the bishop of
Chebru^ wore that died at Constantinople, and being found, they say he more it
how homely soever it was, thinking verily to get unto him self thereby some
of the dead man's holiness. As he soleminzed on a certain tempestuous and
stormy time of the year, (the people requiringe the same) the usual and
wonted spectacles and shows in the place called Circus, environed with a wall
and galeries round about, when the rowme was full of people, and the tempest
waxed sore, there fell upon them suddenly a great cloud of snow, then the
Emperor renealed unto the world what affection and Zeal and fear of God
zeal he bare toward God: he willed the bedells in his name to say thus unto
the people: It is far better for us to lay aside these sowes and pastime, and
with one voice to fall a praying unto God that he will deliver us out of this
present storm. The words were no sooner spoken, but all jointly fell down to
the ground, and poured out earnest and zealous prayers unto God, so y^ the
whole city Humility.
was become like one church. The Emperor him self in the midst of the
assembly, arrayed in common and usual attire, began the hymns, neither failed
he of his purpose. For the wether became fair, again the great derth and
scarsitie was turned by the goodness of God into plenty and abundance of all
things. If wars at any time were proclaimed, he followed the example of
David, he Prospetitie and good success for well doing.
made God his refuge, persuading him self for certain that God ruled and
governed all battails: and by the means of prayer, he obtained ever a
prosperous success.

CAP. XXIII.
Of John, who after the desease of the Emperor Honorius played the tyrant at
Rome, and how God delivered him through the prayers of Theodosius into the
hands of the Roman soldiers.

OCcasion is presently ministered to discourse how Theodosius being aided from
above, foiled the rebel and tyrant John, immediately after the Persian battle
and the desease of Honoritu, in y^ co^sulship of Asclepiodotus and Marianus, y^
15. of August. In mine opinion y^ acts of those days are worthy y^ writig, and
such they are as of right should be recorded to y^ knowledge of the posterity
in time to come. For the like thigs which happened unto the Hebrews under Moses
as they passed through the red sea, new befell unto the emperors captains
being set against y^ tyra^t, the which I mind briefly to ru^ne over, leaui^g y^
large discourse because it requires a several volume unto others. Although
Theodosius knew that Honorius y^ Emperor had departed this life, yet co^cealed
he his death from others, so y^ an other devise which hereafter shall be spoken
of, begutled many therein. He sent privily a soldier unto Salonae a city of
Dalmatia, to give warnig y^ if any nouelty were attempted in y^ west parts of
the world, there should be such preparatio as might quickly suppress y^
authors thereof. When he had brought y^ about, he opened unto all men y^ death
of his uncle. In y^ mean while Ioha^nes one of y^ Emperors chief
secretaries, being not of settled disposition to bear y^ sail and ba^ner of
prosperity, chale^ged the empire, and sent embassabours unto y^ emperor
Theodosius, requiring him to proclaim him emperor. Theodosius took his
legates, laid the^ in hold, and sent unto John Ardaburius y^ captain, who of
late had behaved him self valia^tly in y^ battle against the Persians, he
coming to Salonae, sailed into Aquileia, whence (as it is thought) he took a
wrong course. the chance was as follows. Being in the surging waves of y^
maine seae, y^ wind blewe against him, and brought him ere he was ware into y^
tyra^ts claws. The tyrant laying hand on him was now in good hope y^
Theodosius would be brought of necessity (if he tendered y^ life of his
captain Ardaburius) to create and proclaim him Emperor. when these things
came to light, both Theodosius him self and his army also, which marched
forwards against y^ rebel, were wonderful sorry lest Ardaburius should take
any harm at y^ tyra^ts hands. Aspar also y^ son of Ardaburius seeing both his
father taken captive, and also hearing for certainty y^ an infinite power of
Barbaria^s went to aid the rebel, knew not what to do, he was at his wits
end. To be short y^ prayers of y^ godly Emperor the^ also proved the^ selves
again to be very effectual. for an Angel of God in y^ form of a shepherd
guided Aspar on his journey, and led his army by a lake adjoining unto Raue^na
(for there it was that the tyrant kept captain Ardaburius in hold) which way
as fame goes, there was never man y^ found passage. But God opened a way unto
Aspar where as it is thought others could not go. He led then his army
through the lake, which then as it fell out was dried up by the handy work of
God: he rushed in at the gates of the city which lay wide open, and dispatched
the tyra^t. At what time the most godly Emperor understanding of the tyra^ts
death, as he celebrated those shows and spectacles in Circus, made manifest
his singular zeal and piety godwards, for thus he spoke unto the people. Let
us give over this vain pastime and pleasure: let us rather repair unto the
church and serve God devoutly, pouring unto God zealous prayers, and yelding
unto him hearty thanks, who with his own hand has bereaved the tyrant of his
life. He had no sooner made an end of speaking, but there gave over their
spectacles and shows: they set all at naught: they passed throughout the
theater sounding out thanks giving with one voice together with the Emperor:
they went straight to the church, and spent there the whole day, so that all
the city seemed to be as one church.

CAP. XXIIII. How Theodosius the Emperor after the execution of John the
tyrant, proclaimed Valentinianus (the son of Constantius and Placidia the
Aunt of Theodosius) Emperor at Rome.
WHen the tyrant was dispatched out of the way, Theodosius began to consider
with him self whom he should proclaim Emperor of the west parts of the
world. He had to his kinseman one Valentinianus a very young gentleman,
begotten on Placidia his aunt, for she was the daughter of Theodosius Magnus
the Emperor, and sister to Arcadius and Honorius the Emperoures. Constantius
that was made Emperor by Honorius, and governed the empire with him a very
short space (for he dyed immediately) was the father of Valentinianus.
Theodosius made this his cousin Caesar, sent him into the west, and put his
mother Placidia in trust with the imperial affairs. Afterward when he
determined to go him self into Italy for to proclaim his Cousin Emperor, and
in his own person to counsel the Italians that they should not lightly give
ear unto tyrants and rebels, he came as far as Thessalonica, and there he
was hindered with sickness, so that he could go no further. Therefore he sent
the imperial scepter unto his Cousin by Helion the Senator, and returned him
self back again to Constantinople. But of these things thus much shall
suffice.

CAP. XXV. Of Articus bishop of Constantinople, and how he governed the
churches. Also how he caused that the name of John Chrysostom should be
canonized among the saints of that church.
ATticus the bishop was a great furtherer of the ecclesiastical affairs, for
he governed with great wisdom, and exhorted the people diligently with
heavenly doctrine to virtuous and godly living. When he saw the church
divided, and that the Iohannits used their private meetings and conuenticles,
he commanded that the memorial of John should be solemnized at service time
as the manner is of other Bishops that are deseased. for by that means he hoped
verily it would come to pass that many of them would return unto the
Church. He was so bountiful and liberal that he provided not only for the
poverty of his own Church, but also sent money unto the next Churches for to
supply the want of the needy. for he sent unto Calliopius minister of the
Church of Nice three hundredth pieces of gold and withal letters containing
this form. Aiticus unto Calliopius sends greeting in the Lord. I am given to
understand that there is an Atticus b. of Constantino ple unto Calliopius
minister of Nice.
infinite number in your city ready to perish with famine and stand in need of
the alms and charity of godly and weldisposed persons. Where I write an
infinite number, I mean a great multitude, the certain number whereof I do not
readily know. Therefore seeing I received money of him which bestows
abundance and plenty of riches upon them which use it a right: seeinge also
daily experience teaches us that some do want to the end that such as be
welthy and minister not unto them, may thoroughly be tried: my will is
(well-beloved brother) that thou receive from me these three hundredth pieces of
gold, and distribute them at thy discretion among the poor people of thy
parish, see that thou deal the same not among such as respect only the belly,
and make a living or trade throughout their life time of begging, but among
such as are ashamed to beg. Neither vvoulde I have thee herein to respect
any opinion o^ sect whatsoever, neither to prejudice them which practice in
doctrine a contrary faith unto us, but only to have consideration of this,
that thou relieve them which hunger and thurst and have not vvherevvithall to
help them selves. Thus was he careful of the poverty of such as dwelled from
him in far and forayne contreyes. Again when he understood y^ such as
severed them selves from the Nouatians Atticus endeavored to bring the Nouatians
from Idolatry.
about y^ keeping of Easter, had translated the corpse of Sabbatius out of the
Isle Rhodos (for there he died in exile) buried it solemnly and prayed upon his
tumbe: he sent certain thither in the night time, charging them to remove the
corpse of Sabbatius and bury it in an other sepulcher. such as used to frequent
the place when they saw the grave dug up, ceased thenceforth to honor the
tumbe of Sabbatius. The same Atticus did pass in assigning of proper names to
things. for the rode in y^ bosom of Pontus Euxinus which of old was called
poison, he called Medicen, lest he should there raise an assembly and appoint
thereunto a place called after a foul name. Moreover he termed a piece of the
suburbs of Constantinople, Argyrople upon such an occasion as follows.
Chrysople is a rode in y^ head of the sea Bosphorus. Many ancient writers make
mention thereof, namely Strabo, Nicolaus Damascenus and the famous writer
Xenophon, who both in y^ sixth book of Cyrus expedition and in the first of y^
famous acts of y^ Grecians remembers the said town, y^ Alcibiades wall led it
about and how there is a place therein assigned for y^ payment of tyth and
tribute. for such as loose out of the maine sea and ariue at y^ place do use
there to pay tyth. Wherefore Atticus seeing the place over against him had so
worthy a name, procured this rode thenceforth to be called Argyrople. As soon
as he spoke y^ word, the name was immediately changed. Again when as some men
said unto him y^ the Nouatians should not have their conuenticles and
assemblies with in the walls of the city, what do ye not remember (says he)
what troubles and vexations they endured, when we were tossed with the grievous
storm of persecution in y^ reign of Constantius and Valens, and how y^ at
sundry other times they testified together with us the true faith which we
maintain? Moreover for all they were of old divided from the church, yet
attempted they to establish no novelty as toutching y^ faith. Again this
Atticus being at Nice about the ordayning of a bishop, and seeing there
Asclepiades a Nouatian bishop who was a very old man, he asked of him how many
years he had been a Bishop? when the other had answered fifty years: thou art
truly a happy man (says he) in y^ God granted thee to enjoy so worthy a
function, so long a time. he said again unto Asclepiades: verily I do
commend Nouatus, but I allow not of the Nouatians. Asclepiades maruelling
what he should mean in so saying, replied: how so O bishop? Atticus made
answer: I do commend him (says he) for refusing to communicate with such as had
sacrificed to Idols, for I would have done no less my self. But I like not of
the Nouatians, because they exclude from the communion such as of y^ layty have
lightly offended. Asclepiades replied again unto these things: besides y^
sin of sacrificing unto Idols there are (as holy Scriptures do witness) many
other sins unto death: for the which you deprive only the clergy and we the
layty of the communion, referring unto God alone y^ power of remitting their
sin. The same Atticus had the foreknowledge of his death. for taking his
leave of Nice he said unto Calliopius the minister of that Church: make haste
to Constantinople before Autumn that thou may again see me alive, for if
thou linger and make delays thou shall see me no more in this world. In
uttering these words he hitt the truth on the head, for he departed this life
the one and twentieth year of his consecration, the tenth of October, in the
eleventh Consulship of Theodosius, and the first of Valentinianus Caesar.
Theodosius the Emperor returning from Thessalonica came short to his funeral,
for Atticus was buried the day before the coming of the Emperor into
Constantinople. Shortly after, the creation of Valentinianus the younger was
proclaimed, to wit the three and twentieth day of the same month.

CAP. XXVI.
Of Sisinius the successor of Atticus in the bishopric of Constantinople.

AFter the desease of Atticus there was great contention in the Church of
Constantinople about the election of a Bishop* for some would have Philip a
minister, some other Proclus who also was a minister preferred to the rowme:
but all the people with uniform consent desired Sisinius. He was like wise a
priest, not of any of the Churches within the walls of Constantinople, but of
Elae a Church in the suburbs over against the city, where all the people of
Constantinople are wont to celebrate the feast of our Saviors ascension. All
the laytye labored by all means to have him to their Bishop, partly because
he was counted a very godly man, and partly also for that he endeavored to
relieve the poor beyond the reach of his substance. To be short the layty got
the upper hand and Sisinius was consecrated the eight and twentieth of
February in the twelse Consulship of Theodosius, and the second of
Valentinianus Augustus the younger. Philip the minister seeing that Sisinius was
preferred before him, stomacked the matter wonderfully and inueyed bitterly
against his consecration in the work which he wrote and entitled the Christian
history. While he inueyeth against Sisinius that was consecrated, against the
Bishops who were consecrators, and especially against the laytye who were
electors, he wrote such things as I am loath to report, for I can not choose but
blame him greatly that ever he durst be so bold to lay down so rash and
unadvised reasons. yet in my opinion it will not be amiss presently to say
somewhat of him.

CAP. XXVII.
Of Philip a Priest, bred and brought up in Sida.

PHilip of whom we spoke before was borne at Sida a city in Pamphilia, where
also Trophilus the Sophist had his original, of whom Philip boasted not a
little that he was his kinsman. This Philip being a Deacon and of great
familiarity with John, the Bishop was as it were driven to bestow great
labor and diligence in the study of good learning, so that he wrote many
books of diverse sorts. his style was asiaticall, proud, and lofty, and to
the end he might confute the works of luhan the Emperor, he compiled a
volume and entitled it The Christian history, the which he divided into six
and thirty books, every book has sundry tomes, the number of all mounteth
very nigh to a thousand, the argument prefixed to every one is in manner as
big as the tome it self. this work he entitled not the Ecclesiastical but
the Christian history, where he patched together many matters for to let the
world understand that he was seen in Philosophy. Wherefore he alleges very
often precepts and rules of Geometry, Astronomy, Arithmetic and Music.
Moreover he describes Isles, mountains, trees, with other things of small
importance, so that it grew to a huge volume full of bumbast and vain
ostentation. In my simple judgment it is a work that is prositable neither
for the learned neither the unlearned. For the learned will condemn the often
repetition of the same words which is ri^e throughout the book: the unlearned
have not the capacity to comprehend the insolent style and affected sentences
of his arrogant mind. but let every one judge of his own doings as he shall
think good. I dare affirm that the order he followed in laying down of the
times is both confuse and far from good order. for when he had run over the
raygne of Theodosius, back again he getts him to discourse of Athanasius the
Bishops times* the which I note to be his usual manner. but of Philip so far.
Now to the history of Sisinius time.

CAP. XXVIII.
How that Sisinius made Proclus Bishop of Cyzicum, whom the Cyziceni would
not receive.

AFter the desease of the Bishop of Cyzicum, Sisinius appointed Proclus to be
their Bishop. The citizens understanding of his coming prevented him and chose
Dalmatius a religious man to govern the bishopric. This they did neglecting
the law and canon which commands that no Bishop be appointed and ordained
without the consent and authority of the Bishop of Constantinople. They made no
account of that canon because it commanded namely (as they thought) that the
said authority should be given unto Atticus alone. Wherefore Proclus being not
admitted to execute the function of a bishop in the Church where he was
ordained, continewed at Constantinople, where he occupied him self in
preaching, and purchased unto him self thereby great fame and commendation.
but of him I shall have occasion of speak more hereafter. Sisinius had scarce
been Bishop two years when he died, it was in the Consulship of Hierius and
Ardaburius, the four and twentieth of Decembre. He was a man highly commended
for temperancie, for godly and virtuous life, and to be short for his
liberality bestowed upon the poor. He was a man both gentle and familier,
plain without fraud or guyle, and therefore he never molested any in his
life. he was a great enemy to busy bodies and to quarellers, and therefore
taken of many for a cowarde.

CAP. XXIX.
After the desease of Sisinius Bishop of Constantinople Nestorius was sent for
to Antioch for to enjoy the bishopric, who immediately revealed him self what
kind of man he was.

IT seemed good unto the Emperor after the desease of Sisinius because
ofdiuers vain glorious persons to choose none of that Church to be bishop
(though many made suit for Philip, and many again for Proclus) but determined
with him self to send for a stranger out of Antioch. there was in those days
there a man whose name was Nestorius, by birth he was a German, a loud voice
he had and an eloquent tongue, and therefore as it was thought a fit man to
preach unto the people. They put their heads together, they sent for Nestorius
and brought him from Antioch to Constantinople three months after: who though
his temperance was highly commended of many, yet the wisest sort and sagest
people perceived well enough his other conditions when he first began to
preach. for immediately after his stalling in the bishops sea the tenth day of
April and the Consulship of Felix and Taurus, he gave forth in the hearing of
all the people such a saying as follows, at the pronouncing of his oration
before the Emperor: Restore thou unto me O Emperor the earth weeded and
purged of heretics, and I will render heaven unto thee: aid thou me in
^oyling of the heretics and I will asist thee in the overthrowing of the
Persians. Although such as detested the heretics took these words in good
part: yet such as by his outward behavior gathered the inward disposition of
his mind, could not choose but epsy his hautie stomach, his hasty and running
brain, his foolish feeding on vain glory, specially seeing yt by and by he
bolted out such rash and unadvised sayings. Nay we may say (as the common
proverb goes) that the city had not drunk before he began to blow the
smoke and the burning flame of persecution. for the fifth day after he was
chosen bishop, when he determined with him self to overthrow the church of
the Arians where they had their service privily and by stelth, he so troubled
and disquieted their minds that when they saw their Church must needs down,
they put to their own hands and fired it them selves, the which fire fell upon
the next houses and burned them to ashes, so that there was much ado in the
city, and the Arians rose up to revenge them of their enemies. But God the
defender and conseruer of the city suffered not that pestilent infection of
rankor and malice to run any further. from that time forth not only the
heretics but such as were of his own faith and opinion called Nestorius a
firebrande. Neither rested he with this but destroyed as much as in him lay the
whole city while he went about to mischief the heretics. Again he fell a
molesting of the Nouatians only because Paulus their bishop was famous and
much spoken of for his zeal and godliness. but the Emperor bridled and
withstoode his enterprise with sharp admonitions and nipping words. I think it
best to run over with silence the vexations and injuries he did unto such as
celebrated the feast of Easter the foureteeneth day of the month throughout
Asia, Lydia and Caria, and how many were cast away in the sedition which he
raised at Miletum and Sardis. But as for the plague and punishment he suffered
partly for the aforesaid causes, and partly also for his malapert tongue, I
will lay it down in an other place.

CAP. XXX.
How that in the raygne of Theodosius the younger the Burgonions received the
faith in Christ.

Now am I about to declare a worthy history which happened at that time.
there is a certain barbarous nation inhabiting beyond the river Rheyne whom
we commonly do call Burgonions. these people lead a life far from magistracy
and government of y^ commonweal, for they are all carpenters and thereby get
their living. The people called Hunni breaking often times into their regions,
have destroyed their country and dispatched very many at sundry times out of
the way. Wherefore they determine with them selves not to fly for refuge and
succor unto any mortal man or living creature, but to yield themselves wholly
unto some god or other. And when they called to mind y^ the God of the Romans
never sailed such as feared his name and put their affiance in him, jointly
with one heart and mind they turned them selves to embrace the faith in Christ:
they took their voyage into a certain city of France, and there they
require of the Bishop to baptize them in the Christian faith. The Bishop having
enjoined them to fast seven days, and instructed them in the principles of
Christian profession, did baptize them the eight day following and bid them
farewell. They put on valtant courage and went on boldly to encounter with the
tyrants, neither was their hope frustrate neither did it fail them in the
end. For the Burgonians (when Vptarus King of the Hunni crommed him self with
vittaills on a certain night until he burst in the middle) set upon the Hunni
now wanting a head and captain, few of them against many of the other, to
wit three thousand against ten thousand, they fought valiantly and got
the victory. From that time forth the said nation was a zealous maintayner of
the Christian faith. About that time Barbas the Arian Bishop died, it was the
thirtienth Consulship of Theodosius. the third of ^alentinianus, and the four
and twentieth of lune, in whose rowme Sabbatius succeeded. So far of these
things.

CAP. XXXI.
How Nestorius vexed the Macedonians.

NEstorius insomuch he practiced many things prejudicial unto the quiet state
of the church, procured unto him self great hatred even as the end of his
doings proved sufficiently unto us. Antonius Bishop of Germa a city in
Hellespontus, feeding the humor and cruelty of Nestorius in the rooting out of
heretics, began to vex the Macedonians out of all measure, and for to
clear him self he feigned that the Patriarck to wete, the Bishop of
Constantinople had commanded him the same. Wherefore the Macedonians although
they suffered for a while griefs and vexations, yet seeing that Antonie kept no
mean but exceeded in cruelty, they could no longer bear the weight of so
intolerable a burden of injuries, but in the mad furye of their mind
preserring the rash motion of reuengement before all right and reason,
procured the death of Antonie to be done by such men as they had sent for to
work the feate. This heinous offense which the Macedonians committed was an
occasion to kindle and set on fire the cruelty of Nestorius. for he persuaded
the Emperor to deprive them of their Churches. Wherefore the Macedonians were
put by one church which lay without the old walls of Constantinople. by an
other at Cyzicum, besides many others throughout Hellespontus, so that many of
them returned into the Church and embraced the faith of one substance.

CAP. XXXII.
Of Anastasius the Priest who was the occasion that Nestorius fell into such
extreme impiety.

COmmonly we say that such as are given to drunkenness are never to seek for
the cupp, and busy bodies never want woe: Nestorius who endeavored with might
and main to bereave others of their Churches was by chance thrust out of the
Church him self, the occasion was as follows. Anastasius the priest who
came with him thither from Antioch: kept him Anastasius.
always company: was highly esteemed of him and his chief counselour in all
his affairs, taught on a certain time in the Church that none ought to call
Marie, the mother of God, because that she was but a woman and that God could
not be borne of a woman. These words of his disquieted out of measure the
minds both of clergy and laytie. for they had learned of old that Christ was
true God and not to be severed because of the mystery of his incarnation, as
man alone from his divinity, and that according unto the mind of the Apostle
where he says: Although we 2. Corinthians. 5.
have known Christ after the flesh, yet now do we know him so no more.
Wherefore for this cause let us cease to reason any longer of Christ, but let
us endeuer to attain unto his perfection. When as schism and contention was
hereof risen (as I said before) in the Church, Nestorius going about to
confirm the opinion of Anastasius (for he would in no wise have him whom he
made so much of to be rebuked as one that had uttered blasphemies against
Christ) discoursed very often of that matter as he preached in the Church: laid
down very contentiously certain positions and condemned utterly the clause
that signified the bearing of god. And because that diverse men to a diverse end
and purpose disputed of this question, the church was divided and the members
parted asunder. for much like blind folded persons and men brawling and
fighting in the dark they were carried here and there, now they affirmed this,
anon they said that, and look what they auoutched a little before, the same
they denied immediately after. Many thought that Nestorius was of the opinion
that Christ was but only man and that he went about to reuyue and to raise up
a fresh the heresy of Paulus Samosatenus and of Photinus. there was so much
ado about this matter that the summoning of a general council seemed
needful for the deriding of the controversy and the appeasing of the people.
I of mine own part by perusing the works of Nestorius, do find the man
ignorant and altogether unlearned, I speak this from the heart and unfeignedly.
far it is not of hatred I owe him that I fall a ripping of his crimes and
infamy, neither have I determined by flattery and feeding of some men's humors
to report less of him then I found true. Nestorius in mine opinion follows
neither Paulus Samosatenus, neither Photinus, neither thinks he that our The
opinion of Nestorius the heretic.
Lord Jesus Christ is only man: but only auoideth this clause the mother or
bearing of God as a sraying ghost. This befell unto him for his palpable error
and ignorance. for though of nature he had a smoth and an eloquent tongue and
therefore was thought learned, yet to say the truth he was altogether
unlearned. Moreover he disdained to peruse the works of the ancient fathers.
he so vaimted him self with his rolling congue and eloquent speech, that in
manner he contemned the old writers and preferred him self before them all.
Again he was ignorant of that which was 1. Ioh. 4.
written in the old coppies of S. John's Catholic epistle: every spirit which
deuideth Jesus is not of God. As many as went about to sever the divinity from
the humanity of Christ, sticked not to raze and blot this sentence out of the
ancient coppyes. Wherefore the old writers signified no less then that
certain men had corrupted that epistle, to the end they might divide the
humanity of Christ from the divinity of God. his manhood is joined with the
godhead, neither are they two but one, in which sense the ancient writers were
not afraid to call Marie, the mother of god, Even so wrote Eusebius Pamphilus
in his third book of the life of Constantine. God among us was Eusebius. lib. 3.
de vit. Constable.
borne on earth for oursakes, and the place of his nativity is called of the
Hebrews after a proper name Bethleem. Wherefore Helen the most holy Empress
has set forth the travailing of the mother of God with goodly ornaments, and
bedecked that hollow rock with sundry notable monuments. Origin has written
no less in the first come of his commentaries upon the epistle of S. Paul unto
the Romans, where he discourses at large of this matter, and alleges the
cause why Marie was called the mother of God. Therefore Nestorius seems never
to have read the wor^s of the ancient fathers, and therefore he inueyed only
(as I said before) against this clause the mother of God. For he says not that
Christ is only man as Photinus and Paulus Samosatenus affirmed: neither takes
he away y^ subsistencie of the son of God but confesses every where that he
has his being and that he is in the trinity: neither denies he his essence
as Photinus and Samosatenus did (so did also the Manichees and Montanists) as
it appears by the sermous which he published unto the world. But though I
find that Nestorius was of that opinion, partly by his books which I have
perused, and partly by the report of his familier friends, yet his foolish and
fond doctrine disquieted not a little the whole world.

CAP. XXXIII.
Of a heinous offense committed by certain fugitine servants at the altar of
the great Church, and of the former council summoned at Ephesus for the
hearing of Nestorius opinion.

WHen these things were done in such forte as I said before, a certain
heinous offense was committed in the open church and face of the whole people.
for some noble man's servants, by birth Barbarians, when they had tasted of
their Lord and masters extreme truelty and could not patiently away with the
rigor thereof, ran for refuge unto the Church, and got them unto the altar
with swords hanging by their sides. being requested to depart they would not
in any wise but disturbed and hindered divine service. Moreover for the spare of
many days they held their naked swords in their hands ready to dispatch
whosoever came unto them. Wherefore when they had killed one of the Priests and
wounded an other, in the end they slew them selves: with the sight hereof one
of them that were present said that the profanation of the Church
prognosticated some calamity to ensue, and repeated two Iambick verses out of
some old Poet to justify his saying.

Men see full often such signs before and wonders eke:
When heinous crimes the holy Church to stayne does seek.
Neither was he in a wrong box that uttered these Iambicks, for it
prognosticated as it seemed unto us division to rise among the people, and
deprivation of him that was ringleader of the whole mischief. Cap. 34 in the
Greek. The council of Ephesus. Anno Dom. 435.
Shortly after the emperor gave forth his commandment that the bishops out
of all places should meet at Ephesus, where they came together, whither also
Nestorius took his voyage immediately after Easter holy days together with a
great multitude of people, where he found the bishops assembled* but Cyrillus
bishop of Alexandria came thither in a while after, it was about VVhitsontide.
The fifth day after Pentecost Iuue^alis Bishop of Jerusalem was come. But while
John bishop of Antioch lingered by the way, the Bishops which were already come
thither called the matter into controversy. Cyrillus bishop of Alexandria to
the end he might molest Nestorius (for he thought very ill of him) used
certain preambles of disputation. When many confirmed Nestorius denies Christ
^o be God.
that Christ was God, Nestorius pleaded for him self: I verily (says he) will
not call him god who grew to man's state by two months and three months and so
forth, therefore I wash my hands from your blood, and from henceforth I will no
more come into your company. Immediately after he had spoken this he went aside
and joined him self with the Bishops which held with his opinion* so that the
bishops then present were divided into two parts* such as of the council held
with Cyrillus, called Nestorius before them, he came not but answered that he
would differr the hearing of his cause until the coming of John bishop of
Antioch. Wherefore Cyrillus together with the other Bishops of the council
after they had read over the Sermons of Nestorius the which he had preached
unto the people and gathered out of them that in good earnest he had uttered
open blasphemies against the son of God, deposed him of his bishopric. This
being done the Bishops which held with Nestorius assembled together severally
by them selves and deposed Cyrillus and Memnon Bishop of Ephesus. Shortly after
John Bishop of Antioch was come, who understanding of all circumstances, blamed
Cyrillus greatly, as the author of all that stir, and because that upon a
head, he had so soon deposed Nestorius. Cyrillus taking Iuuenalis on his side
for to revenge him of John, deposed him also. When the contention grew to be
very trouble some, when also Nestorius perceived that the poisoned infection of
discord was scattered far and nighe among the common ^orte of people, he as
it were recanting his folly called Marie, the mother of God, his words were
these: Let Marie be called the mother of God, and I pray you conceive no longer
displeasure. But no man thought that he spoke this and repented from the heart,
therefore as yet he dwells in Oasis, both deposed of his bishopric and
banished his country. Thus was the council of Ephesus at that time broken up,
it was in the Consulship of Bassus and Antiochus the eight and twentyeth of
June. John Bishop of Antioch after his return unto his proper seae, called
many Bishops together and deposed Cyrillus who now was gone to Alexandria.
Shortly after for all that, they laid aside all spyte, grudge and enmity,
they became friends and restored each to other their bishoprics again.
After the deposition of Nestorius, there rose a great schism in the Church of
Constantinople, for the vain and foolish doctrine of Nestorius parted the
people asunder. All the Elergie with uniform consent accursed him openly, for
so we Christians do call the sentence which we pronounce against the author of
blasphemy, whereby we mind to make it so manifest unto the world as if it
were engraven in a table, and nailed to an open post.

CAP. XXXIIII. Cap. 35. in the greek.

How that after the deposition of Nestorius, Maximianus was chosen Bishop of
Constantinople.

AT Constantinople there rose an other schism about the election of a Bishop*
for some Anno Dom. ^35.
would have Philip (of whom I spoke a little before) some other would have
Proclus chosen bishop. Proclus verily had prevailed had not some of great
authority been his back friends: and signified plainly that the canon of the
Church forbad any should be nominated Bishop of one city and translated to an
other* the which saying being alleged was of such force that the people were
therewith appeased and satisfied. Wherefore three months after the deposition
of Nestorius, Maximianus was chosen Bishop, a man he was which led a
monastical life, by degree a Priest, one that of late had purchased unto
himself a good name and was thought to be a godly man, because he had builded
upon his own costs and charges the sepulchers and tumbes where godly men
should be interred* he was a man altogether unlearned, who determined with him
self to lead a quiet life void of all care and molestation.

CAP. XXXV. Cap. 36. in the Greek.

Socrates proves that it is not forbid but that there may be a translation of
Bishops from one seae to an other.

INsomuch that some by reason of the Ecclesiastical Canon which they allendged
for them selves have inhibited Proclus entitled Bishop of Cyzicum from being
placed in the Bishops ^eae of Constantinople, I thought good presently to say
somewhat thereof* such as took upon them to justify that saying, in mine
opinion did not report the truth: but either of envy against Proclus forged
such a decree or of wilful ignorance considered not then of the canons and
other constitutions oftentimes established for the profitt and commodity of
the Church of God* for Eusebius Pamphilus in the sixth book of his
Ecclesiastical history reports that one Alexander Bishop of some city in
Cappadocia, taking his voyage toward Jerusalem, was of the citizens of
Jerusalem caused to tarry and stalled Bishop in the rowme of Narcissus, where he
continewed unto the end of his life. It was an indifferent matter of old time
among the ancient fathers as often as the Ecclesiastical affairs so
constrained to translate bishops from one seae unto an other. If it be any
thing available to annect the canon decreed in this behalf unto this our
present history, let us see how shameless these men were who therefore thrust
Proclus besides the bishopric of Constantinople, and how untruly they
reported of the canon, for it is read as follows. If any Bishop A canon of
the Church.
be assigned to govern any Church whatsoever, and goes not thither, the fault
being not in him self but either that the people repelled him, or some other
necessary cause do stay him: unto him be it lawful to enjoy the honor and
the priestly function, so that he be not troublesome unto the Church whereof he
is appointed Bishop, but approve whatsoever the provincial council shall
determine of the matter called in controversy. These be the words of the
Canon. But that it may appear more evidently that many Bishops were translated
from one city unto an other upon necessary and urgent causes, I will here lay
down the names of such as were removed. Perigenes being chosen bishop of
Patras in Achaia and refused by the citizens of that place, was by Perigenes.
the commandment of the Bishop of Rome placed in the Metropolitan seae of
Corinth to succeed Gregory Nazianzene.
the late deseased, where he continewed all the rest of his life. Gregory
Nazianzene was first bishop of Sasimum a city in Cappadocia, next of Nazianzum,
afterward of Constantinople, last of all he went back again to Nazianzum.
Meletius was chosen Bishop of Sebastia in Armenia, Meletius. Dositheus.
Berentius.
but afterward removed to Antioch. Dositheus Bishop of Seleucia was by
Alexander Bishop of Antioch, translated unto Tarsus in Cilicia. Berentius
Bishop of Arcae in Phaenicia was brought thence into Tyrus. John was sent from
Gordus a city of Lydia to govern the bishopric of Proconesus. John.
Palladius. Alexander. Theophilus. Polycarpus. Hierophilus. Optimus. Siluanus.
Palladius was translated from Helenopolis to Aspunis: Alexander from
Helenopolis unto Adrian: Theophilus from Apamea in Asia to Eudoxopolis, which
of old was called Salabria: Polycarpus from Sexantapristae a city in Mysia,
unto Nicopolis in Thracia: Hiero^ hilus from Trapezupolis in Phrygia unto
Plotinopolis in Thracia: Optimus from Andagamia in Phrygia, unto Antioch in
Pisidia: and Siluanus bishop of Philippopolis in Thracia was translated unto
Troas. but these many shall suffice in steed of many others who were
translated from their proper seaes unto other bishoprics.

CAP. XXXVI. Cap. 37. in the Greek.

Of Siluanus who being Bishop of Philippopolis was removed to Troas.

Now I think it not amiss to write a few lines of Siluanus whom we said a
little before to have been translated from the bishopric of Philippopolis in
Thracia unto Troas. This Siluanus first studied Rhetoric in the school of
Troilus the Sophist: who though he was an earnest embracer of Christian
religion and exercised the monastical trade of living, yet wore he still the
philosophical habit. In process of time Atticus the Bishop sent for him and
made him Bishop of Philippopolis. who having continewed in Thracia the space of
three years when he could no longer away with the pinching cold of that
country (for he had a thin and a weak body) he requested Atticus to
substitute an other Bishop in his rowme, protestinge that he left Thracia for
no other cause but only to avoid the extreme cold. Siluanus then having
procured an other bishop to succeed him, remained at Constantinople and
exercised continewally the monastical trade and discipline* he was so far
from pride and hautines of stomach that often times in the thick assemblies and
solemn meetings of the citizens he wore scandals and bus kin^ of twisted hay
Shortly after the Bishop of Troas departed this life, and immediately the people
Troes came to Constantinople for to seek a Bishop. Atticus muzing with him
self whom he might prefere to the rowme, Siluanus by chance came by: as
soon as Atticus espied him, he ceased to bethink him self and turned unto
Siluanus with these words: thou may no longer excuse thy self but of
necessity thou must take upon thee the government of the Church, for in Troas
there is no chilling cold, behold God has provided for the infirmity of thy
body a delectable and pleasant soil, make no more ado brother but in have get
thee to Troas. To be short Siluanus went thither. Here I think very well to
lay down the miracle which he wrought. A great ship or hulke (for the breadth
thereof called plate) being fraighted and laden with great pillours and newely
made upon the shore or rode of Troas, could not be drawn from the land to take
sea, no, for all the Pilote together with a great multitude of men drew her
with cable ropes she would not move. When they had the space of many days
assaid what they could do and nothing prevailed, they thought verily that some
devil held the hulke from moving. Wherefore they went unto Siluanus the
Bishop and request him to pray in that place, for so they hoped it would come
to pass that the ship might be drawn into y^ sea* but he excused him self
very modestly, said that he was a sinner, and told them that he could not help
them, that it was the office of a just man. But seeing they were so importunate
upon him that they would not be answered, he came to the shore, there he
prayed unto God, took the rope by the end and bad the rest do their
endeavor. The ship being shaken with a little violence was brought by a little
and a little into the main seae. This miracle which Siluanus wrought allured
many of that province to embrace with fervent zeal the christian faith.
Siluanus also expressed no less in other acts and dealings of his the good
motion of his godly mind. When he perceived that the clergy respected nothing
but gain in deciding the controversies of their clients, he suffered thence
forth none of the clergy to be judge, but took the supplications and requests
of suitors: appointed one of the laytie whom for certainty he knew to be a
just and a godly man: gave him the hearing of their causes and so ended quietly
all contentions and quarells* for the aforesaid causes Siluanus became renowned
and famous among all men. Thus far of Siluanus, and though we may seem
herein to have digressed, yet have we remembered such things as may tend to the
profitt and commodity of the reader. But now let us return where we left.
When Maximianus was chosen Bishop of Constantinople in the Consulship of Bassus
and Antiochus, the church enjoyed peace and quietness.

CAP. XXXVII.
Of the Jews in Crete how they were deceived, and in the end perceauing their
folly, embraced the Christian faith.

ABout that time many Jews inhabiting Crete, received the Christian faith
being brought thereunto by such a calamity as follows. A certain Jew being
a subtle knave feigned himself to be Moses and said that he came down from
heaven for to lead the Jews which inhabited that Isle through the seae into
the firm and main land: that he was the same who of old did safe conduyte
Israel through the red seae. For the space of one whole year he did nothing
else but wander from one city to the other throughout the Isle, vsinge all
means possible to persuade the Jews which dwelled there to creditt him, and
exhorting them to leave all their wealth and substance behind them* for he
promised to bring them through the seae dry footed into the land of promise.
When that he had bewytched them with such vain and deceatefull hope, they
left their work and trade of life: they set naught by their wealth and
substance: and they gave license to him that lysted for to possess them. When
the day appointed of the false Jew for the voyage was come, he led them the
way, all the rest began to follow after together with women and children*
he brought them to a certain mountain which lay as it were an elbowe into
the seae ward and thence he bad them cast them selves into the seae.
Wherefore such as first came unto the fall did so, whereof some were crushed
tumbling down the hill, some other were drowned in the seae and dyed
immediately, it would have cost many more their lives had not the prouydence of
God provided better for them. For as God would there were nigh them many
Christians whereof some were fishermen, and some other merchants, they drew up
some which were almost choked up with water and saved their lives who being in
this lamentable plight acknowledged their folly: they stayed others from
plunging themselves in the waves of the seae, laying before their eyes ye death
of the Jews which lead them the dau^ce. They perceived then the guyle, they
blamed them selves for being so credulous, they went about to kill the
counterfeit Moses. But they could not catch him for he conveyed him self
privily from among the^. Whereupon diverse men did conjecture that it was a
deuell, which endeavored by borowing the shape of man to destroy y^ nation, and
utterly to root the Jews from of the face of the earth. Wherefore y^ calamity
schooled the Jews which inhabited Crete, made the^ for sake Iudaisme, and
cleave unto the Christian faith.

CAP. XXXVIII. Ca. 39. in the Greek.

How the Church of the Nouatians was set on fire.

SHortly after Paulus the Nouatian bishop although aforetime counted a very
godly man, yet Anno Dom. 437.
then specially it fell out y^ men conceived a far better opinion of his piety
the^ ever they did before. At Constantinople there happned such a fire y^ like
whereof was not remebred before. For the greater part of the city was
consumed to asses, the famous graynard, the market house called Achilleus were
quite burned. Last of all the fire crept into the Nouatian church which
adjoined unto the sign of the Storck. Wherefore Paulus as soon as he
perceived the church to be in great danger, fell prostrate before the Altar,
referred unto God in his prayer the preservation of the church, neither ceased
he to inculcate as well the remembrance of the city as of the church. God as
it proved in the end gave ear unto his prayers. For all ye fire flashed into
the church both by door and by window, yet was there no harm done: nay though
the buylding round about was on fire, though the church was environed with
burning flames by the power of God the church was preserved and overcame the
fury and rage of the fire. It was not quenched the space of two days and two
night,s the city burned all that while, In the end though many parts of the
city were utterly come to naught, yet the church (as I said before) escaped
that lamentable overthrow. And that which was more to be wondered at, no sign
of the smoke, no scorching of the flame, no parching of the heat could be seen
upon the timber, beams, or walls. This came to pass the seventeenth of
August in the fourteenth Consulship of Theodosius and the first of Maximus. The
Nouatians since that time do yearly keep holyday the seauenteeneth of August
in remembrance y^ their church was then miraculously preserved from fire, at
what time they render unto God hearty thanks: all men do reverence that church
for the miracle, and not only the Christians but also ye Ethniks do honor it
as an holy place. So far of that.

CAP. XXXIX. Cap. 40. in the Greek.

How that Proclus succeeded Maximianus in the Bishopric of Constantinople.

WHen Maximianus had peaceably governed the church the space of two years and
five months. He departed this life, in the Consulship of Areobindus and
Asparis, the twelf of April. It was the ember week next before Easter and on
good fridaye. At what time Theodosius the Emperor played a very wise part. For
lest that tumult and dissension should be raised again in ye church, without any
further delay, while as yet ye corpse of Maximianus was above ground he procured
the bishops then present to stall Proclus in the Bishops seae. To this end the
letters of Celestinus bishop of Rome were brought unto Cyrill bishop of
Alexandria, unto John bishop of Antioch and unto Ruffus bishop of Thessalonica,
certifieng them that there was no cause to the contrary but that one either
already nominated bishop of some certain city, or stalled in some proper sea
might be translated unto an other bishopric. As soon as Proclus then took
possession of the bishopric, he solemnized the funeral of Maximianus and
interred his corpse.

CAP. XL.
Of Proclus Bishop of Constantinople and what kind of man he was.

Now fit opportunity is offered to say somewhat of Proclus. This Proclus from
his youth up was a reader, he frequented the schools and was a great student
of Rhetoric. When he came to man's estate he had great familiarity with
Atticus, for he was his scribe. Atticus seeing his forewardnes in learning and
good behavior in life made him Deacon. But when he was thought worthy the
degree of a priest, Sisinius (as I said before) made him Bishop of Cyzicum. But
these things were done a good while before. At that time as I say he was
chosen Bishop of Constantinople. A man he was of a marvelous good life, for
being trained up under Atticus he became an earnest follower of his virtuous
steps. As for pacie^t suffera^ce he far excelled Atticus. Even as Atticus as
time and place required could terrify the heretics: so he behaved him self
tractable toward all men and persuaded him self that it was far easier for
him by fair means to allure unto the Church then by force to compel them
unto the faith. He determined to vex no sect whatsoever: but reserved and
restored unto the Church that renowned virtue of meekness required in
Clergy men. Wherein he imitated the Emperoure^ Theodosius. For even as it
pleased him not to execute the Imperial sword against such as committed
heinous crimes and wrought treason: so Proclus made no account at all of such
as were of the contrary faith and opinion.

CAP. XLI. C^p. 42. in the greek.

Of the clemency of Theodosius the Younger.

THeodosius the Emperor did highely commend Proclus for the aforsayde
virtues. For he counteruayled in patience y^ holy pryests of God: he could not
away with persecutors, yea ^o say the truth he passed all the priests of God in
modesty and meekenes of spirit, even as it is written of Moses in the book of
Numbres: Moses was the mildest man upon earth, so may it now be said of
Theodosius that he is the mildest man in the world, for which cause God subdued
Numb. 12.
his enemies unto him without slaughter and bloodshed, even as the victory he
got of John the tyrant and the overthrow of the Barbarians did manifestly
declare unto the world. For God bestowed such benefittes upon this most holy
Emperor as he did of old upon the righteous and virtuous livers. Neither
truly do I write these things in the way of flattery, but I will heareafter
declare unto the world more plainly that they are as true as I report them.

CAP. XLII.
What calamity befell unto the Barbarians which aided the tyrante and rebel
John.

AFter the desease of the tyrante, the Barbarians whom he had gathered
together to wage battaill with the Romans purposed to over run certain
dominions that were subject unto the Empire of Rome. The Emperor hearing of
this referred unto the wisdom of God after his wonted guise the wholl matter,
he gave him self altogether unto prayer and in the end obtained his desire. It
shall not be amiss presentely to lay down the miserable ends of the
Barbarians. First of all their captain Rugas was slain with a thunderbolt.
Next there ensued a Rugas sl^ine with a thunderbolt. Pethlence. ^^^e from
heaven.
plague which dispatched the greater part of his soldiers. Neither seemed
this a sufficient punishment, but there came fire also from heaven and
consumed many of them that remained, the which thing did greatly astonish y^
Barbaria^s, not so much because they presumed to take armor against y^ fierce
and valiant Romans as when they saw y^ Romans asisted by the mighty arm
and invincible power of God. At that time Proclus the Bishop repeated some
parcel of Ezechiels prophecy, expounded it in the Church and applied it with
singular commendation to have been foreshewed of God and then to have taken
place to the wealth of y^ Romayne Empire. The prophecy was as follows: Thou
son of man prophecy against Gog the prince of Rhos, Misoch and Thobel. ^^^^h*
38.
I will visit him with pestilence and blood: I will cause stormy rain and
halestones, fire and brimstone to fall upon him and all his hosts, yea and
upon all that great people that is with him. Thus will I be magnified, thus
will I be sanctified and known in the eyes of many nations and they shall
know that I am the Lord. For this sermon, Proclus (as I said before) was
highely commended.

CAP. XLIII.
How the Emperor Valentinianus the younger married Eudoxia the daughter of
Theodosius.

THeodosius the Emperor besides sundry other graces for his singular modesty
and mildness had this one benefitte which follows bestowed upon him by the
goodness of God. He had a daughter on his wife Eudocia, whose name was
Eudoxia. Valentinianus the younger his cousin whom he had made Emperor of the
West parts of y^ world requested he might have her to his wife: Theodosius the
Emperor yielded unto his request. And when as they deliberated with them selves
and thought upon a place that was situated iumpe in the midest between Rome and
Constantinople where the mariadge might be solemnized and agreed that it
should be at Thessalonica: Valentinianus wrote unto Theodosius requestinge him
not to trouble him self any thing at all therein, that he would come to
Constantinople. Wherefore after he had set all things in order in the West
dominions he took his voyage toward Constantinople for to be married. When
all the royal solemnitye was accomplished, in have he returned together with
his wife toward Anno Dom. 440.
the West. It was in the Consulship of Isidorus and Sinator. Thus had the
affairs of Theosius happy and prosperous successes.

CAP. XLIIII.
How Proclus Bishop of Constantinople persuaded the Emperor to translate the
Corpse of John Chrysostom out of exile and bury it in the Apostles Church.

SHortly after Proclus the bishop reconciled unto the Church such as had
divided them selves because of John's deposition, and with his grave wisdom,
and policy he removed out of their minds the offense and displeasure they had
conceived. But how he brought that to pass I will now declare. When he had
first persuaded the Emperor, he caused the corpse of John bnried at Comanum, to
be translated to Constantinople five and thirty years after his deposition and
solemnly with great pomp and reverence to be iuterred in the Apostles Church.
By this means such as for the affection they bore unto John, raised private
and several conuenticles, were coopled unto the congregation of the faithful.
This was done in the sixteenth Consulship of Theodosius the Emperor, the eight
and twentieth of January. Yet I can not choose but marvel greatly, what the
occasion might be of so great a spite and hatred owed unto Origin that was dead
(for he was excommunicated O^igen was excommunicated two hundred yeare^ after
his death.
by Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria two hundred years after his desease)
when as John five and thirtye years after his departure was of Proclus
received into the company of the faithful. But Proclus was a fair
conditioned man in respect of Theophilus. Wise and discreet men do perceive
well enough how these things both have fallen out in times past and now
also daily do come to pass.

CAP. XLV.
The death of Paulus the Nouatian Bishop and how Marcianus was chosen to
succeed him.

NOt long after they had interred the corpse of John in the Apostles church,
Paulus the Nouatian departed this life, it was in the aforesaid Consulship y^
one and twentieth of July. His hearse reconciled in manner unto y^ church all
the varieng sects and opinions. For all came together to his burial and
brought his corpse to y^ grave with singinge of psalms. He was the man that was
greatly beloved throughout his life time for his sincere and upright behavior.
And insomuch he did a worthy act a little before his departure I thought good
to pen it in this our present history to the profitte of the studious
reader in time to come. That he used his wonted dyete of the Monastical
discipline all the while he was sick, without any change or alteration
thereof, that he ceased not to pray continewallye I have determined to run
over with silence, least while I linger about the recital of these I may
seem any kind of way to deface the Act of his both worthy (as I said)
of memory and the profitte of the Reader. It was as follows. Paulus being
ready to depart out of this life called the Priests within this jurisdiction
before him, and said thus unto them: provide you a Bishop while as yet there
remains breath in my body lest after my departure the Churches be set on
tumultes and dissension. When they had answered, that the election of a Bishop
was in no wise to be referred unto them (for they said, one of us is of this
mind, an other of that mind, and therefore it is impossible we should agree
upon one man, but we would have thee to name him whom thy pleasure is we
should choose) after the hearing of their reason he replied* why then deliver
me this your promise in writing, that you will elect whom soever I shall
nominate. When the bond was made and subscribed unto with their hands, first
he lifted him self a little out of his bed, next he wrote secretelye within
the bond unknown unto the^ that were present the name of Marcianus who was a
priest, and had been trained up under him in the Monastical discipline, but
then as it fell out was not present. Last of all he sealed it, he willed y^
chief priests to do the same, he delivered it unto Marcus the Nouatia^ bishop
of Scythia who the^was in the city and said unto him as follows* If it
please God that I may reconer and lengthen my days yet a while longer in this
world, deliver me this bond which I give thee to keeping, but if his pleasure so
be that I must needs depart and finish the race of this frail and transitory
life, thou shall find his name written in this bond whom I have nominated to
be my successor in the bishopric. These words were no sooner uttered but he
gave up the Ghost. Three days after his departure out of this life the bond was
opened in the presence of a great multitude, when they found that Marcianus was
therein nominated, all with one consent lifted their voices and said he was a
fit man for the function, and immediately they sent to seek him out. When they
had happily met with him at Tiberiopolis a city in Phrygia, they take him and
bring him thence, in ye end he was placed in Paulus rowme y^ one and twentieth
day of the aforesaid month. But of these things thus much shall suffice.

CAP. XLVI.
How Theodosius the Emperor sent Eudocia his wife to Jerusalem.

FRom that time forth Theodosius the Emperor began to offer praises and
thankesgeuing for the benefits he received of God and to ex^oll with divine
lauds the name of Christ. Moreover he sent Eudocia the Empress to Jerusalem,
for he promised y^ she should perform this vow if he might see his daughter
married. But she both at her going and at her return bewtifled with sundry
ornaments not only the churches of Jerusalem, but also throughout all the
cities of the East.

CAP. XLVII.
Of Thalassius Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

PRoclus about that time in the seventeenth Consulship of Theodosius, took in
hand a marvelous enterprise such a thing as none of the bishops of old have
at any time brought about. After the desease of Filmus bishop of Caesarea in
Cappadocia, the Caesareans came to Constantinople for a bishop. When Proclus
mused with himself whom he should assign to be their bishop, by chance on
the sabbath day as he sought a fit man for the rowme all the Senators came to
the church for to see whom he would elect, of which number Thalassius was
one, Liuetenant and governor of the nations and cities throughout Illyrium.
Who as report goes being commanded of the Emperor to govern certain
contreyes of the East, was consecrated of Proclus, and in steed of a
Liuetenant made bishop of Caesarea. And thus y^ Ecclesiastical affairs of
those times enjoyed peace and tranquillity. But here I will cut of and make an
end of my history prayinge for the continewance of peace and prosperous estate
of all churches under heaven, for the wealth of all people, for the concord and
unity of all cities and contreyes. For when peace preuayleth there is no matter
for an historiographer to occupy his pe^ne. for most holy Theodorus which have
inioined me this task, now at length performed in these seaue^ books of the
Ecclesiastical history: there would have been no matter ministered for my
pen, if such as set their minds on sedition and discord had been at peace
and unity among them selves. This seventh book contineweth the historye of
two and thirty years, our wholl history being divided into seaue^ books
compriseth the compass of one hundredth and forty years, beginning at the first
year of the two hundredth and first Olympiad when Constantine was proclaimed
Emperor, and ending the second year of the three hundredth and Socrates ends
his hi^tory Anno Dom. 440.
fifth Olympiade, being the seventeenth Consulship of Theodosius the Emperor.

The end of the seventh book of the Ecclesiastical history of Socrates
Scholasticus.
The Translatour unto the Reader.
HItherto (Christian reader) have I translated Eusebius and Socrates, which
continevved their histories from the birth of Christ unto the reign of
Theodosius Junior. I would have thee know that at one time with Socrates
there vvrote two other Grecians, Sozomenus and Theodoret, beginning where
Socrates began, and endinge their histories with him at Theodosius Junior.
Their argument is one, to wit: The Ecclesiastical history, their language
one, they vvrote all in Greek, their years one, for they flourished the same
time. Little difference there is between them in substance, sauinge where the
one is long the other short, where the one is obscure, the other plain,
where the one is taedious, the other pleasant. To translate them all three,
vvoulde not in my opinion be so profitable as paynefull, the volume both
vvoulde be toe huge, and the reader soon vvearyed with the often repetition of
one thing. Cassiodorus the Senator and compiler of the Tripartite history,
preuentinge this inconvenience, and seeing that these three vvriters agreed in
substance, devised with him self how to ease the reader of so great a
labor, and how to rydde him from so taedious a study. He made an Epitome or
brief collection of them all three, I mean Socrates, Sozomenus, and
Theodoret, and called it the Tripartite history. The creditt of the Epitome
and collector does not counteruayle the authority of the author, Antiquity
with the truth is to be preferred. Therefore in translating, I thought far
better thou should see, not the authors to avoid repetition and vvearisome
reading, but the author him self, I mean Socrates alone, in steed of the
two other, whom I have chosen as the soundest writer, the faithfullest
historiographer, and the absolutest delyuerer of the history in all points
unto the posterity. Wherefore if ought be well done, give the praise unto
God, let the pains be mine, and the profit the Readers.

THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF EVAGRIVS SCHOLASTICVS A NOBLE MAN OF ANTIOCH,
AND ONE OF THE EMPEROVRS LIVETENANTS, COMprised in six books, beginning where
Socrates left, and ending a hundredth and seventy years after: WRITTEN in the
Greek tongue about nine hunderd years ago, and translated by M. H.



Imprinted at London by Thomas Vautroullier dwelling in the Blackefriers. 1576.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL THE GODLY AND VIRTUOUS GENTLEMAN, CHRISTOPHER KENNE
ESQVIER, INCREASE OF WORSHIP, CONTINEVVANCE OF GODLY zeal and health in
Christ Jesus.
When I call to memory (right worshipful) the saying of the holy Apostle S.
Paul, that God according unto his unsearchable wisdom chose not many wise
men according unto the flesh, not many mighty men, not many noble men to
plant the principles of his Gospel among the nations under heaven: I can not
choose but honor studious nobility, and reverence virtue where I find her for
the rareness thereof. how precious is a little silver among a great deal of
dross: one fruitful tree in a vvide barren forest: one ruddye rose among
many pricking thorns: one pearl though found in a puddle of mire: one
tvvinkeling star through many thick and mystie clouds: one Lotte in
Sodom: one Helias in Israel: one Job in Husse: one Tobias in Niniue: one
Phoenix in Arabia: and one Euagrius a noble gentleman, employing his travel to
the furtherance of the Ecclesiastical affairs? Dionysius bishop of
Alexandria writing a book of repentance sent it to Conon bishop of
Hermopolis, who by repentance had renounced the idolatry of pagans, and
zealously cleaued to the Christian profession, as a fit reader of so worthy a
theme: Origin vvriting of martyrs sent his treatise unto Ambrose and
Protoctetus ministers of Caesarea, such as had endured great affliction and
grievous crosses under Decius the emperor, where they might have a view of
their valiant and invincible courage: The philosophers of Alexandria and
Egypt, such as in those days excelled in profane literature, vvrote great
volumes of their profound skill, and sent them unto the famous philosopher and
Christian doctor Origin, the great clarke of Alexandria: Of mine own part
(right worshipful) not attributing unto my self, such excellency of wit, and
singularity of gifts as reigned in the aforesaid vvriters, when I had
finished the translation of the former histories, I mean Eusebius and
Socrates, and dedicated them where duty did bind me unto the right honorable
and my very good Lady, the Countess of Lyncolne, I thought good to send this
present translation of Euagrius unto your worship, a noble Gentleman, unto a
worshipful Esquier, a lieuetenant of Antioch, unto the Shiriffe of Sommerset,
a learned historiographer unto on that is no less studious, of great fame unto
one that is of as good report, a furtherer of religion unto a favorer of such
as profess the same. It is told me of truth, nay I have found my self
sufficient trial of your courtesy and virtuous disposition. When I traveled
now two years ago at the request of a dear friend and kinsman of mine in
your countye of Sommerset, and savve the good will you bare unto your
neighbors and tenauntes, the entire love and affection they ovved unto you
again, I called to remembrance the saying of Eberhardus Duke of VVittenberge
in the Parliament held at Worms of all the princes of Germany, in the time
of Maximilian. Every of the nobylitie commended his own cuntreye, the
Princes of Saxony praised their mine pittes and quarries, their precious
mettalls: the Dukes of Bauaria set forth the maiesticall buyldinge and
portly Cities vvythin their dominions: the Duke Palatine extolled the
fertylitie of his soil, the plentifulnesse of his grape, and the
pleasantness of his wine: Duke Eberhardus holdinge his peace and harkning to
the rest, was requested of Friderick Duke of Saxony to say somevvhat for his
own country. I know not (says he) what commendation I should give my
country, but sure I am of this one thing, that I may safely lay my head and
sleep in the lap of any subject within my dominions, by day or by night, at
home or abroad. as much to say he governed his country so virtuously that the
commonalty would live and die with him, the which sying of his by the
censure and opinion of all the princes deserved the greatest praise. If I may
speak unfeignedly what I thought, I took his case to be yours, the judgment
he gave of his dominions to be the report you give of your country, and now I
think the godly rule of his people the^, to be presently the politic
government of your shiriffvvike, you remember I am sure (nay I see it in you
my self) how the painter sets forth the portracture of the emperors of
Germany, holding a book in the right hand and a svvord in the left. the book
betokens knowledge of the law, the svvorde execution of justice. many
there are now a days which sue for such offices, in mine opinion they are
not the fittest men, they respect not the before said conditions but their
own lucre and the making up of their bags for that year. Iouianus refused
the empire of the whole world when it was offered him: Ambrose vvoulde in no
wise be made bishop of Millaine: Eusebius could not be persuaded to take
the byshoprick of Antioch, Constantinus magnus vvrote of him that in so doing
he was vvorthie to be bishop of the chiefest Church under heaven: it was
against your will that you took the office upon you, I know it full well,
therefore you deserve the greater praise and commendation. Now that you are
in office hearken what a learned Poet seeing his friend chosen magistrate,
vvrote unto him, it was in such sort as follovveth:

Da, capias, quaeras, plurima, pauca, nihil. By interpretation, give much: take
little: seek nothing, he meant by extortion. Aristotle bad Alexander remember
that government was not insolency, oppression and injury, but execution of
justice, helping with counsel and maintaining of right. Ernestus Duke of
Luneburge was mindful of his calling, when he caused a burning candle to be
stamped in his coin with these letters in compass. A. S. M. C. alijs
seruiens meipsum contero. while I serve other men's turns, I vvast my self
away. I presume that of your good nature you will take the premises in good
part, considering they proceed of good will and friendly remembrance for the
great courtesy I have received. It is the part of a friend not only to be
thankful for the benefits bestovved upon him, and to commend virtuous
disposition where he finds the same, but also exhort his friend to go on
in well doing and vvish the continuance thereof. If that herein I have
discharged some part of my duty, take it well in vvorth and accept it with
as loving a mind as the Translator was vvillinge to take pen in hand to
commend it unto you with a preface. Farevvell from London the 4. of
September. 1576.

Yours in the Lord MEREDITH HANMER.

THE PREFACE OF THE TRANSLATOR UNTO THE READER, TOVTCHING EVAGRIVS AND HIS
HISTORY.
EVagrius a noble man of Antioch a learned writer and continewer of this
Ecclesiastical history may not lightly be ouerskipped with out commending of
his praise and virtues to immortal memory, and rehearsing of them to the
encouragement of all studious nobility, to the profit of the loving reader,
and the furtherance of christian profession. his honor was nothing impaired,
his blood nothing blemished at all, in that he being a te^porall man acquainted
him self with ecclesiastical affairs. Sabellicus writes that Bartolomevve
the Apostle Sabellicus.
came of a noble race, forsook the bravery of courtiers, and became the
follower of Christ. Peter: Dorotheus, and Gorgonius being pages unto the
Emperor Diocletian Eusebius. eccle. hist lib. 8. cap. 6.
in great creditte and of noble parentage bad court farewell, weyed little their
honor, made less account of the Emperor, forsook their own lives rather then
they Eusebius. ec. hist lib. 8. cap. 11. Eusebius. eccle. hist. lib. 8. cap 11.
would forswear Christ. The treasurer together with the lieuetenant of a
certain town in Phrygia, chose rather for the truth in Christ, with fire to
be consumed to ashes, then here to enjoy all worldly treasure. Audactus a noble
man of Italy, preferred the garland of martyrdom before all the glory and
pomp of this transitory Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 5. Eusebius. eccle. hist. lib. 7.
cap 15. Socrat eccle. hist. lib. 3. cap 11. 1. Cor. 1.
life. A noble man of Nicomedia rent in pieces a wicked proclamation in the
face of all the four Emperors. Astyrius a Senator of Rome, thought it no
staining of his honor, to take up on his shoulders the dead body of a blessed
martyr, and provide for it a funeral. Iouianus, Valentinianus and Valens, noble
men and afterward Emperors one after the other, threw away their sword
girdles, left their offices, departed the court of Julian the Apostata, rather
then they would deny Christ. Yet S. Paul says that not many wise men
according unto the flesh: not many mighty, not many noble men are called.
true it is in respect of a greater number of the contrary, or rather we may say
that these were not fleshly minded, their disposition was not carnal, their
wisdom was not worldly. how great a comfort is it unto christian profession
when princes become fosterers, when Queens become nurces, and noble men become
favorers of the christian faith? In some countries we see that noble men most
of all spend their time in study and learning. It is not decent in some
countries for the pesants son, the farmour, the frankline, or howsoever ye
term him to forget his fathers rusticall toil, and forthwith addict him self
to the gentleman's trade. The Pope most commonly calls noble men to his
college of Cardinals, Dukes and Earls youngest sons, he used to make
Cardinals sometimes in their cradles. Bishops and Archbishops in many countries
descend of noble houses. Osorius Bishops of Lusitania in Portingall writing
against M. Haddon, sticked not to give us an inklinge of his parentage. Neither
do I mislike with this in the church of Rome, sicaetera essent paria, for I
read Socrat. eccle. hist. lib. 5. cap 8.
that Nectarius a noble man by office praetor of Constantinople, was chosen to
be bishop of that seae, of a hundred and fifty bishops which then assembled
together at Constantinople, partly for that, and partly for other things.
Ambrose also lieuetenant of a prouice was made bishop of Millayne. Chrisosto^
bishop of Constantinople descended Socrat. eccle. hist. lib. 5. cap. 8. Socrat.
lib. 4 cap. 25. lib. 6. cap. 3. Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 47. Euagri. lib. 6. cap.
vlt.
of the senators of Antioch. Thalassius Senator of Constantinople, lieuetenant
of Illyrium was made bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia. I see that Euagrius who
in the time of Tiberius Constantinus was Quaestor, and in the time of Mauricius
Tiberius was master of the rolls, together with diverse others occupied
themselves about Ecclesiastical affairs, but I highly commend such as show
forth tokens of their nobility by study of virtue, politic government of
their country, noble prowess, valiantness of courage, maintenance of the
truth, and furtheraunce of the Gospel. some think it is enough for them to
bayte at the university, there steal a degree and forth with be counted
gentlemen: or to be in commons in one of the Innes of court, where there are
many wise, zealous, and learned gentlemen: or to get into some noble man's
service, and by virtue of the cognizance to be called a master: or to purchase
for a piece of money a coat armor: or to beg a farm, and by virtue of the
valuation in the queens books to become a gentleman. Every one thinks not I
am sure, that these sorts of men are to be numbered among the ancient and noble
houses, though in process of time antiquity seem topreuaile very much with
such kind of men, long possession is a great matter in law and an old deed
though it be forged will further the matter very much. The Arcadians called
them selves (...) a progeny Arcadians.
far more ancient then the Moon. of them Ovid writes thus.

Ere Moon was set in skies above (if fame do them not fail) Ovid.

The soil was called of Arcas high whose creditt must avail.
But they contended for Antiquity with the Egyptians and to try out the
truth, Psammitichus King of Egypt did as follows. he shut up in a certain
close lodging Suidas. Egyptians.
far from cities and company of people, two newly borne babes, some say with
nurces (charged not to speak a word) some say among goats, and that for the
space of three whole years, at the three years end to see what language the
children would speak, he caused one of his familiars suddenly to go in among
the children which did so and took one of the children by the hand which
said unto him, Becos, that is in the Phrygian tongue bread, the king hearing
this confessed him self overcome, and yielded unto his adversaries for
antiquity. thenceforth were they called (...) but Ioh. Goropius medic. An
twerpiens.
Suidas thinks that the children being acquainted with the bleting of goats
cried beck and so that it was nothing else but a jest and a deluding of the
king. Yet John Goropius a physician of Antvverpe, takes the matter in earnest
to the end he might currie favor with the Germans, he faith that the Grecians
were herin foully deceived, and that beck or weck in the Germane tongue,
signifies bread: the Egyptians being foiled turn them unto the Scythians and
of them likewise they were overcome. here is much Scythians. Ethiopians.
Britains.
a do and all for gentry. The AEthiopians allege reasons for themselves, and
they must be heard. the Britains can tell you they come from Troy, and thence
they can bring you the straighte way to Adam, next to God, and then a full
point. Poggius writes that a noble man of France espied on an Italian
soldiers bucklar the ox head engraven, Poggius.
stomaked him therefore, told him it was his cognizance, that his house was
far more ancient and to the end all quarells might be ended, challenged him
to the field. the Italian made little ado, told him he would meet him. on
the day appointed the noble man came with a great troop. the soldier
likewise met and ioyninge together he asked of him why his noble blood was
so much out of temper: When that the noble man answered that his auncetors
had ever given the oxes head, and that he and his would thenceforth give it or
else know a cause to the contrary. why an please you sir (says the soldier)
this is no ox head, it is the head of a cow. It was about gentry between
Phaeton and Epaphus that moved Phaeton, as Phaeton. Epaphus.
the Poets feign, to crave license for one day to sit in the chariot of Sol.
for when he minded to root out the posterity of his adversary, almost he set
the whole world on fire. Maximinus the emperor borne in a pelting village of
Thracia, and misliking with Maximinus.
him self therefore, slew as many as knew his pedigree and had seen the rags
of his parents. Herod burned the Genealogies of the Jews that he might
affirm him self as Herod.
well as they to have descended of a noble race. Themistocles a bastard borne,
for to cloak Themistocles.
his birth and to remove the il opinion conceived that way, entised the young
nobility of Athens to frequent Cynosarges a schole without the city where
bastards did only frequent. many shifts are made, Jack would be a gentleman
if he could speak french. Amasis king of Egypt being basely borne, made his
image of gold, set it up to be worshipped Amasis. Smerdes.
that the people might reverence him the more. Smerdes a sorcerer because he
was in person like Smerdes the brother of Cambyses King of the Assyrians (whose
death Cambyses procured fearinge he would aspire unto the kingdom) made the
world believe he was the man in deed, overcame Cambyses and was crowned King,
but his wife and bedfellow with clipping and other wonted familiarity, felt his
head, found that Smerdes had no ears, revealed it abroad, and so was he
betrayed and deposed his kingdom. Prompalus fained himself to be the son of
Antiochus Epiphanes. A Prompalus.
certain Egyptian the son of Protarchus the merchant called him self the
son of An Egyptian.
Alexander Zebenna, and the adopted son of Antiochus, wept bitterly at the
funeral of Antiochus as if he had been his own father. Archelaus made the
world believe that he was the son of Mithridates. when Perseus the last king
of the Macedonians had ended this life, Andristus a country fellow would
needs persuade men that he Andristus. Equitius.
was his son. Equitius affirmed that without all doubt he was the son of
Tiberius Gracchus. Citharaedus endeavored to persuade the Romans that Nero had
not dispatched Citha^oedus.
him self but that he was Nero. many of the aforsaid cloked their gentry,
fained the^ selves noble me^, conquered kingdoms, deluded the world, and in the
end deceived the^ selves. Julius Caesar espied a rude and an homely man,
aspiring unto the kingdom of Cappadocia, he rese^bled very much the favor of
Ariarathes whom all the world knevv to A counterfeit Ariarathes.
have been dispatched by Marcus Antonius, this counterfeit Ariarathes had vvon
all the cuntreis, the crown was going to his head, but ere the crown came
Julius Caesar took his head from of his shoulders. so dealt Augustus the
Emperor with such as had A fained Alexander.
proclaimed a young man to be king of the Jews after the desease of Herod,
because he resembled his son Alexander whom in his life time he had put to
death. When Henry the fourth had taken Richard the second that was king of
England, and imprisoned A priest set up for a king
him, the Earl of Salisbury uncle of the mother side unto king Richard either
to redeem the prisoner or to revenge him of the king or peradventure both,
set up a priest in princely atyre, one of king Richardes Musicians,
resemblinge his person very much, and blazed that the King had broken
prisone and was gone: the people hearing of this ran after the counterfeite
King, but Henry came with power and made the priest he could sign no more.
What will not al these shifts avail us? can we not face out the matter?
vvil Abbey gentry help at al? no doubt antiquity Lycurgus Plutarche.
must take place. vvil you he are what Lycurgus the lavvgiuer of the
Lacedaemonians said sometime upon like occasion unto the bragging nobility of
Lacedemon: O noble citizens (says he) the vaunte and glory we make of
Hercules the ancient race and progeny descending of his loins vvilauaile us
not a jot: unless that with all care and industry we practice in ou^ lives
such virtuous acts as made him famous and renowned: and moreover that we learn
and exercise continually honest and noble behavior. Agesilaus Agesilaus.
king of the Lacedemonia^s misliked very much with the behavior of his
nobility, when he uttered these words unto the^. you see the force and strength
of the host to be on the side of the Spartane soldier, and you your selves
follow after as a shadow commonly goes after the corporal substance.
Theodorus Zuinger reports thus of the nobility of his Theod. Zuinger.
country. They will be counted the best men, that take upon the^ to maintain and
increase the honor of their ancestors: they are the most sluggish sort of men,
they give them selves to hunting, to banqueting, to pouling and oppressing of
the pore people, and they think that only thing sufficient for their honor
that they either through an other man's virtue, or through an other man's vice,
attained unto the name of nobility, or unto ancient arms: that thence forth
they may without controlement together with such like companions banquet day
and night in their pauillions, haunt brothell houses and frequent places of
beastly pleasure, and because they are scarce worthy the company of men they
consume the rest of their days in follovving after dogs. I except them ever
and in all places, which lively express in virtuous life, the noble fame,
and great renown of their ancestors. so far Theodorus. But (God be praised
for it) we are able to report far better of England, that there are of the
nobility, valiant men, virtuous, godly, studious, politic, zealous, of
ancient houses, and blood never stained. There is hope the days shall never
be seen when the prophecy of Chaucer shall take place where he says:

When faith fails in priests savves, Chaucer.

And Lords hestes are holden for laws,
And robbery is holden purchase,
And lechery is holden solace.
Than shall the land of Albion
Be brought to great confusion.
And to the end our wished desire may take effect, let us hearken what
exhortation he gives unto the chief magistrate, his words are these:

Prince desire to be honorable,
Cherishe thy folk and hate extortion,
Suffer nothing that may be reproueable,
To thine estate done in thy region.
Shevve forth the yard of castigation.
Dread God, do law, love truth and worthiness.
And vvedde thy folk again to stedfastnes.
Now that my pen has over ruled me, and run so far with the race of
mine autors nobility, I will return unto Euagrius again, that we may be
the better acquainted with so singular a man that has ministered the occasion
of so singular a matter. He studied a while at Apamea, for so he testifies of
him self in the time of the Emperor Euagri. lib. 4. cap. 25.
Justinian about the year of our Lord 565. he was so careful over the
studious reader, that he recited unto him about the latter end of his fifth
book all the histories both divine and profane, from the beginning of the
world unto his time. He was a great companion of Gregory bishop of
Antioche, he bare him company to Constantinople, when he went to clear him
self, he reports of himself that he was married in Antioche, with great
pomp and royal solemnity, when the great earthquake the night follovving,
shook the whole city. His state and condition I do gather where he writes
of the pestilent and contagious disease which reigned throughout the world,
the space of two and fifty years: the words he vvrote are these: The
Euagrius. lib. 4 cap. 28.
greatest mortality of all fell upon mankind the second year of the
revolution which comprised the term of fiftene years, so that I my self
which write this history was then troubled with an impostume, or
svvellinge about the privy members, or secret parts of the body: moreover
in process of time, when this sickness waxed hot, and dispatched diversely and
sundry kinds of ways it fell out to my great grief and sorrow that God took
from me many of my children, my wife also with diverse of my kinsfolks, whereof
some dwelled in the city and some in the country. such were my adventures, and
such were the calamities which the course of those lamentable times distributed
unto me. When I wrote this, I was eight and fifty year old, two years
before, this sickness had been four times in Antioche, and when as at length
the fourth revolution and compass was past, besides my aforesaid children God
took away from me a daughter and a nephewe of mine. The judgment Nicephor.
eccl. hist. lib. 1 cap. 1.
that Nicephorus gives of his history is in this sort: Euagrius a noble man
wrote his Ecclesiastical history the which he continwed unto the raygne of
Justinius, handling especially profane matters. the substance whereof he
gathered out of Eustathius the Syrian, Sozimus, Priscus, Johannes, Procopius of
Coesarea, and Agathus, all which were famous orators of that time* and out of
sundry other good autors: but the author reuealeth him self in the plainest
sort where he ends his history writing in this sort. Here do I mind to cut
of and make an end of writing, that is the twelfe year of Euagri. lib. 6.
cap. 23.
Mauricius Tiberius the emperor leaving such things as follow, for them that
are disposed to pennethem for the posterity in time to come. I have finished
an other work, comprising relations, epistles, decrees, orations, disputations
with sundry other matters. The relations for the most part are in the person
of Gregory bishop of Antioche, for the which I was preferred unto two
honorable offices. Tiberius Constantinus made me Quaestor, Mauricius Tiberius
made me master of the Rolls, where the noble men, and magistrates were
registered. The author ends his history about the year of our Lord 595.
wanting only five years of six hundred. There are many odd things in this
history whereby the reader may note the change and diversity of times how
abuses creep in by a little and a little* who so ever he be that is so disposed
to settle his mind and rest upon the plain truth by perusing of these
histories, he may have great furtherance. In Eusebius he may behold the estate
of the primitive Eusebius.
church from the Apostles unto his time three hundred and odd years. In
Socrates Socrates.
although it follow immediately, he shall find great change, his history is of
a hundred and forty years after, but in Euagrius being but a hundred and forty
years after him ye Euagius.
shall see far greater alteration. Lastof all if ye weye the things which
happened since the sixte hundred years after Christ, then as it is written,
Qui legit intelligat, Math. 24.
then came in the Pope, then came in the Turk, and then came in the deuell for
altogether. For after the raygne of this Mauricius came in Phocas to be
Emperor which first granted unto the bishop of Rome to be called universal
bishop. This Phocas murdered the Emperor Mauricius, obtained the Empire
through treason, a fit man to be founder of so worthy an act. Note I
beseech you how that in his time God seemed utterly to withdraw his
blessing: France, Spain, Germany, Lumbardie, and the greatest part of the
east fell from the Empire for ever, such a wrecke to the state as never had
been seen before. Not only this but there ensued in the temporaltie no fear
of God, no shame of the world, no love toward the brethren, no care of the
Church, no consideration of clergy men: in the spirituality, pride of
prelates, pampering of their panches, fleshly pleasure, they turned devotion
into superstition, faith into fained works, plain dealing into hypocrisy,
careful zeal into careless security, in stead of the Bible, they brought
into the Church legendes of lies, in stead of the true and pure service of
God, they brought in peeuishe and pelting ceremonies, wherefore the season
requires that we watch and pray and continewally wait for the Lords
coming. All is now in the extreme: Nullum violentum perpetuum.

T. V.



THE FIRST BOOK OF THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF EVAGRIVS SCHOLASTICVS.
CAP. I.
The proeme of Euagrius to his history.

EVsebius syrnamed Pamphilus, a man without all peradventure as in other
things profounde so in penninge excellent, is of such efficacy in his works,
y^ although he can not make the readers perfect christians, yet can he so draw
them by persuasion that with prompt and willing minds they will embrace the
Christian faith. Eusebius, Socrates, Sozomenus, and Theodoret have written most
exquisitly of the incarnation of our most loving savior, of his ascension into
the heavens, of the famous acts of the Apostles, of the combats and
persecutions of y^ holy martyrs, and what other thing so ever was thought
worthy the noting, or otherwise unto some part of Theodosius junior his reign:
In so much therefore such things as ensued after seem nothing inferior unto
the rest, and have been hitherto recorded in no perfect order, although also I
my self seem unfit by reason of my small ability to take so great an
enterprise in hand, yet I take it to be my duty to employ what labor and
industry lies in me for the compyling of this work, and to put my whole
trust and confidence in him which endued the fishermen with heavenly wisdom,
and filed the rough tongue for ready delivery and soundinge of every
syllable, to thend I may revive the famous acts which now do slumber in the
duste of forgetfulness, so stir them with my pen and print them to
immortal memory, that not only every man may know what has happened until
this our age, when, where, in what sort, against whom, by what men, but also
that no worthy act through rechelesse security, and languishinge
slothfulness the sister of oblivion, be clean put out of remembrance.
Wherefore by the help of almighty God there will I begin to write where the
aforesaid writers made an end of their histories, when the outrageous cruelty
of Julian had sucked his fill of the blessed saints and martyrs blood, when
the mad fury of Arius false and counterfeit doctrine was bridled with the
sound canons of the Nicene council, when both Eunomius and Macedonius were
sore pricked at Bosphorus with the power of the holy Ghost and utterly foiled
at the famous City of Constantinople, when the holy Church had purged her of
her filthe and infection the which she lately received and now recovered her
former glory, being as it were all laid over with glistering gold, and
gorgeously araid for her lover and bridegroom: Satan the sworn adversary to
all godliness, because he could not away with these graces and benefits
bestowed from above, raised against us a strange battle contrary to the
course of nature. And when he saw the idolatry of pagans was trod in the
puddle of contempt, and that the servile and abject opinion of Arius was quite
banished the Church, although he staggered and staide openly from oppugninge
the christian faith, specially seeing it was confirmed and fortified by so many
ancient and godly fathers (for in besieging and assaulting of it, his power
was very much diminished) secretly and by The polli^ of Satan ^ reviving
Jewish opon.
stelth he wrought his feats, he devised certain objections and resolutions
and labored to conueigh the error after his new found invention unto the
Iewishe superstition, forgetting like a wretch as he is, that in partaking
with them he was lately foiled and overthrown. Whereas a foretime he had one
adversary, now craftily he seemed to reverence and in manner to embrace the
same: his devise and endeavor was not to withdraw the Church generally from
the whole faith, but to see whether he might possibly corrupt one word or
syllable comprised therein. Wherefore being wrapped in his own malice he
craftily went about to alter, yea one letter which seemed to appertain unto
the sense and understanding of the sentence* but how in pronunciation he
severed the tongue from the truth of the word, so that the sound and sense
of the phrase might not jointly laud God and extol him with divine praises,
moreover into what issue neither of them did grow and what end they enjoyed I
will declare when I come to entreat of them, I will also add there unto what
other thing so ever may be thought worthy of memory, though therein I may
seem to digress, and there will I cease to write where God of his goodness
will have the history ended.

CAP. II.
How Nestorius through the procurement of Anastasius his disciple called the
blessed mother of God, not the mother of God but the mother of Christ, and
therefore was counted an heretic.

In so much that Nestorius (who called together against Christ a second
council with Caiphas, who builded a slaughterhouse of blasphemies where Christ
a new is both slain and sold, who severed and divided a sunder his natures
that hong on the cross and had not as it is written no John. 19. Mat. 27. (...)
not one bone broken throughout all the members of his body, neither his
unseamed coat parted of such as put the Lord to death) rejected the clause of
the mother, or bearing of God, framed of the holy Ghost, by the means of many
learned and godly fathers, set against it this saying the mother or bearing of
Christ, leudly forged of his own brain and filled the Church of God with
sedition, civil wars and cruel bloodshed: I think verily my pen can not
want matter to paint and orderly to continue the history, and so to proceed
unto the end, if that first of all through the help of Christ the ayder of
all men, I begin with the blasphemy of Nestorius. the schism which the^
rose in the church had such a beginning as follows. Anastasius a certain
priest of a corrupt and perverse opinion, an earnest maintainer of the Jewishe
doctrine of Nestorius, and his companion in the voyage he took from Antioch to
be bishop of Constantinople, when he heard the leude reasons and conference
which Nestorius had with Theodolus at Mopsouestia in Cicilia, he fell from the
right faith, and as Theodorus writes of that matter in a certain epistle, he
presumed in the open audience of the Church of Constantinople in the hearing of
such people as served God devoutly to say these words: let no man call Marie,
the mother of God, for Marie (says The fond eason of Anastasius.
he) was a woman, and it is impossible that God should be borne of a woman.
when the religious people misliked with his reasons and counted not without
cause of his doctrine as of blasphemy: Nestorius the ringleader of his
impiety not only not forbad him, neither maintained the right opinion, but
first of all confirmed his sayings to be true, and was very earnest in the
defense of them. Wherefore after he had annexed and lincked thereunto his own
opinion, and the devise of his own brain, when he had powered into the Church
of God the venom of his poisoned doctrine, The blaspherie of Neorius.
he endeavored to establish a far more blasphemous sentence to his own
destruction. he said as follows: I verily will not call him God who grew to
man's state by two months, three months and so forth, even as Socrates
Scholasticus and the former council held at Ephesus have informed of him.

CAP. III.
What Cyrill the great wrote unto Nestorius the heretic and of the third^
council of Ephesus, whereunto John bishop of Antioch and Theodoritus came
short.

CYrill bishop of Alexandria, a man of great fame and renown confuted the
leude opinion of Nestorius in several letters, yet for all that, Nestorius
stiffely withstood his confutation, yielded not one jot, neither unto Cyrill,
neither unto Celestinus bishop of old Rome, but vomited out the venom of his
cankered stomach upon the Church and made suit unto Theodosius the younger
who was Emperor of the East, that by his authority the first council of
Ephesus might be called together. Wherefore the Emperor wrote unto Cyrill and
to all y^ other overseers, and bishops of the Churches throughout every city
geuinge them to understand that the day of The council Ephesus ^no Dom. ^.
Pentecost was prescribed for their assembly, on which day the living and
ghostly spirit descending from heaven shined among us. but Nestorius by reason
that Ephesus is not far from Constantinople was there before them. Cyrill
together with his company came thither also before the day appointed. John
bishop of Antioch was absent with his province not of set purpose according
unto their report which defend his doings, but because he could not in so
short a space call together the bishops of his province, for many of their
cities were distant from Antioch (of old so called, but now Theopolis) unto a
swift and stout goer twelve days journey, unto some others more, and Ephesus
is from Antioch about thirty days journey. And when as John answered
plainly he was not able to meet them on the Sundaye appointed (for so was the
day called) all his diocese sturred not a foot from home.

CAP. IIII.
How Nestorius the heretic was deposed by the council of Ephesus in the
absence of John bishop of Antioch,

When the day appointed for their meeting and fifteen days over were expired,
the bishops which assembled at Ephesus thinking verily that the eastern
bishops would not come, or if peradventure they came it would be long ere they
met together, when as Cyrill also moderated the council in stead of
Celestinus who (as I said before) governed the seae of Rome, called Nestorius
before them and willed him to answer unto the crimes that were laid to his
charge. And when as the first day he promised to come if the case so required,
and being afterward thrice cited to appear, made light account of his
promise, the bishops that were present called the matter into controversy, and
began to reason thereof. Wherefore after that Memnon bishop of Ephesus had
numbered the days that were past since the prescribed time, to wit, seventeen:
after they had read the epistles of the reverend Cyrill unto Nestorius, and
such as he wrote unto Cyrill again, together with the holy epistle of the
renowned Celestiniu sent in like sort unto Nestorius: after that Theodotus
bishop of Ancyra, and Acacius bishop of Melitina, had made relation of the
blasphemous sentences which Nestorius bolted out at Ephesus: and after that
many notable sayings to the justifying of the sincere faith were uttered in
that assembly of The sentence of the council of Ephesus pronounced against
Nestorius the heretic.
holy and learned fathers interlacing sometimes the unadvised and blasphemous
phrases of Nestorius, the holy council pronounced this sentence against
Nestorius in manner as follows: Omitting other heinous crimes of the reverend
Nestorius, in so much he was cited and would not appear, neither entertain
the most holy and religious bishops which we had sent unto him, we were driven
of necessity to sifte and examine his leude and wicked doctrine: And seeinge
we found him to have believed impiously and to have taught heretically,
partly by perusing of his books and epistles, and partly also by the
blasphemous sentences he uttered of late in this noble city, we were moved
both by the canons of the Church and the grave censure of the most holy father
and our College Celestinus bishop of Rome (yet not without sheding of many
tears) to pronounce against him this severe and sharp sentence. Wherefore
our Lord Jesus Christ in derogation of whose majesty Nestorius sticked not to
pronounce such horrible blasphemy has decreed and ordained by this sacred
assembly that he should both be deposed of his byshoppricke and banished the
company of clergy men.

CAP. V.
How John bishop of Antioch came fifteen days after and deposed Cyrill
bishop of Alexandria of his byshopricke together with Memnon bishop of Ephesus:
whom of the contrary side the council absolved removing John with his
company and in the end how that Cyrill and John by the means of the Emperor
Theodosius letters became friends and ratified the deprivation of Nestorius.

When they had pronounced the aforesaid most just sentence, John bishop of
Antioch five days after the deprivation of Nestorius came to Ephesus together
with the priests and Variance between Cyrill b. of Alexandria, and John b. of
Antioch.
bishops of his diocese, called together his clergy and deposed both Cyrill
and Memnon. Afterward when Cyrill and Memnon had exhibited supplications unto
the council assembled with them (though Socrates peradventure unacquainted
with the circumstance report it otherwise) John was called of them to render an
account why he deposed the bishops, and being cited thrice came not at all.
Then Cyrill and Memnon were absolved, and John with his clergy excommunicated
and deprived of al priestly authority. but when Theodosius (who at the first
misliked with the deposing of Nestorius, yet afterward understanding fully of
his blasphemous opinion consented thereunto) had sent his gracious and godly
letters unto Cyrill of Alexandria, and to John of Antioch, they became friends
and ratified the sentence pronounced against Nestorius.

CAP. VI.
The coming of Paulus bishop of Emisa into Alexandria and the commendation
which Cyrill gave unto the epistle of John.

ABout the same time when Paulus bishop of Emisa came to Alexandria, and
pronounced in the Church the sermon which at this day is extant in the world
and bears his name, Cyrill bishop of Alexandria, extolled the epistle which
John had sent unto him and wrote The epistle of Cyrill b. of Alexandria unto
John. b. of Antioch.
back again as follows. Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad:
the midwal of rankor is battered down: the boylinge choler which bereaved the
minds of quietness is purged from among us, and all the occasion of discord and
discention is banished away: for our savior Jesus Christ granted peace unto
the Churches under heaven, and the most virtuous and holy emperors have
persuaded yea and compelled us thereunto: who by imitating with great zeal the
godly steps of their auncesters do firmly retain in their minds the true
and sincere faith, providing with singular care for the profit and furtherance
of the holy Church, so that thereby they purchase unto them selves an
immortal fame, and set forth the glory of their imperial scepter, whom the
Lord of hosts does so liberally reward and so bountifully recompense with
divine graces and benefits, that they are wont not only to foil the enemies
but all ways to win of them the renowned garland of victory. Neither is it
possible that God should lie, which says: As truly as I live, I do glorify
them which glorify me* but when the Lord our brother, and most godly fellow
bishop Paulus came to Alexandria, I was vvonderfull glad, for I could not
otherwise choose: because that he being a notable man became a mean, labored
in preaching beyond the reach of his strength, to the end he might overcome the
envy of Satan, couple together in love the loose and severed members of the
Church, and reduce our Church in like sort with yours unto peace and unity.
Immediately after he wrote as follows: Now I am fully persuaded that the
quarrel which rose in the Church was fond, and began upon light occasion, in
so much my most virtuous Lord Paulus the bishop brought letters unto me,
comprising a sound and sincere protestation of the faith, the which he
auoutched to have been written of your holiness and of the most godly bishops
which are of your province. The form and phrases of Cyrills epistle were as
is aforesaid, but toutching the clause which signified the mother of God,
there was written as follows. When we had perused the godly sentences and
clauses within contained, and perceived plainly that you were of one mind and
opinion with us (for there is but one Lord, one faith, one baptism) we
rendered unto God divine praises who is the conseruer of the whole world: and
presently we conceive exceeding joy, seeing that as well your Churches as ours
being driven thereunto partly by the force and power of the holy scriptures,
and partly also by tradition delivered unto us of our most holy fathers do
embrace one faith and opinion. Who so ever will diligently sift out the true
histories of those times will easily attain unto the knowledge of the
aforesaid.

CAP. VII.
Of many things which Nestorius reported in writing of him self: and how in
the end his tongue which uttered blasphemy was eaten up of worms in the
Isle Oasis, where he departed this life.

How Nestorius was exiled, what afterward became of him, the manner of his
end and the punishments he endured for his blasphemous opinion, are not laid
down in writing of such as delivered his life unto the world: all which in
process and continuance of time would quite have been forgotten and not once
remembered had not I by mere chance lighted on a certain Pamphlet written by
Nestorius him self, where the aforesaid are rehearsed at large. Wherefore
Nestorius the father of blasphemy builded not upon the sure and settled
fundation, but upon the sand, which according unto the parable of our savior
is subject to speedy ruin and overthrow: besides Math. 7.
sundry other his shifts whereby he labored to defend his blasphemous
sentences, he wrote unto such as charged him with ye raising of rash and
unadvised novelties, with his fond request, for the summoning of ye counsel at
Ephesus, that he was driven of necessity to do as he did, seeing the church
Nestorius the heretic excuses his blasphemous opinion in these words.
was divided and yt the one side affirmed Mary was to be called the mother of
man, ye other the mother of God. I (said he) of my part do speak unfeignedly to
thend I might not err in either side, by affirming either that he was not
mortal and subject to death, or of the other side by saying he was not
immortal, have devised that Mary should be called the mother of christ.
furthermore in ye aforesaid pamphlet of his, first of all he declares how
Theodosius ratified not his deprivation because of ye entire love and affection
he bare toward him: again after ye certain bishops of either side were sent
in Embassy from Ephesus unto Theodosius ye emperor (for so ye emperor had
willed) yt he had license given him to return unto his monastery being before
ye gates of Antioch which now is called Theopolis, ye name whereof Nestorius
has not laid down, yet as I learn it was called Euprepius monastery, and
sure I am it stood before ye gates of Antioch not two furlongs of. Nestorius
reports yt he made there his abode ye term of four years, yt he was highly
reuere^ced, yt he received many prese^ts and afterward yt by the commandment
of Theodosius he was banished thence into Oasis. but ye chiefest thing of all
he quite ouerskipped. neither forsook he his blasphemy for all he lived there
so yt John bishop of Antioch gave of him this sentence in ye open face of the
world: to wit, that Nestorius was to be banished for ever. moreover Nestorius
wrote subtely an other pamphlet unto a certain Egyptian where at large by
occasion of his banishment into Oasis he discourses of the aforesaid matters.
but ye plagues and punishments which lighted upon him for ye blasphemy he had
conceived (seeing there is nothing so secret but ye majesty of god sees it) we
may easily gather out of ye letters which he wrote unto ye governor of
Thebais, for there we may see though he escaped ye hand of man yet ye vengeance
of God ouertoke him, led him like a bondslaue and cast him into a lamentable
plight* when as he deserved far greater punishment being set at liberty of the
people Blemmyes in Libya and Theodosius having ordained by his edicts he should
return, as he wa^dred from on place into an other about ye furthest parts of
Thebais, broising and beating him self to ye ground, he enjoyed such an God
from above plagued the heretic Nestorius.
end as was coresponde^t to the life yt went before, and showed him self at his
end a second Arius, whereby it is evident and known for certain unto ye whole
world what recompense is set forth for such as bolt out horrible blasphemies to
ye derogatio^ of ye divinity of Christ. for both Arius and Nestorius blasphemed
him alike, ye one affirming he was a creature, the other taking him for man.
whereas Nestorius co^plaineth yt the acts of ye Ephesine council were
established not as right and reason required but after ye subtle and injurious
fetches of Cyrill who went about to work him mischief, I would gladly learn of
him wherefore it came to pass seeing Theodosius loved him so entirely (as he
said) yt he was constrained to go from one country to an other, without any
compassion enjoined to endure such grievous banishment and happened upon so
unfortunate an end? Or what other thing was it the^ ye divine censure laid down
by Cyrill together with the priests of his asse^bly, seeing both of the^ now are
departed this lif, (and as it pleased an heathen philosopher to say: he is ever
honored of al men with heart and good will where there is no just cause to ye
contrary) Nestorius is adjudged ye author of blasphemy, and the sworn enemy of
god: but Cyrill is highly commended for one yt preached the word of god
faithfully and for an earnest maintainer of ye true and sincere doctrine. but
lest we be charged with forgery and faining of crimes let us hear Nestorius
him self who can instruct us further herein. Go to Nestorius let me hear
Nestorius the heretic in his first epistle unto the governor of Thebais.
thee repeat some part of ye epistle which thou wrotest of late unto ye
governor of Thebais touching ye sacred canons of ye Ephesine counsel. I was
constrained (says he ( by the emperors edict to depart into Oasis otherwise
called Ibis. again after a few lines he says: when the aforesaid Oasis was
taken of the Barbarians and al destroyed with fire, sword, and slaughter, of a
sudden, the Barbarians pitied my case, why and wherefore I know not, and set
me at liberty, charging me with dreadful threats that with all speed I should
get me out of that country. for they said the people Mazici after my departure
were like imediatly to take the city. I came therefore into Thebais together
with certain captives who^ the Barbaria^s brought in my company, what their
meaning was I could not learn* last of al such as came in my company, got the^
to their own home, and I with speed went me to Panopolis. I feared greatly
lest any quarelled with me or picked occasion to molest me, for that I was a
captive, or charged me that I was a fugitive or otherwise howsoever (malicious
mouths are never to seek for sclau^ders) to thend through fraud and deceit
they might bring me into trouble and vexation wherefore I humbly request your
honor that as the laws have provided, you have care over my captivity and that
you suffer no prisoner and banished man to fall into the hands of wicked
varlets: lest the posterity in time to come will cry vengeance and sound out
this lamentable saying: better it is to be led captive of Barbaria^s the^ to
fly for succor unto the empire of Rome. Again with solemn protestations he
requested as follows: my suit is that by your permission it may be lawful for
me hear to make mine abode where I came from Oasis, when the Barbarians set me
at liberty that now at length I may enjoy what God has appointed for me. In
the second epistle which Nestorius wrote unto y^ aforesaid governor there was
written as follows. These letters Nestorius the heretic epist. 2. unto the
governor of Thebais.
which I write unto your noble mind, if ye accept of them as a token of my
love and hearty good will toward you, or as an admonition of a father sent unto
his son, I beseech you wey the co^tents thereof, matter there is great store
comprised in as few words as possibly I could. Oasis otherwise called Ibis was
lately ouerru^ne and destroyed by a great multitude of Nomades. and a little
after. which things being thus brought to pass your honor gave commandment,
I wotnot what moved you thereunto, that certain Barbarian soldiers should bring
me from Panopolis to Elephantina an Isle situated in the furthest part of
Thebais, and thither was I violently haled of them after a lamentable sort* but
as I was overcome with the long journey, and now altogether weried, again I
heard from you by word of mouth that I should return to Panopolis. wherefore
being feeble and faint by reason of the great vexations which befell unto me in
that vverisome and tedious voyage, my body being waste with sickness and
weakened with age and gray hear, the flesh of my hands being shronke and the
ribs broken in my sides I came the second time to Panopolis and there partly
with misfortune and partly with the pains of the bruised vvou^ds I was ready
to yield up the ghost. After all this your lordship gave forth a commandment in
vvriting, by virtue whereof I was feign to remove from Panopolis unto a
certain country that bordered thereupon* but vvhilest that now at length I
hoped the edicts published against me would have an end and vvaited the
pleasure of the most virtuous and puisant emperors touching my exile and
misery, unlooked for there ensued (I speak unfeignedly) a cruel commandment
that now I should be banished the fourth time. Again after a few lines. Be
content I beseech you with these circumstances: let it suffice for one body to
have endured such change of banishment: cease now I humbly request your honor
from iniurying me any longer, refer the sentence which is to be given of me
unto the most puisant emperors, let me have justice, it appertains unto the^
to deal with me according unto their pleasure, take these mine aduises as
proceeding from a fatherly affection unto you as my loving son. If you
presently take the matter in dugin as you have heretofore, go on a gods name,
if reason can not bridle your rage. Thus doubted not Nestorius with letters as
with fist and foot to kick Nestorius the ^rayling heretic had his tongue
eaten ^p (...) worms and so dyed.
as well against y^ emperors as their magistrates, and to revile them all to
naught: neither could he be brought to modest behavior for all his woe and
misery. his end and departure out of this life, I learned of a certain writer
to have been as follows, to wit: his tongue to have been eaten up of worms,
and so by the just judgment of God to have passed from these bodily to
ghostly, from these temporal to eternal punishments.

CAP. VIII.
How Maximianus succeeded Nestorius in the seae of Constantinople, after him
Proclus, and after Proclus, Flauianus.

WHen wicked Nestorius had departed this life, Maximianus succeeded him in the
byshoprick Nestorius, Maximianus. Proclus. Flauianus.
of the famous city of Constantinople, in whose days the Church of God
enjoyed peace and tranquillity. After his deceasse Proclus governed the seae,
who when he had run the race of his mortal life, left the rowme unto
Flanianus.

CAP. IX.
Of Eutyches the unfortunate heretic how he was deposed of Flauianus bishop
of Constantinople and of the council which assembled there and deposed him.

IN the days of Flauianus the poisoned heresy of Eutyches sprang up which
caused a provincial prouincial ^^uncell hol (...) at Constantinople.
council to be summoned at Constantinople where Eusebius bishop of Dorylaeum
being an eloquent Rhetorician called for the records, and first of all
convinced the blasphemy of Nestorius. When Eutyches was sent for and come, he
was found in reasoninge to maintain the aforesaid Eutyches the heretic and
his opinion condemned.
error. for I confess (says he) that our Lord consisted of two natures
before the divinity was coopled with the humanity, but after the vnitinge of
them I affirm that he had but one nature. he said moreover that the body of
the Lord was not of the same substance with ours. Wherefore he was vnministred,
yet at his humble suit unto Theodosus (he reported that Flauianus had forged
records against him) the first council of Constantinople was called together
of the borderinge byshopps to sit upon that matter, where not only the
council, but also diverse other byshopps sifted out the doings of Flauianus.
there the records being found true were confirmed, and a second council
summoned to meet at Ephesus.

CAP. X.
How by the means of Dioscorus bishop of Alexandria and Chrysaphius, it came
to pass that a wicked council was called together at Ephesus, where Eutyches
the heretic was restored to his former degree.

DIoscorus who succeeded Cyrill in the byshopricke of Alexandria, was appointed
moderator An heretical council held at Ephesus, ergo a council can and does
err.
of this council, Chrysaphius governor of the palace, had craftily brought
this about to the end the hatred owed unto Flauianus might be set on fire:
thither also came Iuuenalis bishop of Jerusalem, who some time governed the
seae of Ephesus together with many priests of his train. Domnus who succeeded
John in the Church of Antioch met them, Julius also the substitute of Leo
bishop of old Rome. besides these Flauianus was present together with his
province. Theodosius commanded Elpidius as follows: such as in times past
gave sentence of Eutyches the most virtuous Abbot, good leave have they to be
present at the council, but let them be quiet, and their voices suspended: my
will is that they wait for the general and common sentence of the most holy
fathers, seeing that such things as were before time decided by them are now
called into controversy. to be short, Dioscorus together with such bishops as
were of his opinion in this council restored Eutyches into his former dignity
as it appears more at large in the acts of the said council. As for
Flauianus and Eusebius bishop of Dorylaeum, they were deposed of their
byshopricks: the same council excommunitated also, and deprived Ibas bishop of
Edessa, Daniel bishop of Carra, Irenaeus bishop of Tyrus and Aquilinus bishop
of Biblus. They laid down moreover certain decrees against Sophronius bishop
of Constantinople: they removed Theodoritus bishop of Cyrestes and Domnus
bishop of Antioch, of whom what became afterward I do not learn, and thus
was the second council of Ephesus broken up.

CAP. XI.
The Apology of Euagrius touching the variety of opinions among the
Christians, and of the ridiculous vanity of the heathen godds.

I Would have none of all the ethniks which dote over their idolatricall service
to deride us christians because the latter bishops have abrogated the sentence
of their predecessors and seem always to add some thing unto the form of our
faith. for we of our part though we sifte out with great care the long
sufferance of God which may neither in word be expressed, neither in deed be
found out: yet are we so affectionated though we lean either to this side or
to y^ side, yt we always honor it and extol it above al other things. Neither
was there any one of all the heretics among the christians that of set purpose
at any time would utter blasphemy and fall of his own accord to revile the
majesty of God, but rather persuaded him self in auoutching this or that
opinion, that therein he was of a sounder doctrine then the fathers that went
before him. As touching the ground and principles of Christian religion which
always ought vnuiolably be retained we are all of one opinion. for the godhead
which we adore is the trinity and the persons whom we so highly praise are in
unity: the word of God also was begotten before y^ fundations of the world were
laid, and we believe that in these latter days he took flesh because of the
favor and compassion he had on the work of his own hand. If in case that any
nouelty be found out as touching other matters they come to pass freely of
man's own accord seeing it pleases God so to dispose of the^ and to grant
them liberty to think as it pleases them best to the end the holy,
Catholic, and Apostolic Church may reform what is found amiss, determine
of both sides, guyd unto the true godliness, and direct her self according unto
the plain character of sound and sincere doctrine. And therefore it was said of
the Apostle: It must needs be that heresies do reign among you, that they
which are perfect among you may be known. Herein verily we have to wonder
at the secret wisdom of God 1. Corin. II 2. Corin. 12
which says thus unto S. Paul: My strength is made perfect in weakness.
For look what the things be which divide the members of the Church of God,
even out of the same, sound doctrine is culled out, void of al reprehension,
polished more curiously, and laid up more safely: the Catholic church
increases thereby more and more every day and is extolled in manner unto y^
skies. But the ethniks favorers and fosterers of error which employ no labor
and industerie for y^ sifting out of y^ truth in God, neither to understand
of his care and providence over mankind: these men I say do abolishe both
their old decrees and their newefounde constitutions, sometimes by inuentinge
new Gods one after the other, some other times by consecratinge for Gods their
vain immaginations, and the fond affections of their minds attributinge unto
them the names of Gods, and to be short by fatheringe upon the Gods the
practisinge of such things to the end their intemperate desires may escape
unpunished. And therefore truly it comes to pass that he which is honored
of them for their chief God the father, to wit, of God and man, being The
wanton nesse of Iuppiter. This Phrygian boy was G^nymedes who Iuppiter made
his cup bearer, in the ba^quet which he made the gods. Nectar the drink of the
gods.
transformed into the shape of an Egle snatched away through wantonness a
Phrygian boy, delivered him a cup in reward of the filthy and heinous
offense, lycensed him for love sake to begin unto him, to the end either of
them jointly with the Nectar might suck shame and reproach. The same God
folded himself in other infinitt blemishes very odious to the seeminge of the
vulgar sort of people. for by taking upon him the form of every unreasonable
creature, he became both male and female, and though his womb bare no burden,
yet they say he caused by the act of venerie that such a thing seemed to
have been done by him contrary to nature. Bacchus the son of Iuppiter was an
Hermaphrodite.
They say that Bacchus was his son, and that he was also Androgynus both man
and woman, a great sclaunder to both sex, the ringleader of drunkenness,
quaffinge, surfettinge, vomitinge and all the mischief that ensues thereof.
Iuppiter thrust Saturnus his father out of heaven.
They report of this Aegiochus and thunderinge Jove an other heinous act, that
he murdered his father, which crime ought severely to be punished of all the
nations under heaven. Saturnus the son of Caellus (as the Poe^ts do feign)
fearinge lest his father should get more children to inherit, cut of his
fathers pryuie members and cast them into the Sea, thereof rose a froth and of
the froth Venus was borne.
For Saturn which begat him to his own destruction is said, by him to have
been thrust out of his kingdom. What shall I speak of the whoredom and
leacherie that reigns among the Gods where they appoint Venus Cypria
begotten in the shell of a fish to be the chief author thereof, which
detesteth chastity as an heinous and horrible offense, delights in all
leacherous and beastly acts, and will be pacified with such sacrifices. with
whom when Mars had committed adultery, and Vulcan her husband taking him in
his snares, Mars and Venus were brought forth doing the deed to pastime and
recreate the gods. Phalli and Ithyphalli were the pryuie members of men
offered up in honor of the god Bacchus.
Who is it that will not contemn with laughter their Phalli, Ithyphalli,
Phallagogia, the misshapen and deformed Priapus the son of Venus gotten in
adultery by Iuppiter, and honored with beastly sacrifice.
Priapus, the god Pan was the son of Penelope the wise of ulysses. for when
as after the battle of Troie she looked still for her husband to return, many
were suitors unto her and because she delayed them from day to day they all
abused her and got upon her Pan. other do say that Mercury took the form
of an he goat, made Penelope in love with him and got the god Pan
Pan honored for his filthy member and the mysteries celebrated in In Eleusis
there were sacrifices done in the honor of the goddess Ceres so filthy that
they may not be written.
Eleusis, yet to be commended for this one thing that the sun beholds not
their shameful acts, for they are done in the night season. but leauinge
these foul sacrifices and sacrificers, let us return where we left and
painte forth unto the posterity that which remains of Theodosus reign.

CAP. XII.
How Theodosius the Emperor condemned the heresy of Nestorius.

THeodosius laid down a godly decree which is found in the Code of Justinian
the third law of the first title where he condemned Nestorius for ever, and
pronounced him to be held for accursed, being moved thereunto no doubt by the
instinct of the holy ghost, for all that Cod. de sum. rinit. et sid. ^ath.
tit. 1. l. 3. ^ncimus.
Nestorius him self bragged that the Emperor bare him entire and singular
good will. For thus he writes: We decree moreover, that whosoever do
embrace the wicked opinion of Nestorius and give ear unto his leude doctrine,
if they be bishops that they be banished the holy Churches: if lay persons that
they be accursed. There are other laws of his made in the behalf of our
religion to be seen extant which plainly set forth his seruent mind and
earnest zeal to the furtherance of the Christian faith.

CAP. XIII.
Of Symeon a religious man which lived in a pillour.

IN those days there was of great fame and renown one Symeon, a godly man
and much Symeon an anchor. Domnus b. of Antioch.
spoken of: he was the first that taught to dwell in a pillour, and made
therein his lodginge scarce two cubitts wide. At that time Domnus was bishop
of Antioch, who coming unto Symeon wondered at his mansion and trade of life,
desired of him very earnestly to understand the secrecy and mysteries
thereof. They went both in together, consecrated the immaculate body of
Christ, and became partakers of the lively communion. This Symeon being in the
flesh imitated in life the trade of the Angellicall powers, withdrewe him
self from worldly affairs, forced nature which of her self leans
downewardes and followed after lofty things: being placed as it were in the
midst between heaven and earth, he sought conference with God, he praised
him together with the Angels, he lifted the prayers of men up from the earth
unto heaven, and offered them to God, he brought the goodness of God from
heaven to earth, and made the world partaker thereof. his life is written by
one which saw him with his eyes, also by Theodoritus bishop of Cyres, who
among other things omitted this one history which I have found recorded
among the inhabitaunts of the holy desert, and learned of them for
certayntie, when this Symeon who lived on earth as an Angel and in the flesh
much like a citizen of the heavenly Jerusalem had begone this trade of life
both strange and such as the world was not before acquainted withal, the
religious men of the desert sent a messenger unto him for to demand of him
what he meant by that newefounde and unknown kind of life, and wherefore he
forsook the wonted trade, the steps and traces of the saints which went
before and devised to him self a foreign and unknown way: they exhort him
moreover by their messenger to come down from his lodging and to follow the
holy fathers which were his predecessors. They had moreover commanded their
Legate that if he saw him yield and come down, he The spirit of Symeon was
tried by obedience.
should license him to go on still in his own way (they persuaded them
selves that his obedience would declare whether God had guyded him to lead
such a life, and to take upon him in this world so weighty a combatt for to
chastise his carcass) but if he stubburnely resisted, if he were froward and
wilful, not yeldinge with all speed unto their counsel and advise he should
pull him down with a vengeance. When the messenger came to him, exhorted him
as the fathers had willed, and saw that immediately he began to rise,
yeldinge unto their exhortation, he permitted him to proceed on and continewe
as he began, saying unto him as follows: be of good cheer and behave thy
self manfully, thy mansion no doubt is ordained of God. These things though
other writers have omitted them, yet have I thought them worthy the penninge
unto the knowledge of the posterity. The grace of God being resiant in the
closset of his breast, was so fervent that he wrote freely unto the Emperor
Theodosius, who had made a law that the Jews inhabitinge Antioch should
enjoy again such synagogs as the Christians had taken from them, rebuking
him sharply (for he feared only God who was his emperor) that Theodosius for
to please the Christians called in his proclamations, deposed the magistrate
which put in his head the restoringe of the synagogs, entreated this holy man
and namely Erius the martyr to pray for him unto God, and to make him partaker
of his blessing. This Symeon leading so austere a life, continued his mortal
race six and fifty years. for he lived nine years in the monastery where he
was trained up in the divine precepts of virtuous life: in Mandria, (so was the
place called) seven and forty years: ten of these he spent in a very narrow
rowme: seven in straicter pillours, and thirty years in a pillour of forty
cubits. After his deceasse his holy corpse was brought to Antioch in the reign
of Leo the Emperor and Martyrius bishop of Antioch, unto that time Ardaburius
captain of the Eastern garrison remained in Mandria, together with his power,
keepinge the corpse of holy Symeon lest the borderinge cities should by force
carry it away. Wherefore the holy corpse of Symeon is brought to Antioch after
the workinge of many miracles by the way: the which Leo the Emperor
afterward requested of the people of Antioch, but the Antiochians of the
other side made humble suit unto the Emperor in such sort as follows: In so
much our city is not environed with wales (the Emperors furious It is not
a dead corpse but the living God that is protector of town and cuntrei^
rage had overwhelmed them to the ground) We have transported hither (O
Emperor) the holy corpse of Symeon that it may be both unto us and to our city
instead of a fortified wall Leo being thus entreated of the^ yielded unto their
request, and granted the^ their suit* many parts of his carcass were reserved
unto these our days, I my self saw his skul, at what time Gregory a man of
great renown bishop of y^ church, and Philippicus required that the relics
of the saints for the speedier expedition of his martial affairs in the East
should be sent unto him. And that which was greatly to be marueiled at, the
hear of his head was not worn away but remained whole as if he had been a
live, and conuersaunt among men. the skin of his foreheade being only
shronke into wrinkles and withered yet was not consumed: many also of his teeth
being not pulled out by the hands of the faithful declared unto the world,
the shape and stature of holy Symeon. moreover there was laid up the iron
chain which hong about his neck and with it the corpse so much spoken of, of
all men for enduringe such great hardness and misery was honored with divine
praises. All which circumstances both for mine own profitt and the commonditie
of the reader, I would rehearse at large were it not that Theodoritus (as I
said before) had sufficiently discoursed of them.

CAP. XIIII.
Of the star that was seen in the porche of Symeons pillour the which
Euagrius together with many others saw.

Now I am about to write a certain thing which I saw with mine own eyes. I
was wonderful desirous to see the Church of holy Symeon, it stands at the
furthest from Theopolis that is Antioch, three hundred furlongs, set upon the
top of a hill. the cuntreymen call that place Mandria borowinge the name as I
suppose of the severe discipline and austere trade of life exercised by Symeon
therein, the hill rises in height to a twenty furlongs. the buildinge of the
Church is after the manner of a cross notably set forth with porches of
fouresquare. The porches have pillours annexed unto them finely wrought of
freestone which lift up the roufe on high and that very artificially. The
entire that is to the mids of the temple is wide open very cunningly wrought
where the aforesaid pillour of forty cubits stands, in the which the earthly
and corporeal angel led an heavenly life. The porches have as it were
lattises on high the which they call windows, fallinge both toward the entry
and porches them selves. At the left hand of the pillour in one of the
lattises, I my self together with many country men assembled together, and
compassing the pillour, saw a star of a wonderful bigness running and
wandringe hither and thither throughout the chinkes and clefte lattises
twinkelinge in the eyes of the beholders: neither that once, twice or thrice,
but oftener, and the same oftentimes fading and vanishinge away, afterward
immediately appearinge again, the which is commonly scene on this saints
holiday. There are which report (and verily we have to believe the miracle
partly for their creditt which testify the same, and partly also for that
which we saw our selves) that they saw the very shape of his person, houering
here and there, in a long berde with a The greek word is T^ara the attire of
Persian women. lerom ad fab^ol calls it Gale^um a hatt. the word is also
taken for a M^^e or crown.
hatt on his head after his wonted manner. such men as travel that way may
easily go in and see all, and some times they ride about the pillour. There is
a porter which continually watches the porches of the Church that no woman
enter in (the cause I do not learn) but if any draw nigh they stand without
and behold the miracle. for one of the porches stands over against the
bright star.

CAP. XV.
Of Isidorus the pelusian and Synesius bishop of Cyrene.

Under the reign of the same Emperor there flourished one Isidorus, the fame
of whose sayings Isidorus.
and doings is spread far and nigh, and rife in every man's mouth, he so tamed
the flesh with continual toil and labor and so fedd the mind with mystical
and heavenly doctrine, that he led on earth the life of an Angel and commended
unto the world the lively and express form of the monastical and
contemplative trade of living. he wrote beside many other notable works of
his great labor and study, one unto Cyrill whereby we gather that he lived at
one time with the renowned Cyrill. Now that I have run over these things
aftermy sclender hability, Synesius.
let us not forget Synesius bishop of Cyrene, that the excellency of his
virtues may set forth the simplicity of our style. This Synesius was so
eloquent a man and so profounde a philosopher that he was had in great
admiration of such christians as judged of him without parcialitie,
respectinge neither the venom of malice, neither the vain flattery of
friendship. Wherefore they persuade him to be baptized and to take upon him the
priestly function though he admitted not the article of the resu^ection,
neither would be brought to believe the same, hopinge of him very charitably
that these things would follow after his other virtues, and that the grace of
God would suffer nothing to want in him that appertained unto his souls
health and salvation. which hope of theirs was not frustrate. for how
excellently he proved, both the learned epistles he wrote after the receiving
of priesthood, also the book which he dedicated unto Theodosius with other
notable monuments of his industry do declare.

CAP. XVI.
How Ignatius was translated by Theodosius from Rome and buried at Antioch.

THe bigger sort of bones which the beasts left vndeuoured unto holy Ignatius,
(after the blessed martyr as John the Rhetorician with others do record had
according unto his desire enjoyed the bowels of beasts instead of his
resting grave at Rome in the theater and stage striving of ravenous beasts)
were translated into the Churchyard of Antioch in the reign of Theodosius
which was a long time after his martyrdom. for it was almighty God no doubt
that inspired Theodosius with that good motion, highly for to reverence that
godly martyr, and to consecrate the temple whereof old deuells were honored,
called y^ temple of the goddess of fortune unto Ignatius the holy martyr. That
which of old was dedicated unto fortune is now become a sanctuary and a
famous temple to celebrate the memore of Ignatius, whose holy bones were carried
in a chariott with great solemnity and buried within the temple. for which
cause there is an holy day kept with great joy even at this day, the which
Gregory the bishop has set forth with greater royalty. These things came
there to pass in such sort as you hear, because God would have there the
memorial of his saints celebrated with honor and reverence. for the impious
and wicked tyrante Julian the Apostata being emperor and requiringe an
answer of the oracle of Apollo (who prophesied in Daphnis and spoke by virtue
of the fountain Castalia) which had not the power to open his mouth (holy
Babylas the martyr whose corpse was hard by interred, had tied his jaws
together) Julian I say against his will and as it were forced thereunto,
translated very honorably the corpse of Babylas and builded a goodly Church
which stands at this day without the the gates of Antioch: this he did to
the end the dettells afterward might accomplish their wonted treacheries even
as report goes they promised before unto Julian. but this came to pass
through the providence of God partly that the force and virtue of martyrs may
be seen of all men, and partly also that the holy bones of this blessed martyr
should be buried in hallowed ground and beautified with so gorgeous a building.

CAP. XVII.
Of Attilas king of Scythia how he destroyed both the Eastern and western
parts of the world: of the great earthquake and strange wonders that were
seen in the world.

IN those days there was a battle raised by Attilas king of Scythia, which at
this day is much Anno Dom. 451. some other say 455.
spoken of: but Priscus Rhetor declares at large with flowing style how he
invaded both east and west, how many and what great cities he won, and how
nobly he behaved him self unto the final end of his frail life. Furthermore
in the time of the aforesaid Theodosius reign there was a marvelous great
earthquake, the strangeness whereof exceeded all the wonderful earthquakes
that ever were before, which stretched it self in manner throughout the whole
world: so that many turretts within the palace were turned down to the
ground: the long wall of Cherronesus came to ruin: the earth opened and
swallowed up in her gulphes many villages: many woeful mischaunces befell unto
mankind both by sea and by land, many welspringes were dried up, again where
fountains were never seen before it flowed out: many trees were plucked up
by the roots: the valleis became high mountains: the sea threw out fishes
for dead: many Islands were drowned, the sea ouerrunning the banks and
ouerflowing the countries: many ships sulcating in the maine seas were seen on
ground, the sea falling back not yelding his wonted streams: many countries
throughont Bithynia, Hellespontus, and both Phrygia endured such calamities
that they were utterly undone. This misery endured toe toe long yet did it not
proceed with such vehement anoyance as it began, for it fell and slaked by a
little and a little until at length all was ended.

CAP. XVIII.
The buildinges of Antioch and the founders thereof.

ABout the same time Memnonius, Zoilus and Calixtus, great patrons of the true
piety and Christian profession were sent from Theodosius the Emperor to
govern the noble city of Antioch. of which number Memnonius builded from the
ground with gorgeous and goodly Memnonius.
workmanship, the place which we call Psephium, leaving in the midst an hal
open in height to the tempered aer under heaven. Zoilus erected the princely
porche so called unto this day, and curiously Zoilus.
wrought which is toward the South side of the palace called Ruffine.
moreover Calixtus Calixtus.
founded a goodly monument which both of old and of late vayes is called
Calixtus porche, before the shire hall and the judgment seats over against the
market and the princely house where the captains of the garrisons are wont to
lie. After all these Anatolius president of the Emperors Anatolius.
power in the east being sent thither buylte the tower which bears his
name, and set it out with sundry kinds of buylding. Though these things seem
from the purpose yet in mine opinion the knowledge of them is profitable for
the studious reader.

CAP. XIX.
Of sundry battles that were fought both in Italy and in Persia in the time
of Theodosius the Emperor.

WHile Theodosius was Emperor there was great sedition throughout Europe, yea
when Valentinianus governed the Roman dominions: all which Theodosius with
great power of horsemen and footmen by sea and by land suppressed. And so
quelled the hautines and furious race of the Persian blood, whose king was
Isdigerdes the father of Bararanes or (as Socrates writes) Bararanes him
self, for when they had sent Legates unto him to entreat for peace he
granted it, the which continewed unto the twelfe year of Anastasius reign.
the which things are also remembered of other writers, partly compendiously
gathered by Eustathius Syrus of Epiphania otherwise called Antioch who lays
down in like sort how Amida was taken. It Claudian the Poet. Cyrus the Poet
and pre sident.
is reported moreover that then Claudian and Cyrus the famous Poets did
florishe: and that Cyrus was made chief president (which our auncetors do
term the head officer of the hall) and then appointed general captain of
the Roman power in the west dominions when Carthage was won of the Vandalls
and Genzerichus captain of the Barbarian host.

CAP. XX.
Of Eudocia the Empress and her daughter Eudoxia, of her voyage to Jerusalem
and the picture where with the people of Antioch did honor her.

THeodosius through the procurement of Pulcheria the Empress being his sister,
married Eudocia, borne in Athens and of goodly beawtie, after she had been
baptized in the Christian fatth, on whom he got a daughter by name Eudoxia.
when she came to ripeness of years and mariageable Valentinianus the Emperor
took her to wife: brought her from Constantinoplc to old Rome. Eudoxia went
afterward to the holy city of Christ who is God, where, in the Socrat. lib.
7. cap. 43.
Oration she made unto the people about the latter end she rehearsed this
verse,

My birth I boast of you began, your blood in me does brag.

Where she signified that the inhabitants of that city came from Greece. but
if any man be destrous to know more erquisitly the truth of these things let
him repair unto Strabo the Geographer, Plegon, Diodorus Siculus, Arrianus,
Pisander the Poet, Vlpianus, Libanius and lulian the renowned Rhetoricians
where they are discoursed of at large. Afterward when she came to Antioch the
people of that city erected her picture of brass very artificially handled in
honor of her which is as yet to be seen. It was through her procurement that
Theodosius became a benefactor of Antioch, that he enlarged their city, and
lengthened their wall unto the gate which brings to Daphnis in the suburbs
as it is of every man to be seen. for the fundations of the old walls are
at this day to be seen whereupon the new buyldinge was laid and lead us as
it were by the hand unto the gate. There be some which write that the walls
were enlarged by the elder Theodosius, and that he gave two hundred pound to
repair the bath of Valens which was burned of the one side.

CAP. XXI.
How Eudocia did many worthy acts at Jerusalem and of the diverse trade in
life, and diet of the religious men in Palaestina.

EVdocia went twice from Constantinople to Jerusalem, and though I purpose to
leave for such as have written her life (who in mine opinion have not reported
the truth) wherefore, upon what occasion, and to what end she did it: yet it
is known well enough that during her abode in that holy city of Christ she
wrought many worthy acts to the settinge forth of the glory of God. for she
founded religious houses and made the street commonly called the great causey,
in which religious houses though the manner of living be diverse, yet their
trade and discipline tendes to one end, and the same very godly. for some of
them live in a society, enioyinge not one jot of the things which commonly
allure and weye down the minds of mortal men after worldly affairs, as much
to say, they have no gold, but what have I said, gold? nay they have not a
ragge of their own to cover the bare, neither food to satisfy nature. for
the cloak or coat It behooved then that these monks should be of one sise.
which the one now wears, an other in a while after putts on the same, so
that the garments of all seemed to be one man's, and ones clothing in common to
all. moreover they all had but one table, not furnished with daynties or other
kind of food what soever, but only with herbs, roots, and pulse, and so
much only as sufficed nature, and preserved life. furthermore in prayers
only which they poured jointly unto God they spent day and night: they so
wasted their bodies and mortified them selves that they seemed as dead men
lyinge unburied upon the face of the earth. some of them do more then their
decrees and statutes enjoin them, for they fast the space of two days, yea
and three days also. there are of them which abstain five days and over, and
scarce then do they take as much food as suffices nature. Other some
follow an other trade and order of living far otherwise then the former men,
for they shut up them selves severally in little cabanes which are of such
height and breadth that they can not stand bolt upright, neither bow Hebr. 11.
themselves downewardes at their pleasure. Of which number some as the Apostle
says live all the days of their lives in caves and dens together with
brute beasts and pray unto God in certain secret and unknown buries of the
earth. but some of them hane found out an other kind of life which exceeds
all patient sufferance. for men and women hyde them selves in the dry desert
which scaldeth with scorchinge heat coueringe only such members as of
necessity are constrained to serve nature, the other parts of the body they
yield all bare both unto the parchinge The monks of Pala^stina became as
beasts.
heat of summer, and pinching cold of winter contemning either of them alike.
These men moreover layinge aside such nourishement as other men used, fedd upon
green grass and were called foragers or pasturers and live only upon that,
so that in process of time they became like beasts and differed from men both
in bodily shape and behavior of mind. If peradventure they see men immediately
they run away, and if any pursue after them, either their feet with
swiftness caries them away, or they poppe them selves into such hollow
places of the earth where others can not come unto them. An other thing yet I
will rehearse which for all it seems to pass all the rest I had almost
forgotten. Although there be not many in number of this sort, yet some there
are who being void through virtuous disposition and free from all
perturbations of the mind, come abroad into men's companies, mingle them selves
with the thronging multitudes and feign they are mad and so they tread vain
glory under foot, which the soul (according unto the saying of wise Plato)
uses to shake of as the last cover of shame and reproach. They take so little
delight in feeding of them selves and therein use such Austere discipline that
if necessity constrain them to host at a tippling house or in the stews they
neither reject the place, neither cover their faces, neither thereat blushe at
all. moreover they bayne them selves very often, and most commonly they are
conversant with women and bath together and so they seem void of all carnal
affections as if they had brought nature captive unto them: in so much they can
not be led neither with the wanton looks, neither with the toying and
daliance, neither with the amorous clipping and embracing of a woman to the
natural motion of venerie. but with men they are as men and with women they
live like women, and for all they refuse not the company of both sex, yet know
they only the use of one. To be short in this most holy and divine kind of
life, virtue has prescribed laws for nature, and made peculiar decrees for
her self, to wit: that not one of them all have their full of necessaries,
for by their law they must hungre and thirst, and thereafter to attire them
selves as necessity constrains. their trade is so measured with such
singular commendation, and their diet so moderate that if they fall into the
contrary part and far different from the other, they feel in them selves no
change at all. contrarieties are so tempered in them, the grace of God makes
such a commixtion of repugnancie, and again dissolueth the same, that life and
death, two things in nature and effect far set one against the other, seem
to join hands together, and dwell in them: and look wherein perturbations do
raigue in others, in them they are plucked up by the roots and lie for dead:
and where continual prayer is to be made, there they seem of ripe years,
strong bodies, and strength invincible. These men live both ways, partly as it
were by shaking of the flesh they seem to live for ever, partly again by
companying with men, and applying medicines unto their bodies, they call to God
for mercy, and run over such devout service as may fitly agree with y^
former life. yet want they no necessaries, neither are they bound to one place,
for almay hear alike, and company alike, they use often, nay they kneel
continually, again y^ wearisome standing they make, refreshes age, and the
voluntary weakness they brought them selves unto. They are champions without
flesh on their backs, they are wrastlers, yet have they no blood in their
faces, who though in steed of daynties and set dinners they use solemn
fasting, yet had they lever take nothing, if in so doing they could possibly
live, then cromme them selves with delicacies. And again if it so fall out,
that a stranger come among them though it be very early in the morning, they
entertain him very courteously offering him both meat and drink, so that they
devise an other kind of fasting, that is to eat by compulsion, and in so
doing men have them in great admiration, who though they want many things to
the sustentation of nature, yet are they contented with little, being enemies to
their own will, and to nature. they resemble in their doings the will and
pleasure of their elders, in bridlinge the baytes of fleshly lust, the soul
has the mastery, commits such things as are pleasinge and acceptable unto
God with great discretion and diligence, but in the mean while, happy are
they, and happier when they depart hence, for they bend thither all their
might and hasten to enjoy their wished desires.

CAP. XXII.
What things Eudocia the Empress repaired in Palaestina, and the founding of
S. Stephans Church.

THe wife of Theodosius had conference with many of those kinds of men we
spoke of before, and founded (as I have likewise made mention) many such
religious houses: she repaired the walls of Jerusalem and made them far more
beautiful then they were before. she founded also a goodly Church in
remembrance of Stephan the first Deacon and Martyr, not a Theodosius junior
dyed Anno Dom. 450.
furlonge of from the City of Jerusalem, where she was buried after her
departure unto immortal bliss. Theodosius also as some think before the
deceasse of Eudocia departed to rest, when he had reigned here on earth thirty
eight years, in his rowme succeeded Martianus, a man renowned in all things.
whose famous acts while he governed in the East we will lay down, by the
help of God in the second book followinge.

The end of the first book of Euagrius.
THE SECOND BOOK OF THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF EVAGRIVS SCHOLASTICVS.
CAP. I.
Of Martianus the Emperor, and the signs which foreshewed his reign.

IN the first book goinge before we have discoursed the Acts done in the
reign of Theodosius the Emperor of famous memory: now it remains we take
pen in hand and paint forth unto the posterity, the virtues of the renowned
Martianus the noble and puysant Emperor of Rome, his country, his lineage, and
how he attained unto the Roman empire. In observing this method we shall be
able the sooner to contriue every his famous acts in their fit and convenient
place. Patriscus Rhetor, with many others has written at large of the life of
Martianus. By birth he was of Thracia, the son of a valiant captain: who
being wedded to his fathers trade of life, got him straight to Philippopolis
and there was entertained in the number of such as exercised them selves in the
feats of arms* It fell out in his voyage as he took his iourneye
thitherwardes that he saw on the way a dead corpse whom death had newely
bereaved of his life. he stood still and was amazed thereat (for as he was
virtuously inclined every way, so was he prone to compassion) he continewed
there so long until he had finished all things what so ever belonged unto the
hearse and funeral. but when such as dwelled in compass, had seen his
doings they made relation thereof unto the magistrates of Philippopolis. They
laid hands upon Martianus, and charged him with y^ inurther. but when signs
and contectures prevailed more with the magistrates then the truth or the
protestation of Martianus, denyinge that ever he had murdered the man: and
when Martianus was now ready to endure the penalty of an homicide, upon a
sudden unlooked for (God no doubt of his goodness prouidinge for him the best)
the author of that heinous act was found, confessed the fact, was imediately
executed and Martianus proved innocent. being thus wonderfully delivered out
of trouble he got him unto a certain garrison not far of, and requested they
would entertain him among them, and register his name in their catalogue.
They had the man in admiration, and prognosticated of him by certain gesses that
he would prove a worthy man: recea^ed him with willing minds, matriculated
his* name in their book: neither placed they him in the lowest rowme as a late
commer after their law and custom, but preferred him to an honorable office,
the which one whose name was Augustus, enjoyed before him, but then was lately
deceassed, and entitled him Martianus Augustus, so that together with his
preferment he received the Imperial title (for the emperors are called
Augusti) before be was proclaimed Emperor. Neither truly could the name rest
in him without the dignity, neither again did the Imperial title require any
other name to express the worthiness thereof, so that the self same name was
both proper and appellatiue, and being once sounded it gave forth the
signification, both of the dignity and the borrowed name, An other thing
moreover happened which foreshewed unto Martianus the imperial scepter. When
together with Aspar he warred against y^ Vandalls, Aspar being overcome of
the^, Martianus with many others was taken and brought with other captives into a
plain green where Genzerichus would needs see the^ alive. being brought
together Ge^zerichus as he sat in an upper rowme took great delight in
beholding the number of captives. The captives as long as it pleased every one
continued in the green, for Ge^zerichus had commanded their keepers to knock
of their shackles. wherefore as they all spent the time diversely, Martianus
laid him down on the ground and took a nap on a sunny bank, which burned more
vehemently then y^ season and time of y^ year did require. As he slept an Egle
flew over him, set her self between him and y^ sun, spread abroad her wings,
shadowed him as it had been a cloud, and in so doing eased him greatly, so y^
Genzerichus wondering at y^ circumstance coniectured a right of the things that
were to befall him, he called Martianus unto him, restored him his liberty and
bound him with an oath, if ever he came to be emperor yt he would join in
league with the Vandalls, and never take armor against them, the which (as
Procopius writes) Martianus performed in deed* but omitting such things as
may seem impertine^t, let us return unto the history. This Martianus as he
excelled in piety toward God, so he passed in justice toward his subjects.
he deemed that to be richesse, not which consisted of treasure and raising of
tribute: but only that which supplied the want of the needy, and yielded a
safe and a secure life unto such as enjoyed great possessions. he was a terror
unto his people, not in punishing offe^dors, but in threatening, least at any
time they should offend: and therefore the empire was unto him no inheritance
but the hire of virtue, the which he obtained with the general consent of all,
both Senators, subjects, and all sorts of people, when as Pulcheria the
Empress persuaded them to do no less, whom he entertained in his palace as
an Empress, yet knew her not as man knows his wife, for she continewed a
virgin unto her last hour. These things were done before that Valentinianus
the Roman Emperor ratified the election of Martianus, who afterward
understanding of his virtuous disposition condescended thereunto. Martianus
labored with all might possible that all men jointly should laud God, and the
lips whose languages impiety had confounded, should devoutly now at length
close together, and sound out with harmony and concent, the praise of the
living God.

CAP. II.
Of the council of Chalcedon and the occasion why it was summoned.

WHen Martianus was of the disposition mentioned before, there came unto him
Legates from Leo bishop of old Rome, signifyinge y^ Dioscorus had made light of
the decree which Leo had laid down in the council of Ephesus agreeable with the
true and rightfayth: there came others also reporting what injuries and
contumelies Dioscorus had done unto the^, requesting y^ a council might be
called together for the hearing of their causes. The which suit as chief of
all others, Eusebuis bishop of Dorilaeum made unto the emperor and followed
hard, opening unto him how that both he and Flauianus were deposed of their
byshoprickes through the fraud and wyles of Chrysaphius one sometime of
Theodosius guard: y^ Flauianus (at what time Chrysaphius sent unto him
requiring gold for his admission into the byshopricke) sent unto him the holy
vessel of the Church for to make him thoroughly ashamed of his demand: and
that Chrisaphius wallowed alike in the heretical puddle and blasphemous
impiety of Eutyches. he certified him moreover that Flauianus was piteously
put to death by the procurement of Dioscorus, thrust by him violently out of
the Church, and disdainfully pounced with his feet. The council of Chalcedon
was summoned for the hearing of the aforesaid accusations. Legates and posts
were sent into every province, the holy clergy were called together by
letters, containing grave and godly matter, first of all to meet at Nice, so
that Leo bishop of Rome wrote unto them by Pascasianus, Lucentius and others
whom he sent thither to supply his rowme in such sort as follows: Unto the
byshopps assembled at Nice, Leo sends greeting: afterward at Chalcedon a
city in Bithynia, where Nestorius was cited to appear, as Zachary Rhetor
does favorably report of him. But it is plain it could not be so, for
Nestorius was commanded under pain of an accurse not to show his face in the
council. The which thing also Eustathius bishop of Berytum writes plainly in
the letters which he sent to John the bishop and to another John the priest, of
the canons laid down by that council. his words are these. There came to this
council such as diligently searched out for the relics of Nestorius
Eustathius epist. ad Ioh.
and with open mouths they exclaimed upon the council: what reason and
conscience is there that holy men should be accursed? So that the Emperor was
greatly incensed against them and commanded his guard they should send them
packing with a vengeance. Wherefore I can not see how Nestorius after his
deceasse should be called to the council.

CAP. III.
The description of the Temple of the holy martyr Euphemia within the city of
Chalcedon and the miracles wrought therein.

THe bishops from every where met in the holy Temple of Euphemia the martyr,
which stands in Chalcedon a city of Bithynia. this Temple lies from
Bosphorus little more then two furlonges, situated in a very pleasant soil,
rising upward steep wise, so that such as frequent this Martyrs temple may
easily mount up by a little and a little without wery^^esse, and in they come
unawares, yea into the body of the Church. being there and looking downewardes,
as out of a kenninge tower they see all the fields underneath them as even
ground and plain valleys, flourishing with green grass, laden with corn
and covered with goodly woods of all sorts very delectable to behold:
moreover they see high hills and craggie rocks rising gayely by degrees up into
the skies: diverse sorts of seaes, some yeldinge a bluish and sky color by
reason of the clear wether playing as it were calmely and gently with the
shores while the adjoining regions are void of tempest, some other tossed with
blustering blastes of wind and raginge storms, hurling up pimple stones,
foming out filth and paultry weeds, casting shelfish upon the banks with
whyrling waves. Furthermore this temple stands right over against
Constantinople so that the beholdinge of so worthy and so noble a city
bringes unto it great majesty, this temple is of three fortes of goodly and
large buylding: the first lieng wide open with a long porch receiving the
tempered a^r of the sky set up with goodly pillours on every side. The second
in length and breadth like unto y^ former adornedlikewise with little pillours
differing only in height, and y^ lifted ridge. Of the North side of which
second building there is a rownd I Will and the great window unto the East, the
pillours within are cunningly wrought bowewise, of the same stuff and one
biggenes after the form of a circle. Underneath these there is a loft ouercast
with the like rouffe where it is lawefull for every one to pray unto the Martyr
and to be present at the holy mysteries. Within the I Will Eastwards there is a
vestry artificially builded where the relics of the holy martyr are chested
in a long coffer cunningly made of silver, the which some men for the length
thereof do call Long as if the proper name were so. The miracles wrought at
certain times by this blessed Martyr are known I am sure of every Christian.
For oftentimes either she appears unto the Bishops in their sleep which
orderlye succeed in the gouernemente of that Church, or shows her self unto
some other that are of great fame for their virtuous life and godliness charging
them to celebratea feast in that Church of daynty and delicate food. The which
thing being signified unto the Emperors, unto the chief Priest and wholl
city, all ran thither both Prince, Priest, and people to become partakers of
the mysteries. After all this in the sight of the wholl assembly, the Bishop of
Constantinople accompanied with his clergy got him into the vestry where the
corpse of this holy Martyr (above named) was interred. There is on the left
hand of this coffin and chested corpse What injury was this unto the dead
corpse? It is better for the faithful Christian to become partaker of the blood
of Christ which redeemed him from death and damnation.
as it were a little wickett very strongly made of little latises through the
which they use to let down a long iron with a sponge tied about the end, they
dipp and soke it round about in the dead corpse after wards pull up the sponge
all embrued with cogeled drops of blood. The people seeing this, worship God
immediately and magnify his holy name. There are so many drops of co^geled
blood drawn up that they suffice the religious Emperors, the wholl assembly
of priests gathered there together, and all the flocking multitude not only to
participate thereof them selves, but also to send unto the other faithful
throughout the world, that full feign would be partakers with them. But the
congeled drops continue still the same, neither does the holy blood change the
hew or color thereof at all. All which things are not to be seen at any
certain, special, or appointed time but thereafter as the Bishop of that
place is in life and as it agrees with his virtues. For they report when any
singular man of godly disposition is chosen Bishop of that Church, that then
most commonly this miracle is to be seen: but when a leude person is crept to
enjoy the rowme that these things very seldom come to pass. An other thing
yet I will rehearse which is stayed and hindered neither by time neither by
occasion, neither makes any difference between faithful and infidel but
shows it self alike unto all men. When any comes into the vestry where the
coprs of this holy martyr is chested he is so ravished with such fragrant
odours that all other perfumes in comparison of that seem worth nothing. For
it is like neither the sweet smelling flowers culled in the green meadows,
neither any other redole^t savor whatsoever neither such as is made of pleasant
oils: but it is a strange and passing all the rest breathing out of the
Martyrs dead body.

CAP. IIII.
Of the things handeled and decided by the council of Chalcedon, how after
they had deposed Dioscorus b. of Alexandria they restored Theodoritus and Ibas
to their Bishoprics.

IN the aforesaid place described of us at large the Council of Bishops
met together where Pascasianus and Lucentius Byshopps, and Boniface a Priest,
legates (as I said before) of Leo Bishop of old Rome: Anatolius Bishop of
Constantinople, Dioscorus bishop of Alexandria, Maximus bishop of Antioch,
and Iuuenalis bishop of Jerusalem, with the priests of their several
provinces were present. There sat with them the chief senators unto whom the
substitutes of Leo said that Dioscorus ought not to sit with them in the
council, that Leo their bishop had charged them no less, and if they would
not yield unto it, that they would leave the Church and bidd them farewell.
When the Senators demanded what crimes Dioscorus was to be charged withal,
their answer was, that he who contrary to all right and honesty playde the
part of a Judge, was to* abide the sentence of judgment him selse for the
censure he had pronounced of others. These things being spoken, and Dioscorus
also being appointed to stand in the midst, Eusebius bishop of Dorylaeum
requested that the supplication he had sent unto the Emperor might be openly
read in their hearing, and withal he added these words. I protest unto you
that Dioscorus has iniuried me not a little, he has also brought our religion
into great infamye, he procured the death of Flautanus the bishop, and
wrongfully deposed him together with me. cause I beseech you my supplication
to be read. When he had made an end of speakinge his supplication was read,
contayninge such a form as follows.

The humble supplication of Eusebius bishop of Dorylaeum exhibited unto the
most virtuous Emperors, requestinge he may be heard pleadinge both for him
self and in the behalf of the catholic faith.
IT behooves your majesty's (most noble and puisant emperors) to provide
carefully for the The supplication o^ Eusebius bishop of Dorylaeum exhibited
unto valentinianus and Martianus the emperors.
quietness of all your loving subjects, yet when all others sustain injuries
ever to uphold and assist the sacred senate of priesthood. and herein verily
the divine godheade which granted unto you the rule and domination of the
whole world is truly honored. wherefore seeing the christian faith, and we our
selves also have been oppressed and diuersty molested with extreme wrong by
Dioscorus the most reverend bishop of the most noble city of Alexandria, we are
come unto your wonted cleme^cy most humbly to crave justice at your hands. The
occasion of our complaint is as follows. In the council lately held at the
famous city of Ephesus (I would to God it had never been called together, then
had it not brought into the whole world such horrible mischief and hurliburly)
the aforesaid Dioscorus who trod right and reason under foot, who set the fear
of God far out of his sight, who maintained one absurd opinion with Eutyches
that vain and heretical varlett, who of a long while revealed not unto many
the venom of his cankred stomach, yet bewrayed him self in process of time
partly by occasion of the crimes we laid to Eutyches his charge, and partly
also by occasion of the sentence which Flauianus the bishop of worthy memory
pronounced against him: gathered together a great multitude of seditious
persons, raised with his money no small power, labored as much as lay in him
to overthrow the catholic religion and godly faith of the ancient fathers,
and to establishe the blasphemous opinion of Eutyches the monk whose opinion
was ever condemned of the holy fathers from the Apostles time unto this day.
wherefore seeing the heinous offenses he committed both impudently to the
derogation of the Christian faith and uncharitably against us, be of no small
importance, we are most humbly to crave upon our bare knees of your graces, and
to request that by virtue of your authority the most reverend bishop Dioscours
may be enjoined to answer unto such crimes as we have laid to his charge, to
wit, unto such practices of his, and records as he broughtforth against us in
the holy council, whereby we shall be able plainly to prove that he is estraunged
from the catholic faith: that he maintains an opinion which is nothing else
but blasphemy it self: that he both deposed us unjustly and iniuried us
diversely besides* we beseech you moreover to vouchsafe the sending of your
gracious letters unto the holy and general council of the most godly bishops,
to thend both our doings and his may indifferently be heard, and that your
highness may be certified again of all that is handled by the council, hoping
that therein we shall please our immortal head Christ Jesus. If we may obtain
(most holy emperors) this our humble suit at your majesty's hands, we will not
cease day and night to pray for the prosperous state of your empire, and the
co^tinua^ce of your reign.

After these things y^ acts of y^ second counsel of Ephesus were openly read at
y^ request both of Dioscorus and Eusebius: y^ subtle disputation and exquisit
discourse thereof both written of many others and also laid down among y^ acts
of y^ council of Chalcedo^, if I should here pen for y^ reader (who
peradventure will be desirous to understand y^ final end of al their doings)
without doubt I should seem to post him over with delays, I will therefore
refer it to the end of this book, where as many as will have all things
(after their common saying) at their fingers ends, may both read all, and
carefully committ the whole to memory. But now let us proceed on in the
things which we have chiefly purposed to handle, that is to say, how
Dioscorus bewrayed him self, partly by rejecting the Epistle of Leo bishop of
old Rome, and partly also by deposing Flauianus bishop of new Rome, all which
he did in one day, and craftily devised that the bishops which assembled
together should subscribe unto a blancke, where afterward he caused the
deprivation of Flauianus to be written. when these things were done, the
senators decreed as follows. The next day after when the council advised
them selves somewhat better, we The censure of the senators in the council of
Chalcedon.
do perceive that they reasoned more exquisitly of the true and catholic
faith. Wherefore seeinge that Flauianus the bishop of worthy memory and
Eusebius the most reverend bishop of Dorilaeum were found not to have erred
in the faith after we had searched the acts and decrees of the council, and
also by the report of such as were chief in the council, and therefore
unjustly to have been deposed (for they confessed them selves sowly deceived
and wrongfully to have deprived Flauianus and Eusebius) It seems good unto
us, and no doubt God approves the same, that Dioscorus the most reverend
bishop of Alexandria (if it so please our Lord the Emperor) Iuuenalis the
most reverend bishop of Jerusalem, Thalassius the most reverend bishop of
Caesarea in Cappodocia, Eusebius the most reverend bishop of Armenia,
Eustathius the most reverend bishop of Berytus, and Basilius the most reverend
bishop of Seleucia in Isauria (who were then of authority and chief of the
council) should be punished alike, deposed of their byshopricks, by the
censure and judgment of the council, as the canons of the church do require,
and be at the emperors pleasure. Immediately there were other bills exhibited
against Dioscorus both of the crimes he committed, and the money he had
received: but when Dioscorus being called y^ second and the third time of y^
council, sent fained excuses for him self and came not, y^ Legates The sentence
which Pasca sianus, Lucentius and Boniface (substitutes of Leo b. of Rome) gave
of Dioscorus.
of Leo bishop of old Rome, stood up in y^ council, and said as follows, The
heinous offenses which Dioscorus late bishop of the noble city of Alexandria,
committed against the canons of the counsels, and the ecclesiastical
discipline are thoroughly known of us al, partly by sifting out such things as
were heard in the former session, and partly also by examining such things as
we decided this day. And that we may omit many other things, this man of his
own authority contrary to the canon of the church received Eutyches into the
communion, an heretic of the same opinion with him, and one that was justly
deposed by his own proper bishop, to wit, the most holy father, and our bishop
Flauianus: and this he did before he showed his face in the council which he
held with the most holy bishops at Ephesus. but the Apostolic seae pardoned
the bishops because they were constrained against their wills to do that
which they did: who yielded them selves unto this present hour both to Leo
the most holy bishop, and to the whole sacred and general assembly of bishops,
and therefore as men of one opinion with him, he received the^ into the
communion. As for this Dioscorus he cesseth not as yet to glory of the things
for the which he ought to mourn, lament and lie groueling upon the ground in
sackcloth and ashes, not only this but also he f^rbad the reading of holy Pope
Leo his epistle written unto Flauianus of godly memory, yea being often entreated
of the Legates, nay when he him self had promised with an oath he would
procure it to be read. the default in not reading of which epistle, has been
both an offense and hindrance unto the holy churches under heaven. Although he
was priuey to such lewd practices, yet have we assembled together, to thend we
might deal somewhat favorably both with him for all his former leudnes, and
also in like sort with the other godly bishops which were not of equal
authority with him in judgment. but seeing that his later misdemenure exceeded
his former impiety, for he sticked not to excommunicate Leo the most holy and
most religious archebyshop of Rome, moreover when shameful bills were exhibited
against him, and he him self being cited once, twice, and the third time as
the canon of the church has commanded by the godly bishops to appear before
the council, yet would be not come, for his own conscience accused him, but
entertained contrary unto law such as were justly deposed by diverse counsels
and set at naught sundry co^stitutions of the church condemning as it were him
self with his own doings: once again seeinge these are found to be his later
practices, Leo the most holy archebyshop of great and old Rome, by us and this
sacred assembly together with the most blessed Apostle S. Peter, who is the
rock, the ground of the Catholic Church, and the fundation of the true
faith bereaved him of all dignity that belongs to a bishop, and deprived him
of the priestly function* wherefore let this holy council give the sentence of
Dioscorus (of whom we have hitherto spoken) according unto the canons of the
Church. When these things were ratified by the council, and certain other
things decided, y^ bishops that were deposed with Dioscorus at y^ request of
the council, and the consent of y^ emperor were restored to their
byshopricks: again when they had annexed certain things unto their former
constitutious y^ conncell pronounced such a sentence as follows. Our Lord and
savior Jesus Christ going about to confirm his disciples in the knowledge of
the faith, said unto them: my peace I give you, my peace I bequeath unto you,
to the end none should vary from The acts and decrees of the council held at
Chalcedon.
his neighbor in sacred religion, but that all with one mouth and mind should
acknowledge the word of truth. ( Imediately after when they had read y^ creed
established by the council of Nice, with y^ form of faith agreed upon by a
hundred and fiftye godly fathers assembled at Constantinople, they proceed on
in these words) that divine and holy creed containing the abundance of the
grace and spirit of god is sufficient both to bring men unto a perfect knowledge
of the faith, and also unto a sure confirmation of the same* for it instructs
us most exquisitly in such things as we must necessarily know of the father, of
the son, and of the holy ghost, and sets forth after the plainest manner
the incarnation of our Lord Jesus for them that with faith will embrace it. but
seeing that certain lewd and godles persons endeavoring with their erroneous
opinions, to root out true religion have brought into the world many vain
fantasies of their idle brains, of which number some were not afraid to
corrupt the true understanding and the mystery of the manhood, our Lord Jesus
took for our sakes and to deny the mother or bearing of God which is attributed
unto the virgin Against Nestorius.
Mary, other some fained very fondly that the divinity and the humanity
consisted of one nature, confou^ding both with a certain imaginatiue co^mixito^
of natures, and affirming with horrible blasphemy Against Eutyches.
that in the said confusion the divine nature of the only begotten was
patible. therefore this great and general counsel presently assembled together
being desirous with all might to stop every gapp, and to cut of all occasion of
deuelishe devices wrought to the overthrow of the truth, decrees that the
faith which we received of the fathers is inuiolably to be retained: and
therefore The Nicene creed is confirmed. Against Macedonius opinion the creed
of the council held at Constanti nople is ratified.
commands above all other forms of faith, that the creed delivered unto us
of three hundred and eighteen godly fathers is firmly to be believed.
moreover to the end the enemies of the holy Ghost may utterly be foiled, it
ratifieth the doctrine afterward established touching the substance of the
holy Ghost by a hundred and fifty godly byshopps which met at the princely
city of Constantinople: the which essence those fathers made manifest unto
the whole world, not by adding anything of their own, as if the canons of the
Nicene counsel were imperfect, but that they might declare by manifest
testimonies of holy scripture what their own opinion was of the holy ghost
against such as denied the godhead thereof. furthermore to the confutation of
such as doubted not to pervert the mystery of our Lords incarnation,
assirming both impiously and blasphemously that he which was borne of the holy
virgin was but only man, this holy council approves the synodicall Epistles
of holy Cyrill bishop The synodicall epistles of Cyrill approved.
of Alexandria, written unto Nestorius and to the bishops of the East churches,
partly to refell the mad and frantic opinion of Nestorius, and partly also
for to instruct such as are godly disposed, and labor to attain unto the true
understanding of the holy creed. Again this council annexeth thereunto not
without good consideration the Epistle of Leo the most holy archebyshop of old
Rome, which he wrote unto Flauianus the most holy archebyshopp for the
remouinge and rooting out of the Church of God the fanaticall opinion of
Eutyches, as a The epistle of Leo unto Flauianus allowed.
worthy tract agreeing with the consession of Peter that great Apostle, and as
it were a strong pillour and fortress to uphold the true and sincere
doctrine against all erroneous opinions. for he valiantly encountreth with such
as endeavored to divide the mystery of the incarnation into two sons: he
excommunicateth such as dare presume to say that the divinity of the only
begotten is patible: he manfully withstandeth such as confound or make a
commixtion of both the natures in Christ: he ratleth sickebraines and frentike
fools, who affirm that the shape of a servant which he took of us, was of a
celestial or some other kind of substance: last of all he accurseth such as
vaynely have feigned that before the couplinge of the natures The creed of the
council held at Chalcedon.
there were two, but after the vnitynge of them that there was but one only
nature in the Lord. Wherefore treadinge one trace, and immitatinge the faith
of the holy Fathers which went before us, we consesse one, and the same
son our Lord Jesus Christ, and with one general consent we say that he
is perfect God and perfect man, true God and true man of a reasonable soul
and humane flesh subsistinge: of one substance with the father according unto
his diuinitye, but of one substance with us according unto his humanitye: like
unto us in all things, sin only excepted: begotten of the father before all
worlds, according unto his godhead, but borne in these later days for our
sakes, and for our salvation of the virgin mary, and the mother of God
according unto his manhood: one and the same Jesus Christ, the son, the Lord,
the only begotten: of two natures, known without confounding of the^, without
mutation, without division without separation: the distinction of natures not
removed for all the uniting of them, but the propriety of both natures wholy
retained and coupled together in one person, or as the Grecians say, in one
(...) not severed and parted into two persons, but one and the self same
only begotten son, God the word, and the Lord Jesus Christ, even as the
Prophetts of old, and Christ him self afterward have instructed us of him
and the same has the faith of the fathers delivered unto us. Seeinge we have
sifted out the truth of these things with great care and diligence, the
sacred and general council has decreed that it shall be lavvfull for no man,
either to allege or to write, or to frame, or to believe, or to teach any
other faith. Moreover this council commands such as presume to devise any
other faith, or to bring forth, or to teach, or to publishe any other creed
unto such as turn either from paganism, or from Iudaisme, or from any other
sect whatsoever, unto the knowledge of the truth, if they be bishops, that
they be deposed of their byshoplike dignities: if priests, that they be
vnministred: if monks and lay people, that they should be accursed. After the
reading of these decrees, Martianus the Emperor, who was present at the
council of Chalcedon, who made there also an Oration, returned to
Constantinople. Iuuenalis and Maximus, Theodoritus and Ibas, who had been
deposed, were restored to their byshopricks. other things there were handled
by the council, the which shall be laid down (as I Constantinople the
second patriarchship
said before) in the end of this hook. They decreed besides all the
aforesaid that the byshopps seae of New Rome, that is of Constantinople,
because she enjoyed the second honor after Old Rome, should be chief and in
honor above all other cities.

CAP. V.
Of the sedition raised at Alexandria about the election of Proterius and in
like sort at Jerusalem.

AFter that Dioscorus was exiled into Gangrena, a city of Paphlagonia,
Proterius by the general Proterius b. of Alexandria.
consent of the council was chosen bishop of Alexandria. Being stalled in
the seae, there rose among the people through heat of contention a wonderful
great tumult and uproar. for as it falls out in such hurliburlies, some would
needs call home Dioscorus, some others very earnestly cleaued unto Proterius, so
that there ensued thereof great slaughter and bloodshed. for Priscus the
Rhetorician writes how the lieuetenant of Thebais came then to Alexandria, A
lamentable sedition at Alexandria about the election of a bishop*
saw all the people on an uproar, and set upon the magistrates, how they threw
stones at the garrison which endeavored to keep y^ peace, how of force they
made y^ soldiers fly unto y^ temple, of old called Serapis, how the people
ran thither, ransacked y^ temple and burned y^ soldiers quick. the emperor
understanding hereof to have sent thither imediatly two thousand chose^
soldiers: who having wind and wether at will, arrived at Alexandria y^ sixth
day after. Again when y^ soldiers ravished the wives, and defloured the
daughters of y^ citizens inhabiting Alexandria, y^ the latter skirmish and
combat exceded the former in cruelty. After all this how the people assembled
together at Circus where their spectacles were solemnized, and there to have
requested Florus who was captain of the garriso^ and governor of their city
in civil affairs, y^ he would restore unto them y^ priueledged corn which he
had deprived them of, their bathes, their spectacles, and other things
whatsoever were taken from The Mon^ inhabitinge the deserts bordering upon
Jerusalem were ^^reticks etc ^demned t^ council (...) Chalcedo^
them because of their insurrection and tumults. The aforesaid author reports
that Florus appeased their wrath with his presence and gentle exhortation, and
restored peace for a while. but in the mean space the monks which inhabited y^
deserts adjoining unto Jerusalem could not setle quietness within their breasts.
for some of them which had been at the council and dissented from the decrees,
came to Palaestina, co^playned of the form of faith delivered by y^ council,
and labored to set other monks on fiery sedition. but when Iuuenalis returned
from y^ council to his byshoprick and was compelled by such adversaries as
labored to bring him into y^ contrary opinion to confute and detest his own
religion and had fled unto the city where y^ emperor made his abode: they y^
impugned and reviled the council of Chalcedon (as I said before) gathered the^
selves together, made an election upon Easter day, chose Theodosius to their
bishop, who was the ringleader of the whole mischief raised in the council,
and the first that certified them of the canons and decrees thereof: concerning
whom not long after The behavior of Theodosius a ^oging monk.
the Monks of Palaestina wrote unto Alcison, how that he was convicted of
heinous crimes by hiw own bishop, and expulsed the monastery, and how that
continewing a while at Alexandria he cleaued to Dioscorus, was whipped for
sedition, set upon a Camel as malefactors are used, and carted throughout the
city. unto this Theodosius there came many out of the cities of Palaestina,
requesting him to appoint them bishops, of which number Petrus the Iberian was
made bishop of Maiuma hard by Gaza* when the truth of these treacheries came
to light Martianus the Emperor commanded first of all that Theodosius should
be brought unto him with power of armed soldiers, secondly he sent thither
Iuuenalis, to the end he should reform the disordered state of the Church, and
reduce all to peace and quietness, moreover he commanded him to depose as many
as Theodosius had preferred to y^ priestly function. After the return of
Iuuenalis into Jerusalem, many grievous calamities and mischievous devices,
such as most commonly (through the instigation of the envious deuell, and satan
the sworn enemy to God and man) are wont to reign in the minds of mortal
men, ensued by the means of ye contrary factions. for the deuell by changing
of one letter and lewd interpreting thereof, brought to pass that it should
be pronounced either way for to establish a contrary opinion, the which
sentence as diverse do think is so repugnant, and infers such
contradictorie sense and meaning, that the one seems utterly to subvert and
overthrow the other. for he that confesses Christ to be IN two natures, says
no less but that he consists O^ two The Aequiuocall ^allacy of the deuell
lay in those two sylables (...) and (...).
natures, for by granting that Christ is both IN divinity and humanity, is
to confess that he consists OF divinity and humanity. he again that says
that Christ consists OF two natures affirms plainly that he is IN two
natures, for by auouching that he consists of divinity and humanity, he
testifies him to be in divinity and humanity: yet not by conversion of the
flesh into the godhead (whose uniting is inexplicable) neither of y^ godhead
into flesh: so that when we say OF TWO, we understand withal IN TWO, and by
saying IN TWO, we mean OF TWO, not parting y^ one from the other. for it is
toe plain that the whole, not only consists of the parts, but yt the whole
is understood in the parts, yet for all y^ some men be of the vpinion yt they
are far severed a sunder, because their minds and heads are so occupied
before, or else because they maintain some sulline opinion of God or self
will. that they had lever endure any kind of death, then yield unto the
plain and manifest truth. by occasion of this subtlety of satan the aforesaid
mischieues ensued. but so much of these things in this sort.

CAP. VI.
Of the great necessity of rain, famine and pestilence, and how that in
certain places (hardly to be believed) the earth brought forth of her own
accord.

ABout that time there was such scarsitie of rain in both Phrygia, Galatia,
Cappadocia and scarsitie of ^ine. ^amine. estilence. welling. ^s^ammatio^
coughe.
Cilicia, that men wanting necessaries received poisoned nurishment, and deadly
food: upon this there rose a great pestilence, and men after change and
alteration of diet began to sickenne, their bodies swelled, the inflammation
was so great that it made them stark blind, they had withal such a cough
that they died thereof the third day. Although there could no medicine be had,
neither remedy be found for this pestilence, yet by the providence of almighty
God the famine relented for such as were left alive: for it is reported that
in that dear and barren year there came down food from the aer no otherwise
then Manna of old unto the (...), and the year following the earth of her
own accord brought forth fruit. Neither w^ this misery rise throughout
Palaestina, but also sundry calamities reigned in many and in^ regions.

CAP. VII.
How Valentinianus the Emperor was slain, Rome taken and ransacked.

WHile the aforesaid calamities reigned in the East, Aetius was lamentably put
to death ^^ntiniaEmperour Rome was ^ne.
at old Rome. Valentinianus also Emperor of the West parts of the world was
slain together with Heraclius by certain soldiers of Aetius, through the
treason of Maximus, who aspired unto the Empire, and therefore wrought their
destruction because the wife of Maximus had been deflowred by Valentinianus and
forced to commit adultery. This Maximus married Eudoxia the wife of
Valentinianus against her will. she (neither without good cause) took this as
a great contumely and reproach, devised every way how to revenge her
husbands death (for she is a woman, exceedinge outrageous for stayninge the
purity of her vessel, of an intractable Rome was taken by Genzerichus king of
the Vandall^.
mind, when her honesty is oppressed, specially by such a one whose cruelty
bereaved her husband of his life) she sendes to Libya unto Genzerichus, makes
him fair promises, puttes him in good hope of prosperous successes, requests
him that unlooked for he would invade the Empire of Rome, and promised to
yield all into his hands. This being compassed Rome is taken. Genzerichus
being a Barbarian, of behavior unconstant, and of little trust* gave no credit
unto her words, set the city on fire, carried away the spoil, took Eudoxia
with her two daughters, returned, got him to Libya and married Eudoxia the elder
daughter to his son Honorichus. but he sent Placidia the younger daughter
together with Eudoxia her mother, accompanied with a princely train unto
Martianus, hopinge thereby to mitigate his wrath and displeasure. for he was
offended not a little at the burning of Rome, and the abusing of Valentinianus
the Emperors daughters. Martianus afterward gave Placidia to wife unto
Olybrius a noble man and a senator of Rome, who when Maximus. Auitus.
Maiorinus. Seuerus. Anno. 458.
the city was taken fledd to Constantinople. After the death of Maximus,
Auitus was Emperor of Rome the space of eight months: when the plague had
dispatched him, Maiorinus the year following took the government of the
Empire: again when Rhecimerus a Roman captain had procured through treason
the death of Maiorinus, Seuerus became Emperor of Rome the space of three
years.

CAP. VIII.
The death of Martianus the Emperor, and the reign of Leo: and how the
heretical faction within Alexandria, slew Proterius their bishop, and chose
in his rowme Timotheus Aelurus.

WHile Seuerus continued his reign in the Empire of Rome, Martianus having
governed Martianus the Emperor dyed Anno Dom. 458.
only seven years changed his kingdom, got him to a far more excellent
habitation, and left unto his successors a princely example of rule. The people
of Alexandria understanding of his death, renewed their spite with a far
greater rage and fury against Proterius. The people are wont upon light and
triflinge occasions to raise tumults and sedition, but specially at Alexandria:
who boldening them selves with often brawlinge, being in very deed but
raskalls and abiectes, take upon them like blind bayardes great enterprises.
And therefore they say that every Jack straw if it so please him may give the
onsett, set the city all on an uproar, draw the people here and there at his
pleasure, in ^o much they are not ashamed (as Herodotus writes of Amasis) to
fight diverse times with their shadows and for matters of no importance at all.
In such things this is their disposition, but in other matters not so. The
people of Alexandria watchinge the absence of Dionysius captain of the
garrison, and his abode in the upper parts Timotheus Aelurus b. of Alexandria.
of Egypt consented together, and chose Timotheus syrnamed Aelurus to be their
bishop, who lately had been a monk, yet then one of the priests of Alexandria:
and after they had brought him into the great Church called Caesar, they
proclaim him their bishop, for all Proterius as yet lived and executed the
priestly function. Eusebius bishop of Pelusium, and Peter the Iberian, bishop
of The lamentable death of Proterius the godly archbishop of Alexandria.
Maiuma were present at the election of Timothee, the which things are
remembered of the historiographer, who wrote the life of Peter, where also he
reports that Proterius was slain, not of the people, but by a soldier* for
when Dionysius being driven with the rumor of the horrible practices committed
there, (...) in post haste to Alexandria, for to quench the fiery flame of
sedition: certain citizens (as it was credibly informed unto Leo the Emperor)
through the persuasion of Timothee, ran Proterius through with a naked sword
as he passed by, and fled toward the holy font, tied him with a rope, and
trailed him to the fouresquare porche, for all men to gaze at him, and there
with shouting and laughter they reveal the murdering of Proterius.
Afterward they drew his carcass throughout the city, and burned it to
ashes, neither abstained they like sauadge and brute beasts (as they were)
from tastinge of his bowels even as it is manifest unto the whole world by
the complaint which the byshopps throughout Egypt, with all the clergy of
Alexandria beholding the circumstances with their eyes made (as I said before)
unto Leo the successor of Martianus in the Empire of Rome, written in manner as
follows.

Unto Leo, the virtuous, religious, victorius by the testimony of God him
self, and triumphant Emperor: the complaint made by all the bishops
throughout your province of Egypt, and by the clergy of your chiefest and
most holy Church of Alexandria.
Saying the divine and celestial grace of God (most holy emperor) has
ordained your highness as a levvell and treasure for mortal men: you cease
not (we speak unfeignedly) imediately and next after God continually to provide
for the safety and profit of the common weal. In a while after they say. when
the peace which reigned among the godly people, both here with us and with in
the city of Alexandria, was removed, out of the Church of God, Timotheus then
being a priest, got him imediately after the council of Chalcedon was
dissolved only with four or five byshopps, together with a fevve monks, fell
from the faith, and divided him self from the Catholic Church. These his
companions were infected with the pernicious doctrine of Apollinarius, and the
pestilent error of Timothee him self: al they were then deposed of their
priestly dignities according unto the canon of the Church both by Proterius of
worthy memory, and the council of bishops held in Egypt, and also exiled
by the Emperors, whose displeasure they had procured. Again after a
fewelines. The same Timothee, at what time Martianus the Emperor of famous
memory changed this frail life for blisfull rest in the celestial paradise,
sticked not most impudently to revile him with raylinge and opprobrious
languages, as if he had been subject to no law: he staggered not like a
shameless caytiffe at accursing the sacred and general assembly of byshopps
which met at Chalcedon: he led after him a multitude of chaungelings and
seditious people: he set up him self against the holy canons, the decrees of
the Church, the common weal and laws: he intruded him self into the holy
Church of God, which had both a pastor and a teacher, to wit, our most holy
father and archbyshopp Proterius, as he celebrated the wonted mysteries, and
offered up the sacrifice of prayer unto Christ Jesus the savior of us all for
your holy Empire, and for your christian and religious palace. Again they
say. The next day after, as Proterius the most holy father executed (as the
manner is) the function of a bishop, Timotheus took unto him two byshopps
deposed of their dignities with some banished priests, as we said before, and
was consecrated bishop by two of them, when as none of all the Catholic
bishops throughout the province of* Egypt (as the use is in consecrating the
bishop of Alexandria) was present: and so took possession as he persuaded him
self of the archebyshopps chair, but verily it was nothing else save plain
whoredom against the spouse of Christ, and the Church of God which had an
husband of her own, that celebrated therein the holy mysteries, and governed
the same according unto the canons of the Church. When they had enterlaced a
few lines, they went on as follows. Blessed Proterius could do no other
then (as it is written) geeue place unto wrath: and Romans 12.
to the end he might escape the fury of such as ran headlong to dispatche him
out of the way, he made his refuge unto the reverend font: the which place of
all others, yea the Barbarians and brutish people being altogether ignorant of
the virtue and grace which ishueth thence are loath to profane. yet these men
purposing to perform in deed that which from the beginning they had devised
for Timothee, saved not the life of Proterius, no not in those priueledged
places of the temple: reverenced not the religious place: honored not the time
(for it was on the high feast of Easter) stood in no awe of holy pristhood,
which is a mediation between God and man: slew him being innocent and
dispatched with him six others for company, They brought with them the wounded
carcass, they lugged it throughout the city, they set it out piteously to be
skorned at, they cruelly rent with the lash of the whipp the senseless corpse,
they unjointed the members throughout the body, neither refrayned they after
the manner of brute beasts to taste of his bowels whom they lately took for
a mediator between God and man. last of all that which remained they burned to
ashes scattering and hurlinge into the aer the ashes thereof exceeding therein
the sauadgnesse and cruelty of brute beasts* the author and ringleader of all
these mischiefs was Timotheus.


Zachariewho discoursed in like sort of these things, being persuaded as it is
like with the letters of Timothee which he wrote unto Leo, reports many other
things to have happened, and that through the mi^demenure of Proterius, who
made much ado (as he says) and great stir in Alexandria: that the people
wrought not all those mischiefs, but certain desperate soldiers, and that the
Emperor Leo sent thither Stelas to chastise them for their lewdness.

CAP. IX.
How Leo the Emperor wrote letters throughout the world for to understand
what was best for him to do toutching the election of Timotheus Aelurus and
the council of Chalcedon.

LEo the Emperor when he demanded the advice of the byshopps throughout the
Roman common weal, and other godly men likewise that were renowned for
monastical discipline, concerning the council of Chalcedon, and the
consecration of Timotheus syrnamed Aelurus, he wrote generally unto all men,
and sent with all coppies of the supplications exhibited unto him both by the
favorers of Proterius and the faction of Timothee. the letters he sent every
where contained such a form as follows.

The coppie of the godly letters of Leo the most virtuous Emperor, unto
Anatolius bishop of Constantinople with all other archebyshopps and byshopps
wheresoever.
LEo Emperor, and Caesar, virtuous, victorious, triumphant, chief Lord, all
noble Augustus unto Anatolius the bishop sends greetinge. It was ever our
desire, that both all the most holy and Catholic churches, and moreover the
cities subject unto the Roman dominions should enjoy peace and
tranquillity, and that nothing should befall them, which might molest their
quiet estate. what stir there was of late risen at Alexandria, we are sure
thy holiness knows full well, but to the end thou may understand the whole,
and the occasion of so great a tumult and hurliburly, we have sent unto thy
fatherhood the coppies of the complaints and supplications exhibited unto our
highness, against Timothee, both by the most holy byshopps and priests of the
aforesaid city and province of Egypt, after their coming unto the princely
city of Constantinople, as also such supplications as certain citizens sent
from Timothee out of Alexandria unto our camp, have delivered unto us: to this
end and purpose, that thou may perfectly know what Timotheus has
practiced, whom the people of Alexandria, the worthiest personages, the
citizens and shipmasters requested to be their bishop, and what other things
were contained in the supplications, and moreover touching the council of
Chalcedon a corize unto diverse men's consciences, as the complaints here within
enclosed do declare. Wherefore our will is that thy holiness do assemble
all the religious and catholic byshopps which presently remain in this
princely city, and with them, all the sacred senate of clergy men (for our
principal care is to deliver Alexandria from tumults and sedition to peace and
quietness) that after the sifting and exquisite handling of all controversies,
we may learn what your opinion is of the aforesaid Timothee and the council
held at Chalcedon, laying aside all fear of man, all spite and favor,
having only the fear of almighty God fixed before your eyes (you remember I
am sure that for these things you shall render an account before the majesty
of God) that we being certified by your letters of all the premises, may
publishe such an edict as shall be agreeable unto the same.


These were his letters unto Anatolius. The Emperor wrote other letters
differing very little in style from the aforesaid, both unto other byshopps,
and unto other famous men, who then (as I said before) led a poor life, and
had not wherewith all to maintain Symeon. Baradatus. James.
them selves, of which number was Symeon (above mentioned) the first that ever
made his nest in a pillour, and found out that kind of mansion, the rest were
Baradatus and James, learned men of Syria.

CAP. X.
The censures and answers of diverse byshopps, and of holy Symeon unto the
aforesaid letters of the Emperor.

FIrst of all Leo bishop of old Rome, wrote in defense of the council of
Chalcedon, and dissalowed Leo b. of Rome.
the election of Timothee, as an act contrary to the canon of the Church: the
which epistle of Leo, the Emperor sent by one of his trusty messengers unto
Timothee bishop of Alexandria, to whom Timothee wrote back again,
reprehending both the council of Chalcedon, Timotheus ^lu^us the be^et^^^ll
bishop of Alexandria.
and the epistle of Leo. The coppie of these epistles is to be seen in the
letters which Leo the Emperor wrote generally unto all men, but I omitted
them, lest I should weary the reader with interlacing toe many of such kind
of works. Moreover other byshopps in like sort maintained very earnestly the
canons of the council of Chalcedon, and condemned with one voice the
consecration of Timothee. but Amphilochius bishop of Sida alone of all the
other byshopps wrote an epistle Amphilochius b. of Sida.
unto the Emperor, where he inueyed bitterly at the election of Timothee, yet
approved not the council of Chalcedon, the which things are laid down in
writing by Zachary Rhetor, together with the Epistle of Amphilochius. Symeon
also a man of worthy memory, wrote touching the aforesaid controversies two
Epistles, one unto Leo the Emperor, an other unto Basilius bishop of Antioch,
of both which the Epistle unto Basilius being but very brief, I think best
to lay down for the louinge reader, it was as follows. Unto the most
religious, most holy and dearly beloved of God, my lord Basil, the archebyshop,
Symeon an humble sinner sends greeting The epistle of Symeon that dwell^^ in
a p^l^^^^ unto Basilius Archbishop of An^^o^h.
in the Lord. Now we may very well say, blessed be God, which has not turned
away our petition, neither withdrawn his mercy from us miserable sinners.
When I had perused the letters which your holiness sent unto me, I fell into
an admiration of the singular care and piety of our most holy Emperor
revealed and made manifest unto the world by the affection he b^re not only
unto the holy fathers, but also by the zeal he showed unto the faith confirmed
by them. but this comes not of our selves, it is, as the holy Apostle
writes, the gift of God, who by the means of your prayers granted unto him
so prompt and willing a mind. Again after a few lines he says. Wherefore I
being an abiecte and vile creature, as it were the untimely birth of the
monks signified unto the Emperor what I my self thought of the creed laid
down by the six hundred and thirty holy fathers, which assembled at
Chalcedon, affirming that I held with that faith published no doubt by the
instinct and motion of the holy ghost. for if our savior be in the midst of
two or three gathered together in his name, how can he choose but be present at
the assembly of so many holy fathers, seeing the holy ghost has been with them
from the beginning? After this again. Wherefore be of good cheer and defend
stoutly the true faith, in such sort as Jesus the son of Naue servant of the
Lord of hosts, governed and desended the people of Israel. I beseech you
salute from me all the clergy of your province, with the holy and faithful
people.

CAP. XI.
The banishment of Timotheus Aelurus bishop of Alexandria, and the election of
Timotheus Salofaciolus: of Gennadius and Acacius byshopps of Constantinople.

AFter the aforesaid stir Timotheus syrnamed Aelurus was banished
Alexandria, and enjoined Timotheus Aelurus. Timotheus Salofaciolus. Anatolius.
Gennadius. Acacius.
to make his abode at Gangrena: wherefore the people of Alexandria those
Timotheus (whom some called Basilicus, some other Salofaciolus) to succeed
Proterius in the byshopricke. When Anatolius had departed this life Gennadius
governed the byshopricke of the princely city of Constantinople, after him
succeeded Acacius master of the hospital or College of Orphans.

CAP. XII.
Of the earthquake which happened at Antioch three hundred forty seven years
after that which was in the time of Traian.

IN the second year of Leo the Emperors reign, there was such a marvelous
great earthquake Anno Dom. 159.
and shaking of the fundations at Antioch, that it can not sufficiently be
described. before it began certain people that were borne within the city
waxed mad, raued above measure, and seemed unto us far to exceed all furious
rage of brutishe flercenesse and cruelty, as a preamble forerunninge so great
a calamity. This grievous earthquake happened the five hundred and sixth year
after the city was called Antioch, the fourteenth day of the month Gorpiaeus,
after the Romans, September, about the fourth hour of the night, the Sunday
goinge before, the eleventh course of the revolution, three hundred forty seven
years after the earthquake under Traian. That earthquake was a hundred fifty
and nine years after the grauntinge of the charter and incorporation of the
city: but this fell in the reign of Leo, the five hundred and sixth year, as
the historiographers who diligently described the circumstances thereof have
left us in writing: It turned vpside down, in manner all the buyldinge of
this new city, being well peopled, without a wast corner, or ruinous piece
of buyldinge, but all adorned and gorgeously set forth by the bountifulness
of the Emperors, contendinge among themselves successively who should pass
other. Moreover as ye go in, the first and second lodginge of the palace
were overthrown, the rest standinge up with the bath adioyninge thereunto,
which bath aforetime served to no use, yet then of necessity by reason the
other bathes went to ruin, supplied their want, and stood the city in good
steed. the portly gates of the palace, the place called the fouresquare
porche, the utter turretts and galleries nighe the gates where their stage
plays were kept, and some porches that came out thence, some part of the
bathes of Traian, Seuerus, and Adrian, the adjoining Ostracina, together with
the porches and Nymphaeum were turned down to the ground, all which John
Rhetor has largely discoursed of. he says further that in consideration of
the premises, the Emperor forgave the city a thousand talents of gold of the
tribute which they paid him and released such citizens as sustained loss, of
their rent, last of all, that he took upon him to repair the public
edifices.

CAP. XIII.
Of the fire that raged at Constantinople.

THere fell moreover at Constantinople a calamity not much unlike the former
nay far more grievous, it began in that part of the city which lay to the
sea and is called the Ox Causei The report goes that a despitefull and
wicked deuell in the form of a woman or a poor woman through the instigation
of the deuell (both is reported) went about candel light with a candell in her
hand unto the market for to buy some saltfish, left her candell upon the stall
and went away. When the candell had wasted to the end of the wike, it rose
into a great flame and stroke immediately in the buylding over head which
burned at the first, it took hold also of the houles that were next not only
such as easily might be set on fire, but also the stony buylding and burned
them to ashes. They say this fire lasted the space of four days, no man was
able to quench it, it flashed throughout the mids of the city, consumed
from the north part to the south end all houses, five furlungs in length and
fourteen in breadth, left no buylding either public or private, no pillours,
no stony arches or vaultes in all that time and in all that compass unburned
to the fundation, but to have perced the flinte stone and hard metal as if
it had been stuble or straw. Of the north part of the city where the haven
lies this lamentable destruction reached from the Oxe-Causei (so is the place
called) unto the old temple of Apollo: in the south side from the haven of
Julian unto the temple of Concord: in the midst of the city from
Constantines market unto the market of Taurus, a pitiefull show and dreadful
to behold. The goodly places and gorgeous high buyldings that had been within
the city, the costly carved timber yelding heretofore great majesty unto the
eye of man, both public and private were then become like craggy hills and
rocks that no man could pass through, confused heaps of filth and all kind of
stuff full of deformity, that the owners of them them felues could not discern
the bounds of their possession neither say this or that place stood thus
before the fire consumed them.

CAP. XIIII.
Of sundry calamities that raignedin diverse contreyes.

ABout the same time when the Scythian battaill waged with the Romans which
inhabited the Eastern parts of the Empire waxed hot, Thracia, Hellespontus,
and Ionia were wonderfully shaken with earthquakes: no less were the fifty
Isles called Cyclades in the seae Aegaeu^, Cnidos in Caria and Coo, so that many
of their buildings were turned down to the ground. Priscus moreover writes,
there fell at Constantinople and in Bithynia such storms of rain and water
that for the space of three or four days it poured down like wholl streams
and floodes, beat down the hills and mountains with the violence thereof and
made them plain valleys: that the villages were all on flote and in danger
of drowning: that in the lake Boan not far from Nicomedia by reason of the
filth and all kind of baggage which the water brought thither, there were
seen Islands. but these things came to pass in a while after.

CAP. XV.
The marriage of Zeno and Ariadne.

LEo the Emperor gave Ariadne his daughter to Zeno, made him his son in
law, who of a child was called Aricmesus, yet being married, he got that name
of a noble man of Isauria, that had been of great honor and renown. How
this Zeno attained unto great estimation, and upon what occasion Leo preferred
him before all other, Eustathius Syrus has left us in writing.

CAP. XVI.
Of Anthemius that became Emperor of Rome, and also of such as succeeded him.

ANthemius at the request of the Roman ambassadors inhabiting the west, which
were sent in Anthemius.
embassy unto Leo y^ emperor, abiding at Constantinople, was sent to be
emperor of Rome, to whom Martianus the emperor had given his daughter in
marriage, Basiliscus also the brother of Berina the wife of Leo was made
captain over a great army of chosen soldiers, and sent against Genzerichus,
al which circumstances Priscus Rhetor has exquisitly handled, neither only
these things, but also how Leo conspired the death of Aspar, whom he him self
had made Emperor, as the reward of honor he advanced him unto, and slew with
him also his sons, Ardaburius whom he had made Caesar and Patricius, to thend
he might skorne at the insolency and ignorance of Aspar Olymbrius. Glycerius.
Nepos. Orestes. Romulus Augustulus, Odoacer.
their father. when Anthemius who governed the empire of Rome five year, was
slai^e, Olymbrius was by Rhecimerus proclaimed emperor: after the dispatching
of him Glycerius was created emperor, he reigned five years and was deposed
by Nepos, who stepped in his rowme, and made Glycerius a Roman bishop of Salone
a city in Dalmatia, Orestes put Nepos beside the empire: after Orestes his
son Romulus syrnamed Augustulus was the last emperor of Rome, of the
thousand three hundred years after the reign of Romulus. when he departed
this life Odoacer governed the Roman common weal, who refused the name of an
emperor, and would have him self called a king.

CAP. XVII.
The death of Leo the Emperor, of young Leo that came after him, likewise of
Zeno his father and successor.

ABout that time Leo the emperonr having reigned seuentene years deposed him
self of the Anno Dom. 475.
imperial scepter at Constantinople and placed Leo that was of tender years,
the son of Ariadne his danghter, and of Zeno, in the empire. After him came
Zeno y^ father of Leo the younger to be emperor, the son in law of Leo the
elder, and this he obtained through the procurement of Berina the wife of Leo
y^ elder: in a while after when young Leo had departed this life Zeno reigned
alone. but al what so ever he did during his reign, or what othermen did
against him and what things happened in his days we purpose by the help of
God to discourse in the next book following.

CAP. XVIII.
Asummarie recit all of all the acts of the council held at Chalcedon briefly
handled before by Euagrius The translator unto the reader.
in the 4. chapter of this 2. book where he promised to refer the reader for
further knowledge unto the end of this 2. book, and now he performs it with
a large and ample discourse. marvel not at all gentle reader though he repeat
here certain things which he laid down before. As I find them in the greek,
so thou have them in English, be begins thus:

PAscasianus and Lucentius the byshopps, and Boniface the priest supplied in
this council the absence of Leo bishop of old Rome: Anatolius als bishop of
Constantinople, Dioscorus bishop of Alexandria, Maximus bishop of Antioch,
Iuuenalis bishop of Jerusalem with their several clergy, were present at the
council. There sat with them the chief senators unto whom the substitutes of
Leo said that Dioscorus ought not to sit in the council with them, that Leo
their bishop had charged them no less, and if they would not yield unto it,
that they would leave the Church and bidd them farewell. When the Senators
demanded what crimes Dioscorus was to be charged withal, their answer was,
that he who contrary to all right and honesty playde the part of a Judge, was
to abide the sentence of judgment him self for the censure he had pronounced
of others. These things being spoken, and Dioscorus also being appointed to
stand in the midst, Eusebius bishop of Dorilaeum requested that the
supplication he had sent unto the Emperor might be openly read in their
hearing, and withal he added these words. I protest unto you that Dioscorus
has iniuried me not a little, he has also brought our religion into great
infamye, he procured the death of Flauianus the bishop, and wrongfully deposed
him together with me. cause, I beseech you, my supplication to be read. When
he had made an end of speakinge his supplication was read, contayninge such
a form as follows.

The humble supplication of Eusebius bishop of Dorilaeum exhibited unto the
most virtuous Emperors, requestinge he may be heard pleadinge both for
himself, for the catholikefaith, and for Flauianus bishop of Constantinople.
IT behooves your majesty's (most noble and puisant emperors) to provide
carefully for the The supplication of Eusebius bishop of Dorilaeum exhibited
unto valentinianus and Martianus the emperors.
quietness of all your loving subjects, yet when all others sustain injuries
ever to uphold and assist the sacred senate of priesthood. and herein verily
the divine godheade which granted unto you the rule and domination of the
whole world is truly honored. wherefore seeing the christian faith, and we our
selves also have been oppressed and diversely molested with extreme wrong by
Dioscorus the most reverend bishop of the most noble city of Alexandria, we are
come unto your wonted cleme^cy most humbly to crave justice at your hands. The
occasion of our complaint is as follows. In the council lately held at the
famous city of Ephesus (I would to God it had never been called together, then
had it not brought into the whole world such horrible mischief and hurliburly)
the aforesaid Dioscorus who trod right and reason under foot, who set the fear
of God far out of his sight, who maintained one absurd opinion with Eutyches
that vain and heretical varlett, who of a long while revealed not unto many
the venom of his cankred stomach, yet bewrayed him self in process of time
partly by occasion of the crimes we laid to Eutyches his charge, and partly
also by occasion of the sentence which Flauianus the bishop of worthy memory
pronounced against him: gathered together a great multitude of seditious
persons, raised with his money no small power, labored as much as lay in him
to overthrow the catholic religion and godly faith of the ancient fathers,
and to establishe the blasphemous opinion of Eutyches the monk whose opinion
was ever condemned of the holy fathers from the Apostles time unto this day.
wherefore seeing the heinous offenses he committed both impudently to the
derogation of the Christian faith and uncharitably against us, be of no small
importance, we are most humbly to crave upon our bare knees of your graces, and
to request that by virtue of your authority the most reverend bishop Dioscorus
may be enjoined to answer unto such crimes as we have laid to his charge, to
wit, unto such practices of his, and records as he broughtforth against us in
the holy council, whereby we shall be able plainly to prove that he is estraunged
from the catholic faith: that he maintains an opinion which is nothing else
but blasphemy it self: that he both deposed us unjustly and iniuried us
diversely besides. we beseech you moreover to vouchsafe the sending of your
gracious letters unto the holy and general council of the most godly bishops,
to thend both our doings and his may indifferently be heard, and that your
highness may be certified again of all that is handled by the council, hoping
that therein we shall please our immortal head Christ Jesus. If we may obtain
(most holy emperors) this our humble suit at your majesty's hands, we will not
cease day and night to pray for the prosperous state of your empire, and the
continuance of your reign.

The canons concluded upon by the bishops in the second council of Ephesus
were openly read at the request as well of Dioscorus as of Eusebius, where it
appeared that the epistle of Leo was not read at all, yea though some had
spoken of it again, and again. Dioscorus being demanded why it was not read,
answered for him self, that he had moved the bishops and that oftentimes to
do it: Iuuenalis bishop of Jerusalem, and Thalassius bishop of Caesarea in
Cappadocia, who together with Dioscorus challenged unto them selves authority in
the council of Chalcedon, required that all should be read and revealed.
Iuuenalis auoutched and said plainly that the emperor admonished Dioscorus by
his letters to read the epistle of Leo, yet afterward that there was not a
word spoken of it. Thalassius pleaded in like sort for him self, yt he hindered
not the reading of it, and that he had not so much authority of him self as to
command the reading of it. wherefore the acts of the council being read, some
of the bishops espied therein certain feigned and counterfeit hands, and among
the rest Stephan bishop of Ephesus was demanded of the council who they were
that subscribed with exceptions, he made answer that Julian (who afterward
was made bishop of Lebidum) and Crispinus had done so: for all that such as
subscribed at the request of Dioscorus, not to have suffered it so to stand,
but to have wrung the fingers of such as wrote and directed their pens to their
great shame and infamy. In the end Stephan confessed that the deprivation of
Flauianus was ratified with subscriptions the same day. for Acacius bishop of
Ariarathia compelled all the bishops by force, and made them of necessity to
subscribe unto a blanke, molesting the^ infinitely with soldiers, who stood by
with naked swords ready to dispatch them if they yielded not. Again they read
an other accusation whereunto Theodorus bishop of Claud^^opolis made answer
y^ there was no such thing spoken. As they proceeded on still in reading the acts
of the council where any thing was motioned which concerned Eutyches and such
as affirmed y^ the flesh of God our lord and savior Jesus christ came down
from heaven, they brought forth the records of the council, where Eusebius had
answered, y^ Eutyches had said in deed from heaven, but not to have added
whence he took it: y^ Diogenes bishop of Cyzicum urged him at y^ time, in this
sort, tell us the^ whence took he flesh? and y^ they were not suffered to reason
further thereof. After all this they brought forth the records, then Basilius
bishop of Seleucia in Isauria said: I adore our one lord Jesus Christ the son
of God, yt only God y^ word, who after his incarnation and the uniting together
of y^ divinity and humanity is thought to consist in two natures. y^ bishops of
Egypt cried out against this in such sort as follows: Let no man divide him
into parts that can not be parted. we must say there is one son, not two
sons. they y^ bishops of y^ east cried: cursed be he that parts christ,
cursed be he that deuideth him. the same records did testify y^ Eutyches being
asked whether he thought y^ The heresy of Eutyches.
christ had two natures, made answer y^ according unto his knowledge before
y^ conjunction of his divinity and humanity together, christ consisted of two
natures, but after y^ uniting of the^ to have had in him but one nature. And y^
Basil said then: if he confess not y^ there were two natures after y^
conjunction of yt natures which can neither be separated, neither confounded,
then brings he in both a confusion and a co^mixtion: but if he say that the
divinity being incarnate put on humanity, and so understand y^ incarnation in
such sort as Cyrill does: then says he no other then we do. for the divinity
which was with the father is one thing, and the humanity which he took of his
mother is an other thing. when y^ council demanded of them why they had
subscribed to depose Flauianus, y^ records do declare y^ the bishops of the
East cried out: we have all done amiss, and therefore we all crave pardon.
Again going forwards in perusing of y^ records, it appeared y^ bishops were
asked why they admitted not Eusebius into their company and conference, when he
requested it of them, whereunto Dioscorus answered that Elpidius brought
letters to warn them, and that he proved unto them how Theodosius the emperor
charged them they should not permit him to come into the council, the acts do
witness yt Iuuenalis made the same answer. Thalassius said y^ such things as
the emperors had condemned, were of no force and authority after the
condemnation, yet y^ he said not so as in defense of the faith. whereupon the
records do declare yt Dioscorus reprehended their doings with these and such
other like words: I pray you what manner of canons are now observed? when
Theodoritus came in among them, it is reported the Senate should say that he
came in for an accuser: and that Dioscorus answered, he was to take the rowme
of a bishop. The Senate then replied that both Eusebius and Theodoritus were to
stand in the rowme of accusers, no otherwise then Dioscorus was to stand at
the bar and to be arrayned. All the acts of the second council held at
Ephesus were read and the sentence which they had pronounced against
Flauianus and Eusebius. until they came to a certain clause, at the hearing
whereof, Hilarious the bishop began to speak. The bishops of the East and
such as were of their side, cried: Let Dioscorus be accursed. The bishops of
the East cried thus against Dioscorus.
In the very same hour Christ deprived Dioscorus, when Dioscorus deposed
Flauianus. O holy Lord we beseech the chastise thou him, and thou O
Catholic Emperor, be revenged on him, God grant Leo may live many years,
God send the Patriarche a long life. Last of all when the acts were read,
which declared that all the bishops assembled at Ephesus had subscribed unto
the deprivation of Flauianus and Eusebius, the most sage and worthy Senators
said as follows. The next day after when the council advised them selves
The senators gave their sentence in these words. where it appears that lay
men were of great authority in the councels.
somewhat better, we do perceive that they reasoned more exquisitly of the
true and Catholic faith. Wherefore seeinge that Flauianus the bishop of
worthy memory, and Eusebius the most reverend bishop of Dorilaeum, were
found not to have erred in the faith after we had searched the acts and
decrees of the council, and also by the report of such as were chief in the
council, and therefore unjustly to have been deposed (for they confessed them
selves fowlye deceived, and wrongfully to have deprived Flauianus and Eusebius)
It seems good unto us, and no doubt God approves the same, that Dioscorus
the most reverend bishop of Alexandria (if it so please our Lord the Emperor)
Iuuenalis the most reverend bishop of Jerusalem, Thalassius the most reverend
bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia, Eusebius the most reverend bishop of Armenia,
Eustathius the most reverend bishop of Berytus, and Basilius the most reverend
bishop of Seleucia in Isauria (who were then of autoritye and chief of the
council) should be punished alyke, deposed of their byshoprickes, by the
censure and judgment of the council as the canons of the Church do require
and be at the Emperors pleasure. When their sentence was read the bishops of
the East cried: That judgment is just. Then the byshopes of Illyrium said
with loud voices: We have all done amiss, and therefore we all crave pardon.
When the bishops of the East cried again: That sentence is just, Christ
deposed the murderer, Christ revenged the martyrs, The Senators commanded
that every one of the byshopes then present should write his faith
seuerallye: perswadinge them selves of a suretye that the most holy Emperor
believed according unto the form of faith publyshed at Nice by three hundred
and eyghteene fathers, and agreeable unto the creed framed at Constantinople,
by a hundred and fiftye bishops, and no otherwise then the Epistles of the
holy fathers: Gregory, Basil, Hillarie, Athanasius, Ambrosius, and the two
Epistles of Cyrill read in the first council of Ephesus have directed him:
and that Leo the most reverend bishop of old Rome, deposed Eutyches for the
contrary. After the breakinge up of this session in such sort as you hear,
when the holy bishops had met again and sat together, Eusebius bishop of
Dorilaeum exhibited unto them bills of complaynt, both in his own name and in
the person of Flauianus, where he charged Dioscorus that he maintained one
heresy and opinion with Eutyches, and that he had deposed them of their
priesthood. He added moreover that Dioscorus had falsified the records by
layinge down certain words which were not at all uttered in the council
then assembled together: that through wiles and craft he had procured blanks
for them to subscribe unto. he made suit unto them again that all the acts
and canons of the second council held at Ephesus by their sentence and
authority might be abrogated: that they would restore them unto their priestly
function: that they would accurse the detestable doctrine of Eutyches, and last
of all he requested that after the reading of the records, his adversary might
be brought before the council. when this was granted, Aetius the head notary
stood up and said that he had been with Dioscorus as with the rest, and that
Dioscorus had answered him, that his keepers would not license him to come
unto the council. It was said moreover that Dioscorus was sought for before
the council sat and could not be found, and that Anatolius bishop of
Constantinople should answer he should both be warned, and come unto the
council. This being done such as were sent unto him returned saying from
Dioscorus: My keepers will not let me come, if they will license me, let them
speak. but when y^ messengers replied y^ they were sent not unto the masters
of y^ ward, but unto him, y^ report goes he answered thus: I am ready to come
unto the holy and general council, but I am staid. Himerius added unto these
sayings, how at their return from Dioscorus, Bo^tius met by y^ way the
ma^ster of y^ holy offices, and that bishops accompanied him again as he went
unto Dioscorus, and y^ they had brought with the^ in paper some part of their
conference, y^ which notes being read declared y^ Dioscorus made the^ this
answer: when that I ponder this matter with my self and perceive how
available it is for me, take this answer: seeinge the most reverend bishops
which sit The sleeu^ less aunsw^^ of Dioscor^
in the counsel have decreed many things after the often co^ferences they had
with several me^ and that I now am called to the second sitting for to revoke
such things as were spoken of before, my request is, that the most reverend
bishops and holy Senate which were present at the first session be now also at
the second, that the same things may now the second time be exquisitly handled.
The records do declare y^ Acacius replied unto him again in this sort. The
holy and worthy council Acacius.
has not therefore commanded your holiness to come unto them, to thend such
things as were decided in the presence of the most reverend bishops and holy
senate, should be called in again, but sent us purposely unto you that you
should come unto the council, and that your holiness should not be absent
from them. Dioscorus said unto him again as it is recorded: Dioscorus.
You told me already that Eusebius gave up unto the council bills of
complaynte, well I request you once again, that my cause may thoroughly be
known and examined in presence of the presidents and senate. After the
recital of other things toe and froe, with other circumstances they sent
again unto Dioscorus, requestinge him to be present at the council, who wrote
his answer in paper, afterward they returned and read it thus before the
council. I signified of late unto your holiness that I was sick, therefore I
crave that the most worthy presidents and holy senate will be present at the
handlinge and decidinge of causes, and because my sickness increases,
therefore I differ my coming. The records do declare that Cecropius
hearing that answer, said thus unto Dioscorus: Why sir hitherto ye made no
mention of sickness, and will ye now be sick, ye should have satisfied the
canons of the Church. Dioscorus turned unto him, I told you (says he) once
already that the presidents shall be there for me. With this Russi^s bishop of
Samosata said unto Dioscorus: look what so ever is called into controversy,
it is decided according unto the canons of the Church, and therefore he that
comes unto the council may speak freely what pleases him. Dioscorus being
therein persuaded, Iuuenalis, and Thalassius came thither. Eustathius bolted
out such things as were to no purpose, whereunto as it is recorded, Dioscorus
made answer, and requested of the most religious Emperor that the presidents
and such as had given judgment with him in the council, should be sent for
thither. The messengers that were sent unto him answered him again, that
Eusebius complained upon him alone, and that it needed not according unto his
motion, to cite all to appear. Dioscorus replied that by right as many as were
Judges with him in the council should be present, that Eusebius had no
private action against him, but only an accusation against such things as
they all had decided and judged. When the Legates urged him with the same,
Dioscorus answered: I told ye once what ye may trust toe, I know not what I
should tell you again. After the relation of the aforesaid, Eusebius bishop
of Dorylaeum protested that he charged no man with ought save Dioscorus alone,
and requested that Dioscorus might be called the third time. Aetius
interrupted him and said: that there came of late unto the council certain
men of Alexandria (as they named them selves) of the clergy, together with
some of the laytie, and preferred bills of complaynt against Dioscorus, and as
they stood at the Church doors where the council sat, there to have made
an exclamation: that first of all Theodorus Deacon of Alexandria, gave up unto
the council a bill of invitement, after him ^^chyrianus Deacon of the same
church, there followed him Athanasius the priest, Cyrills brothers son, and
that last of all Sophronius charged him with blasphemy, bribery, The conditions
of Dioscorus.
and extortion. Dioscorus was called the third time, and came not, the Legates
brought the council his answer in these words. I have answered your holmes
so sufficiently already that I have now no more to say unto you. When the
Legates dealt earnestly with him for to come, he would give them no other
answer. Then Pascasianns said: Dioscorus is now the third time cited to
appear and comes not, no doubt his own conscience does accuse him, what
deserves he I pray you? all the bishops made answer that he incurred the
danger of the canons of the church. Proterius bishop of Smyrna said: when
holy Flauianus was slain through his procurement, he was not punyshed
according to his deserts. Last of all the Legates of Leo Archebyshop of Rome,
spoke The subs^^^^^^ of Leo of Rome ^aue this ^^ence a^^st Dios^rus in the
^^unc^ll of ^halcedon.
in the council as follows. The heinous offenses which Dioscorus late
bishop of the noble city of Alexandria, committed against the canons of
counsels, and the Ecclesiastical Discipline are thoroughly known of us all,
partly by siftinge out such things as were heard in the former session, and
partly also by examininge such things as we decyded this day. And that we
may omit many other things, this man of his own autoritye contrary to the
canon of the Church received Eutyches into the communion, an heretic of the
same opinion with him, and one that was justly deposed by his own proper
bishop, to wit, the most holy father and our bishop Flauianus: and this he did
before he showed his face in the council, which he held with the most holy
bishops at Ephesus. but the Apostolic seae pardoned the bishops, because they
were constrained against their wills to do that which they did: who yielded
them selves unto this present hour both to Leo the most holy bishop, and to
the whole sacred and general assembly of bishops, and therefore as men of one
opinion with him he received them into the communion. As for this Dioscorus he
ceasseth not as yet to glory of the things for the which he ought to
mourn, lament and lie grouelinge upon the ground in sackcloth and ashes. Not
only this but also he forbadd the readinge of holy Pope Leo his Epistle
written unto Flauianus of godly memory, yea being often entreated of the
Legates, nay when he him self had promised with an oath that he would procure
it to be read. The defaulte in not readinge of which Epistle has been both
an offense and hindrance unto the holy Churches under heaven. Although he was
priueye to such lewd practices, yet have we assembled together to the end
we might deal somewhat favorably both with him for all his former
levvdenesse, and also in like sort with the other godly byshopps which were
not of equal autoritye with him in judgment. But seeinge that his later
misdemenure exceeded his former impierie, for he sticked not to excommunicate
Leo the most holy, and most religious Archebyshop of Rome, Moreover when
shameful bills were exhibited against him, and he him self being cyted
once, twice, and the third time as the canon of the Church has commanded by
the godly bishops to appear before the council, yet would he not come, for his
own conscience accused him, but entertained contrary unto law such as were
justly deposed by diverse counsels, and set at naught sundry constitutions of
the Church, condemninge as it were him self with his own doings: Once
again seeinge these are found to be his later practices, Leo the most holy
Archebyshop S. Paul says that Christ is the rock and fundation to build
upon. 1. Cor. 3. and 10.
of great and old Rome, by us, and this sacred assemblye together with the
most blessed Apostle Saint Peter, who is the rock, the ground of the
Catholic Church and the fundation of the true faith, bereaved him of all
dignitye that belongs to a bishop, and deprived him of the priestly function.
Wherefore let this holy council give the sentence of Dioscorus (of whom we
have hitherto spoken) according unto the canons of the Church. When
Anatolius, Maximus, with the rest of the bishops (those only excepted whom
the Senators had deposed with Dioscorus) had confirmed the aforesaid sentence,
the council certified Martianus the Emperor of their decrees, and sent a
deprivation unto Dioscorus The deprivation of Dioscorus archebyshopp of
Alexandria.
in such sort as follows. Because thou have despised the holy canons of the
Church: Because thou haste not obeyed this holy and general council:
Because thou art moreover convinced of many other heinous crimes: Because thou
being thrice called of this famous assemblye to answer unto such things as
were laid unto thy charge, came not, know that for all the aforesaid, thou
art deposed by this holy and general council the thirteenth day of this
present October, of thy byshopricke, and bereaved of all Ecclesiastical right
and title. These things being registered and sent also unto the godly bishops
of the most holy Church of Alexandria, and the decree against Dioscorus
openly proclaimed, that session brake up and so ended. But afterward they sat
again, and first they answered the senators who had desired to be satisfied
as touching the true and right faith: next they affirmed that there was
nothing to be done concerning Eutyches, for the bishop of Rome had made a
^^nall end and conclusion thereof, and therein they were all agreed. moreover
when all the bishops seemed very willing, and the senators exhorted every
patriarch, that one or other of every their several provinces should stand
up to the end the opinions of them all might thoroughly be known, Florentius
bishop of Sardis craved their favor that with advise, and after deliberation
taken, they might attain unto the truth, and Cecropius bishop of Sebastopolis
said. The faith is Cecropius.
both notablye set forth by three hundred and eyghteene holy fathers,
confirmed afterward by the godly fathers, Athanasius, Cyrill, Celestinus,
Hilarious, Basil and Gregory, and now again approved by most holy Leo.
Wherefore our request is, that the creed of the three hundred holy fathers
and of the most holy Leo may be read. Being read all the council cried:
This is the faith of the true professors, we are all of this faith. This is the
faith of Pope Leo, this is the faith of Cyrill, thus has the Pope interpreted.
Again when they had reasoned among them selves for the readinge of the faith
which the hundred and fifty holy fathers publyshed in the council held at
Constantinople, it was also read. Then the whole council cried again. This
is the faith of the true professors, thus we do all believe. After the
finishinge of all the premises Aetius the Archedeacon said, I have here at
hand the Epistle of holy Cyrill, written unto Nestorius, the which all the
byshopes in the council held at Ephesus confyrmed with their several
subscriptions: I have here also an other Epistle of the same Cyrill, written
unto John byshope of Antioche, and confirmed likewise, will it please you to
geeue them the hearing. When every one had spoken his pleasure of them, they
were both read. we have thought good presently to lay down here some portion
of the former, it was read as follows.

Unto Nestorius the most reverend and his most holy colleague Cyrill sends
greetinge.
THere are as I am given to understand certain men which labor and that
very often Cyrill archebyshop of Alexandria unto Nestorius archebyshop of
Constantinople and an heretic.
altogether to discreditt me with your holiness, this they do specially when
they see worthy men and magistrates oftentimes meetinge together, supposinge
peradventure that you will be pleased with the hearing of such things. Again
after a few lines he says. The holy and famous council affirms that he
which is naturally begotten of God the father, is the only begotten son,
true God of true God, light of light, by whom the father made all things: that
he came down from heaven, that he was incarnate and made man: that he suffered,
rose again the third day and ascended into the heavens. It behooves us to
yield and condescend unto these articles, unto this doctrine, and to search
out with all the gifts we have, what is meant by being incarnate, and what is
understood by saying that the word of God became flesh. for we do not say
that the word of God by chaunginge the nature thereof became flesh, neither by
conversion into wholl man which consists of body and soul: but this rather,
that the word according unto the subsiste^cy or being thereof, coupling unto it
self living flesh endued with a reasonable soul, became man: in such sort as
may neither be expressed in word, neither conceived by thought: and that he
was called the son of man, not according unto will only, or in that it so
pleased his goodness, neither only by taking upon him the person, or because
contrary natures were coupled together in true unity: but that one Christ and
one son consisted of two natures: not that the difference of the natures was
taken away by reason of the unity, but that the diuinitye and humanitye after
an unspeakable and secret couplinge and meetinge together made one Lord,
Christ, and the son. After the enterlacinge of certain other things he
annexed thereunto as follows. Because he came of a woman and coupled man's
nature unto him self according unto his subsistencie, and that for our sake,
and for our salvation, therefore is he said to have been borne after the
flesh. for he was not first of all (after the common generation) borne of the
virgin Mary, and then the word of God entered into him. but was coupled with
the flesh in the matrix, and is said to have been borne after the flesh, as one
that made the birth of his flesh proper to him self. In like sort we say that
he suffered, rose again, not that God the word suffered in his own nature
either stripes, or the print of nails, or other vexations, (for the godhead
being without body is impatible) but that the body being made proper unto him
suffered, and so is he said to have suffered these things for our sakes. for
there was in the body which suffered, that which could not suffer.


But so much out of the first epistle. touching the second we laid down a
good part thereof in the first book of our Ecclesiastical history which went
before in the epistle of John bishop of Antioch. there is such a protestation
laid down as follows, and confirmed with the testimony of Cyrill. We
confess that the holy virgin is The words of John b. of Antioch.
the mother of God, because God the word took flesh and manhood of her, and
coupled unto him self by the conception, the temple which he took of her.
Neither are we ignorant that godly men inspired from above have partly affirmed
that the phrases which co^cerned the Lord and were laid down by the
Evangelists and Apostles were uttered of one person. and partly divided them
into several portions, as written of two natures: and partly also confessed
that they were divine, and spoken only of the diuinitye of Christ. Unto this
of John, Cyrill adds of his Cyrill unto John b. of Antioch.
own. When we had perused these your godly sentences and clauses within
contained and perceived plainly that you were of one mind and opinion with us
(for there is but one Lord, one faith, one baptism) we re^dred unto god divine
praises, who is the co^seruer of the whole world: and presently we conceive
exceedinge joy, seeinge that as well your Churches as ours being driven
thereunto, partly by the force and power of the holy scriptures, and partly
also by tradition delivered unto us of our most holy fathers do embrace one
faith and opinion. After the readinge of these Epistles, they that were in the
council cried in this sort:: we are all of that faith: Leo the Pope believes
so: cursed be he that deuydeth Christ, that confounds his natures: this is
the faith of Archebyshoppe Leo: thus believes Leo, Leo and Anatolius are of
this faith. We are all of this faith: Cyrill is of this faith. Let Cyrill
never be forgotten. Let the epistles of Cyrill be ever had in memory. This is
our opinion, thus we both have believed and do believe. Thus does Archbishop Leo
believe, thus has he written. They reasoned a while whether the epistle of Leo
should be read, in the end they read it with the interpretation annexed
thereunto, which is extant among the acts of the council. When the reading
was ended and the Bishops had cried, this is the faith of the fathers, this is
the faith of the Apostles, we are all of this faith, the true professors are of
this faith, cursed be he which believes not thus, Peter in the person of Leo
said thus: thus have the Apostles taught, Leo has godly and truly taught
these things, Cyrill has taught thus, Leo and Cyrill have taught alike, cursed
be he which holds not this faith, this is the true faith, this is the opinion
of the true professors, this is the faith of the fathers. why were not these
things read in the council of Ephesus, what meant Dioscorus to conceal these
things. When the bishops had made an end of crieng in this sort, y^ records of
y^ council do declare y^ when this parcel of Leo his epistle was read: It was
to pay the ransom of our nature The words of Leo b. of Rome.
that the godheade was joined with the patible nature, to the end, one and the
same mediator of God and man, the man Christ Jesus (the which thing was fitly
applied unto our sores and maladies) might dye of the one nature and not of the
other, when this I say was read and the bishops of Illyriu^ and Palaestina had
doubted of the sense and meaning of the words, Aetius Archdeacon of the most
holy church of Constantinople alleged openly y^ opinion of Cyrill out of his
own words as follows. Because his proper b^dy through the goodness of God as
Saynct Paul writes tasted of death The words of Cyrill. Heb. 2. Leo.
for us all, therefore is he said to have dyed for us: not that he suffered
death as toutching his nature (for to say or think so is mere madness) but
that in such sort as I said before his flesh tasted of death. Again out of
the Epistle of Leo they read thus. Both natures accompanied together does that
which is proper to either of them: the word brings to pass such things as
belong unto the word, the body works such things as appertains unto
the body, the one works miracles the other sustayneth reproaches. Again when
the Bishops of Illyrium and Palaestina doubted also of this sentence the same
Aetius read the words of Cyrill as follows. Some Cyrill.
phrases of holy Scripture which concern the Lord do best agree with his
divine nature, some other with his humane nature, and some other the middle
between both, affirming that the son of God is together both God and man.
After all this when they doubted again of an other part of the aforesaid
epistle of Leo the Bishop, which was read in this sort, Although in Leo.
very deed there is one person of God and man in the Lord Jesus Christ: yet
there is one thing wherein either of them does participate in contumely and
an other thing wherein they both communicate in glory, It is of us that his
humanity, is inferior to the father, and of the father it is that his divinity
is equal with the father, Theodoritus remembered him self that Cyrill had
written Cyrill.
the same thing almost in y^ same words. when he was made man, he laid not a
side his propriety but continevved as he was: and the one nature dvvelled in
the other that is the divine nature in the humane. These things being
expounded, when the worthy Senators had demanded if any among them doubted any
further, all made answer that they were fully resolved. After this Atticus
Bishop of Nicopolis requested they might all have a day given them to
deliberate, to the end they might with firm and settled minds establishe such
things as were pleasing unto God and agreeable with the doctrine of the fathers:
he craved moreover the epistle which Cyrill wrote unto Nestorius wherein he
had exhorted him to yield unto the twelve poincts of the faith that were
confirmed of all the Bishops. The Presidents conferred of this matter among
the^ selves and granted them five days to deliberate, that then they should
come together with Anatolius bishop of Constantinople, this being done they all
agreed and said with one voice: we believe thus, we all believe thus, as Leo
believes so believe we, there is not one of us that doubts, we have all
subscribed. Unto these things they replied again in this sort. It is not
needful that all should come together, but in so much it seems very
expedient that such as waver and are not as yet resolved may be confirmed, let
the most reverend Bishop Anatolius appoint whom he shall think good of the^
that have already subscribed to satisfy and confirm the rest. After this the
council said: we crave of the Fathers that the Presidents and chief of this
council do entreat the Emperor and the Empress for us, we have all done
amiss, let us be pardoned. The clergy of the Church of Constantinople cried:
few do cry we hear not the wholl council speak. Then the Bishops of the
East lifted their voices saying: let the Egyptian be deposed. And when the
Bishops of Illyrium requested the same, the clergy of Constantinople cried: let
Dioscorus be banished, let the Egyptian be exiled, let the heretic be sent
away, Christ has deprived Dioscorus. Again the Bishops of Illyrium and such
as were of their side, cried: we have all offended, we beseech you pardon us.
Rid the council of Dioscorus, away with Dioscorus out of the Churches. After
they had tossed these and other such like things to and fro, they rose up. The
next session followinge when the Senate had reasoned among them selves about
the publishing of their acts and decrees, Consta^tinus the secretary read out
of a schrole as follows. The next day after when the council advised The
sentence of the Senators is laid down by Eua^rius now the third time.
them selves somewhat better, we do perceive that they reasoned more exquisitly
of the true and Catholic faith. Wherefore seeing that Flauianus the Bishop
of worthy memory and Eusebius the most reverend Bishop of Dorilaeum were found
not to have erred in the faith after we had searched the acts and decrees of
the council, and also by the report of such as were chief in the council, and
therefore unjustly to have been deposed (for they confessed them selves foully
deceived, and wrongfully to have deprived Flauianus and Eusebius) It seems
good unto us and no doubt God approves the same, that Dioscorus the most
reverend Bishop of Alexandria (if it so please our Lord the Emperor) Iuuenalis
the most reverend Bishop of Jerusalem, Thalassius the most reverend Bishop of
Caesarea in Cappadocia, Eusebius the most reverend Bishop of Armenia,
Eustathius the most reverend Bishop of Berytus and Basilius the most reverend
Bishop of Seleucia in Isauria (who were then of authority and chief of the
council) should be punished alike, deposed of their Bishoprics by the censure
and judgment of the council, as the canons of the church do require and be at
the Emperors pleasure. After other things were read the bishops then present
being demanded whether the Epistles of Leo were agreeable with the faith of
the three hundred and eighteen holy Fathers assembled of old at Nice in
Bithynia, and with the Creed of the hundred and fifty fathers in the council
held at Constantinople? Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople The Epistle of Leo
is co^^irmed.
with all the assembly made answer that the Epistle of Leo was no other the^
the faith of the aforesaid Fathers and subscribed unto it. Immediately the
council cried: we are all content, we do all allow the same, we are all of
one faith, we are all of one opinion, we do all be leave so. Thus have the
Fathers which are present in the council believed, thus have they subscribed.
God grant the Emperor a long life, God grant the Empress a long life, God
grant the Fathers of the council many years, God preserve the lives of such
as are of one faith and opinion with the council. We wish the Emperor many
years, we wish them that hold with the counsel many years, God send the
Emperor to see many years. we have subscribed unto the faith, this is the
opinion of Leo, this is our opinion. Last of all they said. Concerning those
things we have sent unto y^ most holy, and our most religious Lord the Emperor
and now we wayt for his highness answer. Again when some told them in this
sort: your reverence and wisdoms have to render an account unto God for
Dioscorus, whom you have deposed unknown unto y^ Emperors most excellent
majesty, unknown unto us in like sort, and for all the things you have
complained of, and for the acts of this council, they cried: God has
deprived Dioscorus, Dioscorus is justly deposed, Christ has deprived
Dioscorus. After all this when the Preside^ts had brought forth Martianus the
Emperors answer where he had signified unto them his pleasure toutching the
bishops that were deposed, the Bishops requested and said: we pray you as many
as be of one opinion, as many as hold with the council, as many as subscribed
in the council unto the Epistle of Leo, come into the council, immediately in
they came, and down they sat. The supplicatio^s which the Bishops of Egypt
had exhibited unto Martianus the Emperor were read which besides sundry other
things contained in them as follows. We believe as the three hundred and
eighteen Bishops ^ Bishops Egypt.
which met at the counsel of Nice have delivered unto us, and we hold with the
faith of holy Athanasius and holy Cyrill accursing every heresy both of Arius,
Eunomius, Manes, Nestorius, and of them which say that the flesh of our Lord
came down from heaven, and was not taken of the virgin Marie and mother of
God which co^tinewed always a virgin, and that the same is like unto our
flesh in all things, sin only excepted. Then all yt were in the council
cried: why have not these men accursed the opinion of Eutyches? let them
subscribe unto the Epistle of Leo, and let the^ accurse Eutyches with his
heresy, let them condescend unto the Epistle of Leo: peradventure they go
about to deceive and beguile us. The Bishops of Egypt made answer that their
province had many Bishops, and that they would not take upon them to answer
for such as were absent: they requested of the council to stay for their
Archbishop, that according unto their manner and custom they may uphold his
censure and opinion. They said moreover that if they would decide ought before
their Metropolitan were elected, the bishops of Egypt would make an
insurrection against them. When they had often entreated and the council
withstoode them, motion was made that the Bishops of Egypt should have time
until their Archbishop were chosen. Next the supplications of certain Monks
were brought forth, the sum whereof was yt not one of the^ would take pen
in hand to subscribe before the general assembly met which the Emperor had
determined to call together, and before they understood their decrees. With
the reading thereof Diogenes bishop of Cyzicum remebred that Barsumas was one
of them which made an insurrection and murdered Flauianus and that he had
cried, kill him. And now not having his name in the supplication contrary to
order, to have presumed to come unto the council. All the Bishops cried at
this, Barsumas has peruered all Syria and raised against us a thousand Monks.
When it was moved that as many as were there should wait the counsels
pleasure and decree, the Monks required that their supplications might be
read. The effect of them was that Dioscorus and the Bishops of his opinion
might be present at the council. All the council was moved with this and
cried: Let Dioscorus be accursed, A company of cockebraine and heretical Monks
would be ruled neither by Bishops nor by council.
Christ has deposed Dioscorus, out with these Monks, remove shame from the
council, take away force and injury, let not these impious and lewd sayings
come to the Emperors ears, let not the council be discredited, away with
infamy. The Monks hearing this cried of the contrary: take away contumely
from the Monasteries. When the council had the second time repeated the former
exclamation, they consulted that the rest of the supplications were to be
read, where it was said that Dioscorus was injuriously deposed and that it
behooved them of necessity seeing the controversy toutching the faith was to
be decided, to have his presence in the council: and unless they would do
this that they would shake of the dust from their feet and forswear the
communion of the Bishops that were present. After they had made an end of
speaking, Aetius the Archdeacon read them the canon that concerned such as
divided them selves from the Church. Again when the Monks would not give
ear, neither be ruled by the most holy bishops, neither by yt entreaty of
Aetius the Archdeacon, when the one half of the council would needs
pronounce Nestorius and Eutyches accursed, and the other half withstoode them,
the Presidents thought good y^ the supplication of F^ustus and the other Monks
should be read, where they craved of the Emperor that the Monks which
impugned the true faith and sincere doctrine should not be received again, for
why, Dorotheus the Monk, called Eutyches the true professor. Against whom
there were sundry poincts of Eutyches doctrine tossed to and fro and discussed
in presence of the Princes. In the fifth session the Senators commanded them to
set forth the decrees and canons of religion after the playnest sort.
Asclepiades Deacon of Constantinople read a certain canon the which they thought
best not to be recorded, whereunto some gave their consents and some other
would not. when they had suppressed y^ contrary voices, the Senators affirmed
upon Dioscorus own report, that he had deposed Flauianus for saying there
were two natures in Christ, and that the decree bore wittnes that he co^sisted
of two natures. Then replied Anatolius: Dioscorus was not deposed for heresy,
but because he excommunicated Leo, and being thrice called unto the council
would not come. After this y^ Senators would have the Epistle of Leo laid down
among the decrees, but the bishops said no, it should not be, they would not
draw any other form, for that was perfect enough, in the end they referred
that unto the Emperor, who commanded that three bishops of the East churches,
three out of Po^tus, three out of Asia, three out of Thracia and three out of
Illyrium together with Anatolius and the substitutes of the Bishop of Rome
should meet at the Church and orderly reason of the faith, that either they
should lay down their several Creedes, or else know of a surety y^ he would
call a council to decide that controversy in the West. Being demanded
whether they would hold with Dioscorus who affirmed y^ Christ consisted of two
natures, or subscribe with Leo, who said that there were two natures in Christ?
they cried that they believed with Leo and held such as said y^ contrary for
Eutychians. The Senators replied y^ Leo him self affirmed there were two
natures so coupled in Christ, that they could be neither changed, divided, nor
confounded, with this saying they went into the temple of Euphemia accompanied
with Anatolius, the substituts of Leo, Maximus bishop of Antioch, Iuuenalis
bishop of Jerusalem, Thalassius bishop of Caesarea, in Cappadocia and many
others. Being set, the canon of the council was read: Our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ etc. as we have written before. After it was read they cried: This
is the faith of all the Fathers, we are all followers of this, we are all of
this opinion, Then said the Senators: the decrees and canons of the Fathers are
to be referred unto the Emperors most excellent majesty* Martianus the
Emperor was present at the sixth session, made an oration of peace and unity
unto the Bishopps, and commanded Aetius Archdeacon of Constantinople to read
in his hearing that which was decided, whereunto they subscribed every one.
The^ the Emperor asked them whether the decree was established by their
general consent, they all the second time answered, yea. Again the Emperor
made unto them two orations which were highely commended of them all. In the
end the canons by the means of the Emperor were confirmed, and the seae of
Chalcedon was made an Archbishopricke: the Emperor moreover commanded the
Bishops to continewe there three or four days, and to propose before the
Princes and Senators what every one thought good to be decided, and that they
should decree that which seemed expedie^nt. Then the session brake up. There
were other decrees and other canons established, and there was an other council
held by Iuuenalis and Maximus where it was decreed that the bishop of Antioch
should have either of both Phaenicia and Arabia annexed unto his province, and
the Bishop of Jerusalem, all the three Palaestinas, the which after
consultation had both by the Presidents and Bishops was confirmed. In the ninth
session the cause of Theodoritus was heard who accursed Nestorius in these
words: cursed be Nestorius and whosoever besides him denies Marie the virgin
to be the mother Theodoritus
of God, and deuideth the one only begotten son into two sons. I (says
he) have subscribed unto the canons of the council, and the Epistle of Leo.
After deliberation had among them selves, they restored him unto his
Bishopric. In the tenth session the suit of Ibas was heard Ibas.
and the sentence which Photius Bishop of Tyrus and Eustathius Bishop of
Berytus had pronounced against him was read, but the final end was differed
unto the next day. In the eleventh sessio^ when many Bishops would have him
restored, diverse Bishops were against it and said, that his accusers were at
the door and ready to come in. At length they read what they had decreed
toutching him. Yet the Senators moved the council that the Acts of the
council held at Ephesus which concerned Ibas should be read, and that all the
acts of the second council of Ephesus should be abrogated, the creation of
Maximus Bishop of Antioch only excepted: they entreated therein the Emperor
that nothing whatsoever was decreed since the first council of Ephesus where
holy Cyrill Bishop of Alexandria was chief should be of force and they gave
sentence that Maximus should enjoy his Bishopric. In an other session Basianus
the Bishop of Ephesus matter was called, and decreed that Basianus should be
removed out of his Bishopric, and Stephan placed in his Basianus.
rowme. In the thirteenth session Eunomius Bishop of Nicomedia and Anastasius
Bishop of Nice were called, for they contended among them selves about their
cities. The foureteeneth session was held for the hearing of Basianus. Last
of all it was decreed that the seae of Constantinople should enjoy the next
prerogative after Rome.

The end of the second book of Euagrius Scholasticus.
THE THIRD BOOK OF THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF EVAGRIVS SCHOLASTICVS.
CAP. I.
How Zeno the Emperor governed and lived.

WHen Zeno after the deceasse of his son had attained unto the Imperial
scepter, as if he were certainly persuaded, he could not enjoy y^ Empire of
the wholl world Zeno was emperor ^nno Dom. 75.
unless with outrage and riott he yielded him self unto all fleshly pleasure
whatsoever, gave him self at y^ beginning so much unto sensuality that he left
no filthy or shameful act, no heinous offense unpracticed, but so wallowed in
them that he thought it the part of a base and abject mind to commit them in
the dark and in secret: but to do them openly in the face of y^ whollworld
was a princely part, and such an act as became only the Emperor. His
disposition herein was both lewd and servile, for the Emperor is not to be
counted of thereafter as he governs others, but as he rules and guydeth him
self. It behooves him to suffer no lascivious Princes and magistrates should
be paternes of Godliness, unto the subjects and common people.
motion to root within his breast, but valiauntlye to encounter with
intemperancy, and to make his life as a pattern of virtue, or a lantern for
his subjects to follow after, thereby to lead them unto godly instruction.
But this man gave himself over unto voluptuousness and fell by a little and a
little unto such shameful servitude, that he could by no means be
withdrawn from it: he changed oftentimes such enormityes as maystred him no
otherwise then unthrifts and castawayes do use, whom infinite carnal
delites do lead captive, tickle their minds and sooth their senses, and that
which is most dangerous, vices be so linked together that one most commonly
follows in the neck of an other. For fleshlye pleasure having once taken
place, observes no mean, ends not in good time, but by occasion of one an
other is kindled, one flame of fiery lust flasheth after an other, until that
one has gotten either the government of him self, and given vices the
overthrow and thenceforth become conqueror: or else is overcome with the
tyrannical slavery of them, lead by them unto the last gasp, and in the end
plungeth like a wretch into the deep pit of hell.

CAP. II.
How the Barbarians invaded both the East and west contreyes.

ZEno in the beginning of his reign lead such a life as I have described
before. His subjects throughout the East and West dominions were vexed out of
measure, and sustained great losses: for the Barbarians called Scenitae
destroyed all places and a great multitude of Hunni called of old Messagetae
invaded Thracia and passed over the river Danubius without lettor stay. Zeno.
also was by force after a Barbarian sort bereaved of the other parts which
remained of the Empire.

CAP. III.
How Basiliscus the tyrant took armor against Zeno and put the Emperor to
flight.

THis Zeno, when Basiliscus the brother of Bernia made preparation to take
armor against him, was of so faint a courage that he fled away geuinge unto
Basiliscus the Imperial honor and victory without any travel. He was so
odious unto his subjects who by right detested his abominable life: he had no
stomach at all, no show of a noble mind, but all luskish and lither of a
naughty condition the which his sensualitye declared bearinge rule over his
cowarde mind and slothful disposition. Wherefore this Zeno together with
Ariadne his wife whom he had with him, who also had fled away from her
mother (and if there were any other that bore him good will) got him into
Isauria where he had been brought up and there he was besieged. Thus
Basiliscus came to be Emperor of Rome, proclaimed his some Marcus, Caesar,
and laid down a platform of gouernemente far contrary both unto the manner
of Zenos raygne and such as were Emperors before him.

CAP. IIII.
How Basiliscus called Timotheus Aelurus Bishop of Alexandria home from exile
and by his persuasion sent letters into every Coast wherein he condemned the
council of Chalcedon.

THis Basiliscus (spoken of before) at the request of certain citizens of
Alexandria that were sent unto him, called Timothee home from exile where he
had continewed eighteen years, Acacius then being Bishop of Constantinople.
Timothe after his coming to Constantinople persuaded Basiliscus to send
letters universally unto all Priests throughout the Churches under heaven, and
therein to accursed both the acts of the council held at Chalcedon and the
decree of Leo as toutchinge the faith, the which letters were written in this
form. The Emperor Caesar Basiliscus, Pius, Victorious, triumphant, chief
Lord, perpetual Augustus, and Marcus the most noble Caesat, unto Timothe the
most reverend and most holy Archbishop of the noble city of Alexandria
sends greetinge. The laws and canons hitherto Basiliscus the tyrant and
vsu^per of the Imperial crown sent these wicked letters into all churches
wherein he condemns the faith of Leo, the godly bishop of Rome and the canons
of the holy council held at Chalcedo^.
compiled in defense of the sincere and Apostolic faith, by the most holy
Emperoures our predecessors, who worshipped aright the blessed, eternal and
living trinity, seeinge they were godly decreed and have ever been found
wholesome for the wealth of the whollworld, we will never have cancelled, nay
rather our will is they should be published for our own proper decrees. for we
prefer piety and singular love toward God and our Savior Jesus, who both
made and advanced us to glory and renoune before all the care and travel that
is employed in worldly affairs, and we believe verily that the fastening and
knitting together of Christ's flock in love and charity, is both a safety unto
us our selves, and unto all our subjects, unto our Empire a fundation that can
not be shaken and a wall that can not be battered and thrown down, wherefore
being moved with the instinct of the holy spirit, we have determined with our
selves to offer for a sacrifice unto God and our Savior Jesus Christ the
uniform consent of the holy church as the first fruits of our reign and
Empire: and ordained that the ground and bulwark of the blessed life given
unto men, to wit, the Creed of the three hundred and eighteen holy fathers,
of old assembled together in the holy Ghost at Nice (in the which faith both
we and all our ancestors were baptized) should only be kept and retained of
the faithful people throughout all the most holy Churches of God: for in this
one Creed the sincere faith is so sufficiently decided both to the overthrow
of all erroneus opinions and to the establishing of concord and unity
throughout the holy Churches of God. And moreover the canons published to the
confirmation of the same faith, are of no less force and virtue. Again we do
ratify the faith of the hundred and fifty holy fathers, which assembled in
this noble city of Constantinople and accursed the blasphemers of the holy
Ghost. In like sort we approve the acts of the council called at Ephesus
against wicked Nestorius and such as afterward embraced his opinion. As for
such decrees B(...) co^de^neth Leo and the counsel of Chalcedon.
as disturb the quiet estate of the holy Churches of God and the peace of the
wholl world, to wit, the decision and decree of Leo, all the canons of the
council held at Chalcedon, whatsoever they desined toutching the exposition
of the Creed, interpretation, doctrine and deciding thereof, to the end a
newefound faith might be established contrary to the Creed of the three
hundred and eighteen Godly Bishops spoken of before, we ordain and decree
that the most holy Bishops both here and in every the several Churches
wheresoever do acurse them, and whersoeuer they are found that they be burned
to ashes, for so the godly Emperors of famous memory Constantinus and
Theodosius junior who lived before our time commanded as concerning the
heretics books and blasphemous pamphlets. We will have them so abolished
that they be banished for ever out of the one and the only Catholic,
Apostolic and faithful church, as constitutions which derogate from the
whollsome decrees of the three hundred and eighteen holy fathers which
always ought to be of great force and virtue, and from the canons
established in the holy Ghost of the godly Bishops at the council of Ephesus.
To be short that it be not lawefull either for Priest or for people to
transgress that most divine canon of the holy creed, but that together with
all the new sanctions published in the council of Chalcedo^, the heresy also
may be rooted out, of such as confess not, that the only begotten son of
God was conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of holy Mary the perpetual virgin,
and mother of God, truly incarnate and made man, but that his flesh came down
from heaven and so feign it very monstrously to be figurated in some
pha^tasticall sort or other: we will and command that every erroneus opinion,
at what time, in what sort, or place soever throughout the wholl world has
been either compassed, or thought upon within, or expressed by word without
as plausible nouelty to the overthrow of this holy Creed, be condemned for
ever. And insomuch the Emperor is bound of duty with diligent care to
provide that by his prouidente counsel the subjects, not only in time present,
but also in time to come may enjoy peace and tranquillity: we do ordain that
the most holy Bishops do subscribe unto these our gracious letters generally
written unto all and openly proclaimed, to the end they may thereby manifestly
declare their settled mind in addicting them selves only unto the holy faith
of the three hundred and eighteen holy fathers, the which also the hundred and
fifty Godly Bishops have afterward confirmed, and after that again was
ratified of the true professors and holy fathers which met at the princely
city of Ephesus. For it seems good unto us that the only Creed of the
three hundred and eighteen holy fathers as a perfect platform of tried faith
should be followed and by accursinge the acts of the Chalcedon council which
may be stumbling blocks unto the faithful people, that they banishe them
wholly the Churches, for canons that disturb the wholl world and hinder the
success of our happy raygne. Such as after the receite of these our gracious
letters, published as we persuade our selves by the providence of God, to the
end concord, and unity, which is to be desired of all men may be
established in the Churches of God, do at anytime go about to allege, or
name, by disputinge, teachinge or writing, in any time, forte, or place, that
decree published in the council of Chalcedon contrary to the faith, as autors
of tumultes, and dissension in the holy Churches of God and unto all our loving
subjects, and adversaries moreover unto God and the safty of our scepter. we
straictly charge and co^mau^d and that according unto the laws made before our
time by Theodosius the worthy Emperor of happy memory against such frenzy and
madness, presentlye annexed unto these our gracious letters, generally directed
unto all, if they be Bishops and of the clergy that they be deprived of their
dignity and priesthood, if Monks or lay men that they be exiled and punished
with confiscatio^ of their wholl substance and other severe penalties. For in
so doing the holy, coessential Trinity author and geuer of life unto the wholl
world being honored of us, with such homage and service, not only for the
rootinge out of such tares as we have mentioned before, but also for the true
and Apostolic traditions toutchinge the holy creed established by us, is
like to be reconciled and favorable unto us and unto all our louinge subjects,
to govern the Empire together with us, and to bring peace and quietness unto
mankind,

CAP. V.
How many subscribed unto the wicked letters of Basiliscus and condemned the
council of Chalcedon.

TImothee who was newely (as I said before) returned from exile as Zachary
Rhetor does Timotheus. Aelurus. Peter Cnapheus. Paulus. Anastasius. 50. Bishops
subscribed to heresy for fear.
write subscribed unto the aforesaid letters of Basiliscus universally
directed unto all men. Even so did Peter Bishop of Antioch syrnamed Cnapheus,
who was at that time at Constantinople together with Timothee. When these
things were brought about in this sort, Paulus was chosen Archbishop of
Ephesus. It is reported also that Anastasius the successor of Iuuenalis in the
seae of Jerusalem subscribed unto those general letters of Basiliscus, and
that many others to the number of fifty did no less, I mean abrogated the
decrees of Leo and the council of Chalcedon. Besides all this there is extante
a supplication written unto Basiliscus by the Bishops of Asia which met
together at Ephesus, whereof we have borrowed some part and laid it here down
in such sort as follows. Unto the most holy and dearly beloved of Christ
our puysant The flattering and heretical Bishops of Asia wrote this unto
Basiliscus the usurper.
Lords Basiliscus and Marcus perpetual Augusti. After a few lines this is
annexed. You have signified most holy and Christian Emperors that you your
selves together with the faith which is both hated and diversely assaulted,
were impugned. Again a little after. The terrible and dreadful expectation of
the day of dome, the flame of Gods heavy wrath and your majesty's high
displeasure apprehended the adversaries immediately, which arrogantly went
about to withstand almightye God and to assault your confirmed raygne: who
moreover do not only not cease diversely to aff^ct and molest our mean
calling but continewally revile us, blase abroad false rumors and sclaunders
of us, to wit, that we subscribed unto your gracious and Apostolic letters
generally written unto all not without compulsion and constraynt, whereunto
verily we have subscribed with most willing and prompt minds. And again
after a few lines. Take heed that in no wise ye lay down any decrees
contrary unto your former letters generally written, perswadinge your selves
for most certain that in so doing the wholl world will be set on hurlyburly
and the mischiefs which rose of the council of Chalcedo^ (where there was
great slaughter and blooshed of true professors and innocente persons) in
respect of afterclapps shall seem but trifles. Toward the end there was
written. We take our Savior Christ Jesus to witness, that the religion and
service we owe unto God is both free and voluntarily: and we crave most
humbly of your majesty's that besides sundry others, specially the Bishop of
Constantinople who is manifestly known to have wickedlye behaved him self in
Zacharias Rhetor. The Monk of Constantinople we^ heretics.
his calling may be condemned and deposed of his dignitye by the just,
canonical and Ecclesiastical censure. Besides all the aforesaid Zacharis
writes in this sort. When the letters of the Emperor generally directed
unto all, were published abroad, the Monks of Constantinople being infected
with the noisome sink of Eutyches heretical opinion, supposing now after the
restoringe of Timothee and publishinge of the Emperors letters they had gotten
that which they looked for, to the vpholdinge of their heresy and hopinge now
they could bring their purpose to pass: got them in all the haste unto
Timothee, and after Timothee (who proved that the word of God according unto
the flesh was of one substance with us, but according unto his diuinitye of
one substance with the father) had confuted them, they went home again like
fools.

CAP. VI.
How Timotheus Aelurus after he had recovered the Bishopric of Alexandria
rendered unto the seae of Ephesus the Metropoliticke jurisdiction and accursed
the council of Chalcedon.

THe aforesaid Zachary reports how that Timothee left Constantinople and
got him to Ephesus and there restored Paulus (who was lately chosen by the
Bishops of the province according unto the canons of the Church, yet after
deposed) unto his former Bishopric. The said Timothee moreover restored the
seae of Ephesus (as I said before) unto her Metropoliticke jurisdiction that
was taken away by the council of Chalcedon. Thence he took shipping and came
to Alexandria: there he requested of as many as came unto him to accurse the
council of Chalcedon. There left him (as Zachary writes) sundry of his own
crew, but specially Theodotus one of them which forsook Theodosius (who then
was made Bishop of Jerusalem by certain sedicious persons) at Ioppe and
accompanied Iuuenalis to Constantinople.

CAP. VII.
How Basiliscus fearinge him self in the insurrection made by the Monks
through the persuasion of Acacius, called in his former letters.

Again the aforesaid author writes how Acacius Bishop of Constantinople
canuased the matter about, raised both Monks and people of Constantinople
against Basiliscus as one that was an heretic: made him deny he had written
his letters universally unto all men, and decree that such things as he had
rashly and unadvisedly published should be called in again, and to have also
brought to pass that the same Emperor sent every where unto all men contrary
letters wherein he approved the council of Chalcedon. The same Zachary
shewinge himself very partial throughout his history and led very much with
affection, omitted the said contrary letters, they were written as follows.

The repelling letters of Basiliscus the Emperor.
THe Emperors Caesar's, Basiliscus and Marcus. we charge and command that the
Apostolic Basiliscus the vsu^pe^ is feign by reason of the commonon ^o call
in his former letters laid lowne in the ^. cap. of this book.
and true faith from the beginning hitherto retained in the Church, continewed
unto this our present reign and observed ofvs this day be embraced for ever:
in it we were baptized and we believe that the same is only to be embraced
firmly and vnuiolably, being embraced to be continewed throughout all the
Catholic and Apostolic Churches under heaven, and no other besides this to
be longer sought for. Wherefore our will is that the letters generally written
duringe our raygne either unto all men or otherwise how soever, or what
beside this has been published by us, be henceforth cancelled and abolished:
that Nestorius, Eutyches with all their accomplices and every heresy be
accursed: that no council be called together neither any decree or reasoninge
of the faith, but that such things as are already in that behalf established
remain unviolable: that the provinces whereunto the seae of this royal and
noble city has the preferringe of Bishops be restored unto the most
reverend and most holy Patriarch Acacius: and that the Bishops already placed
throughout the provinces continewe nevertheless in their proper seaes, so that
there may rise thereof after their desease no prejudice at all unto the
prerogative of the holy seae of Constantinople. Last of all let no man doubt
but that this our gracious decree is of force agreeable with the will of God.


Thus were these things brought about.

CAP. VIII.
How Zeno the deposed Emperor recovered again the royal scepter.

ZEno (as it is reported) seeing in a vision the holy, valiant, and renowned
martyr Thecla, not only provoking, but also promising him to be restored
again unto the Imperial robes, led his army toward Constantinople. And
having allured with gifts such as besieged him, he thrust Basiliscus (who had
raygned two years) beside the scepter, took him out of the sanctuary he had
fledd unto, and delivered him unto the hand of the enemy. For which cause Zeno
dedicated at Seleucia in Isauria a goodly temple gorgeously builded unto y^
renowned martyr Thecla, and bewtified it with many Princely monuments which
were preserved unto this our age. But as for Basiliscus he sent him away to
suffer at Cappadocia, where together with wife and children he was put to death
in an Inn called Acouson. Immediately after, Zeno made a law where he
abrogated the decrees of Basiliscus the tyrant comprised in the letters he had
generally written unto all men: banished Peter syrnamed Cnapheus out of Antioch
and Paulus Bishop of Ephesus.

CAP. IX.
How after the deceasse of Basiliscus, the Bishops of Asia going about to
pacisie Acacius who stomached them for condemning the council of Chalcedon,
sent unto him their recantation.

THe Bishops of Asia to the end they might avoid the displeasure Acacius had
conceived against them, acknowledged their faults and craved pardon: sent unto
him their recantatio^ and repentance. where they protested that they had
subscribed not of their own accord but by constraint and compulsion unto the
general letters of Basiliscus, and confirmed with an oath that it was even so
and that they believed no otherwise then the counsel of Chalcedon did believe.
The recantation was thus.

The Epistle or recantation sent by the Bishops of Asia unto Acacius Bishop of
Constantinople.
Unto Acacius the most holy and most religious Patriarch of Constantinople.
After a few lines. We have sent unto you as it was very meet, one for to
supplye our rowme. In a while after this again. By these our letters we do
protest that not of our own accord, but by compulsion we were brought to
subscribe unto Basiliscus letters: and that we have given thereunto our
consents not with heart, but only in word. For by the grace of almighty God who
louingelye accepts of our prayers we believe no otherwise then we learned of
the three hundred and eighteen famous men, and lights of the wholl world and
besides them of the hundred and fifty holy fathers. We hold moreover with the
holy acts decreed by the godly fathers at Chalcedon.


As for the report Zachary Rhetor made of these bishops whether he sclaundered
the^ or whether they lied the^ selves that they had subscribed against their
wills unto Basiliscus letters, I am not able certainly to auoutch.

CAP. X.
What Bishops there were of Antioch about that time.

AFter that Peter was banished the Church of Antioch, Stepha^ succeeded him in
the Bishopric, Peter. Stephan. Calandio.
whom the people of Antioch dispatched as John Rhetor declares with little
darts, much like sharp spears. After his decease Calandio governed the seae,
who persuaded as many as came unto him to accurse both Timothee and the general
letters Basiliscus had sent abrod unto all Churches.

CAP. XI.
How the Emperor Zeno spared Timotheus Aelurus because of his gray hear:
after this Aelurus death Petrus Moggus became Bishop of Alexandria, he was
deposed and Timotheus Basilicus placed in his rowme.

ZEno although he purposed to banish Timothee, Alexandria, yet when it was told
him that he was a very old man and ready to lie in his grave, he altered his
mind. Timothee not long after finished the race of his mortal life and
immediately the Bishops of that province chose of their own head Peter
syrnamed Moggus to their Bishop. Zeno hearing this was very much Peter Moggus.
displeased, gave forth commandment that Peter should die the death, called
home Timothee the successor of Proterius who then by reason of a certain
insurrection made of the people, led his life at Canabus. Thus Timothee by the
Emperors commandment recovered again the bishopric.

CAP. XII.
Of John who crept to be Bishop of Alexandria after the death of Timothee, and
how the Emperor deposed him for perjury, preferringe Petrus Moggus to the
rowme.

John the Priest and Parson of Saynct John Baptists the forerunner of our
Savior, ^ame through some men's persuasion to Constantinople, made suit unto
the Emperor, that (if it fell out the Bishop of Alexandria departed this life
in his time) he would give him the nominatinge of the next incumbent to
succeed him in the Byshoprick. Zachary reports that the Emperor charged
him, he went about to procure it unto him self, but to clear him self of
this suspicion he swear and protested with solemn oaths he would never be
Bishop if it were offered him and so got him home. Wherefore the Emperor
decreed that after the death of Timothee he should be Bishop whom both clergy
and laytye would elect. Shortly after Timothee died, John gave a piece of
money (as Zachary does write) neglected the oath he made unto the Emperor,
and was chosen Bishop of Alexandria. When this was known the Emperor banished
him Alexandria, wrote by some men's procuremente an Epistle unto the people of
Alexandria, of unity and concord, and commanded that Peter should be
restored unto the Byshopricke condicionally if he subscribed unto the Epistle
and received into the communion such as held with Proterius.

CAP. XIII.
How Petrus Moggus Bishop of Alexandria received the Epistle of Zeno and was
reconciled unto the faction of Proterius.

PErgamius Liuetenant of Egypt took upon him the orderinge of this matter
according unto the mind of Acacius Bishop of Constantinople: he arrived at
Alexandria and there he was given to understand that John had fled away: he
conferred with Peter: exhorted him to allow of Zeno his Epistle written unto
the people of Alexandria, and to receive into the Church such as dissented from
him. Whereupon Peter received the Epistle and subscribed unto it: promised
moreover to admit his adversaries into the communion. After all this at a
solemn meeting within Alexandria when all the people embraced the Epistle of
Zeno entitled of Concord: Peter also was reconciled unto the faction of
Proterius, made a sermon unto the people and read in the church the Epistle of
Zeno which was an exhortation unto peace and unity.

CAP. XIIII.
The Epistle which Zeno wrote to reconcile the people of Alexandria.

ZEno Emperor Caesar, Pius, Victorious Triumphant, chief Lord, perpetual
Augustus unto the most reverend bishops throughout Alexandria, Egypt, Libya
and Pentapolis with the Priests, Mo^ks and lay people, sends greeting. In
so much we are certainly persuaded that the original confirmation, continewa^ce,
strength and invincible fortres of our Imperial scepter is only vpheld by the
sincere and true faith (the which three hundred and eighteen holy fathers
delivered unto us by the inspiratio^ of the holy Ghost in the council of Nice,
and was also confirmed of a hundred and fifty godly Bishops in the council held
at Constantinople) we have labored day and night not only by prayer but with
all endeuer and with publishinge of laws, amply and abundantly to sill with
it the holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church of God scattered far and vvide
over the face of the earth, being the immortal and sempiternall parent of this
our raygne and principalitye: that the devout people of God continewinge the
divine peace and quietness may pour unto God the acceptable sacrifice of
prayer, together with the most holy Bishops and sacred clergy, with the
governors of Monasteries and Monks them selves for the preservation of our
prosperous raygne. For in case that almighty God and our Savior Jesus Christ,
who took flesh of the virgin Mary the mother of God and was borne into the
world would allow of the general praises and worship we give unto him and
receive the same with willi^g mind and redines, then no doubt not only all
sorts of enemies would utterly be foiled, but also all other nations under
heaven would be brought subject unto our Empire, and willingly serve us next
and immediately after God: then also peace and the profit annexed thereunto,
seasonable te^perature of the aer, plenty of all sorts of fruit, with all
other things required for the use of man would abu^dantly be ministered. Now
therefore seeing it appears unto all men how both we our selves and the Empire
of Rome is preserved under the wing of the true faith; the holy governors of
the monasteries and heremits with other religious me^ exhibited unto us
supplicatio^s, exhorti^g us very earnestly that the most holy churches may
enjoy peace, that the members may be coupled together which the deuel enemy to
honesty has labored of a long time to part asunder, for he is fully persuaded
that if the body of the church being jointly knit together in the bond of unity
encountered with him, he would quickly be overthrown. by reason the members
were severed, it came to pass that infinite multituds of me^, now many hundred
years ago departed this world, some without baptism, some other without the
communion being void of charity (the dynt of death is inevitable) it caused
moreover infinite slaughters and bloodshed, not only the earth but the aer also
was infected with streams of blood is huinge out of the tender bowels of men.
And who is he (I pray you) that wishes not for reformato^ and redress of
these things? wherefore we have done our endeavor for to certify you, that not
only we our selves but all the churches every where have not had in times
past, neither present, will not have herafter, neither know any other that
have any other faith or doctrine, then the creed (spoken of before) delivered
by three hundred and eighteen Bishops and confirmed afterward by a hundred
and fifty fathers. But if any man have any other creed we take him not to be
of the church. For we believe that through this faith only it comes to pass
that our Empire does flourish: that the people by embraci^g of the same are
inspired with the holy Ghost and washed in the sacred fountain of baptism: it
was this faith that the holy fathers in the council of Ephesus subscribed
unto, which deposed wicked Nestorius of the Ecclesiastical ministry and as
many as favored his heretical opinion whom we also do accurse together with
Eutyches (for both of them impugned the aforesaid faith) and approve the
twelve points of the faith laid down by Cyrill of worthy memory, late
Archbishop of the Catholic church of Alexandria. For we confess that the
only begotten son of God our Lord Jesus Christ is truly incarnate, of one
substance with the father according unto his divinity, and of one substance
with us according unto his humanity: that he came down from heaven: that by
the holy Ghost he took flesh of the virgin Mary the mother of God: that he
is one and not two. For we say that the miracles he wrought and the vexations
he endured in the flesh belonged unto one person. we do condemn for ever such
as divide, or confound his natures, or say that he had a fantastical body.
For he was truly incarnate of the mother of God without spott or blemish of
sin. The Trinity remains nevertheless though one person of the Trinity, to
wit, God the word be incarnate. Wherefore seeing we learn of surety that all
the holy and Catholic Churches every where, that all the godly Presidentes
and governors thereof, and that our Empire neither has allowed neither will
retain any other creed or form of faith, then that we spoke of even now,
let us jointly without any more a do be reconciled and embrace unity and
concord. These things have we written unto you, not to innouate ought as
toutching the faith, but fully to satisfy you therein. We do accurse
whosoever has believed or does believe the contrary, either now or at other
times, either in the council of Chalcedon, or in any other council
whatsoever* but specially of all others we do accurse Nestorius, Eutyches and
their co^plices. Wherefore hold with your Ghostly mother the Church, and
celebrate therein together with us the one holy communion according unto that
one faith of the three hundred and eighteen holy fathers. For your most holy
mother the Church groneth after you and desires to embrace you which are her
natural children, moreover she longs to hear your sweet voices. Get ye
thither in all the have. If ye do this ye shall not only purchase unto your
selves the favor of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, but also the
commendation of our highness. This epistle being read, all the people of
Alexandria returned unto the Catholic and Apostolic Church.

CAP. XV.
How John the deposed Bishop of Alexandria got him to Rome and procured
Simplicius the Bishop of Romes letters in his behalf unto Zeno toutching the
injuries he had sustained.

John (of whom we spoke before) took his heels from Alexandria unto old
Rome and raised there a wonderful great sedition. For he made report that
they deposed him of his bishopric for maintaining the decrees of Leo and the
council of Chalcedon, and that there was an other placed in his rowme, which
impugned the same. Simplicius Bishop of old Rome hearing of this, was
wonderfully moved, and wrote in his behalf unto the Emperor Zeno: but Zeno
answered him again, accused John of perjury and that therefore and for no
other crime he was deposed.

CAP. XVI.
How Calandio Bishop of Antioch was deposed for partaking with Ilus, Leo, and
Pampreps: and how the Bishops of Constantinople, Jerusalem, Antioch and
Alexandria were reconciled one to the other.

CAlandio Bishop of Antioch wrote unto Zeno the Emperor and unto Acacius
Bishop of Constantinople that Peter was not only an adulterer but also had
accursed the council of Chalcedon at his being in Alexandria. Yet afterward
this Calandio was banished into Oasis for holdinge with Ilus, Leo and Pampreps,
against Zena. Peter surnamed Cnapheus who was Bishop of Antioch before Calandio
and Stephan, recovered his bishopric again, subscribed unto Zenos Epistle of
Concord and wrote synodall letters unto Peter Moggus Bishop of Alexandria.
Acacius Bishop of Constantinople was afterward reconciled unto this Peter,
Martyrius likewise Bishop of Jerusalem wrote synodall letters unto him. Yet
afterward diverse withdrewe the^ selves from Peter's communion and thereupon it
fell out that Peter openly accursed the council of Chalcedon. Acacius Bishop
of Constantinople hearing of this was very sorry, wrote unto diverse of his
friends for to understand the truth: Peter be^nge desirous to satisfy them to
the uttermost, wrote back again to purge him self that he had committed no
such act, yet some do report y^ they knew certainly that Peter wrote no such
thing.

CAP. XVII.
Of the things which Peter Bishop of Alexandria wrote unto Acacius who
maintained the council of Chalcedon.

THe aforesaid Peter being a wavering person and a time seruer continewed not
long in one mind: but now accursed the council of Chalcedon and anon
recanted him of his folly approving in all points the same council. Wherefore
he wrote unto Acacius Bishop of Constantinople in manner as follows. The most
high God recompense your holiness for your great Peter b. of Alexandria
flat^ereth Aca^ius b. of Co^^tantinople ^ith this epistle.
travel and carefulnes, who not only your self many years ago have kept the
faith of the holy fathers but also confirmed the same by continewall preaching
and public sermons. For the confirmation of which faith we see that the
creed of the three hundred and eighteen holy fathers has very well been
framed, in it we were baptized, in it we have believed, and now do believe: the
which faith also was confirmed by a hundred and fiftye godly Bishops in the
council of Constantinople. wherefore you lead all men co^tinewally as a
guide: you bring the holy church of God into unity: last of all you persuade us
with invincible arguments that nothing was decreed in the most holy and
general council of Chalcedon prejudicial unto these canons of the fathers,
but that such things as of old were established by the holy fathers in the
council of Nice, were confirmed in this council with uniform consent of all.
we of our own part seeing we saw therein nothing innouated as toutching the
faith, have consented theru^to of our own accord and believed the same. Yet are
we not ignorant that there are certain monks which envy at our brotherly Idle
Monks ^^t men together by ^e ears.
love and amity, which blase in your hearing sclau^derous reports that can not
I am sure so easily displease your holiness: first of all how we should
translate into an other place the corpse of the most holy and our most reverend
father Timothee the Archbishop, which (as they say) is neither acceptable unto
God, neither agreeable with the laws. Again they get them unto the second
crime, the which as it is forged, so is it far more heinous then the other.
For how can it be that we should accurse the council of Chalcedon, seeing we
confirm the same by our belief? your holiness I am sure is not ignorant how
both people and monks contend here with us, who can first devise any fond
novelty, they determined to fall again from the Church, together with
certain other lewd persons, and to draw the people after them. Wherefore
being helped with your prayers, we have devised these letters, as a salve for
this mischief, which derogate nothing at all from the council of Chalcedon,
fully satisfyinge our selves that there was no novelty established therein.
This have we done moreover, partly for to persuade the simpler sort of men, and
partly also for their sakes which remain here with us, that they may have
somewhat for them selves to stop the aduersaties mouth with all: and by
imployinge in this behalf our continual travel and industrye, we have
suppressed in short space the furious disposition of the people. I would have
your holiness yet to learn one thing more, how the monks cease not at this
hour to sow tares among the wheat, how they linked unto them The idle monks
sowed tares among the wheat as the enemy did in the gospel.
certain men which never lived in the monasteries as instruments of their
wicked practices: how they rogue about and spread false rumors, both against us
and the quiet state of Christ's Church: how they suffer us to do nothing
decently as the canons of the holy and catholic Church of Christ do
require, but rather bring to pass that the people will sooner control us
then be commanded of us, nay all their doing is detestable in the sight of
God and man. I hope your holiness will signify all the aforesaid unto our
most holy Lord the Emperor, and bring to pass that his highness may decree
in this behalf such things as may be for the Ecclesiastical peace and
tranquillity, agreeable with the will of God, and the Emperors industry, to
thend all men may conform them selves thereafter.

CAP. XVIII.
How John the deposed bishop of Alexandria counseled Felix bishop of Rome to
depose Acacius bishop of Constantinople.

John who fled to Rome, after Zeno had deposed him, certified Felix the
successor of Simplicius in the Byshopricke of Rome, of Peter's doings: exhorted
him (as Zachary writes) to send Acacius a deprivation, because he had
communicated with Peter, the which act of Felix being contrary to the canons
of the Church Acacius would not approve. The messengers that brought this
Epistle unto Acacius were the paynefull and vigilant monks called Acoimetoi.
Zachary is the (...)
author of the premises, who as far as I can see, knew nothing of the whole
circumstance perfectly, but heard it only as it were over the shoulder, and
so reported it. Wherefore I my self will now write the stories as they were in
deed. When John had exhibited accusations and bills against Acacius unto
Felix, that contrary unto the Canon of the Church, he had communicated with
Peter and of other heinous offenses which he had done against the decrees of
the Church: Felix sent Vitalius and Misinus two bishops, unto the Emperor
Zeno, partly to confirm with his authority the council of Chalcedon, partly
also to depose Peter of his Byshoprick as an heretic, and last of all to
send Acacius unto him for to render an account, and to purge him self of such
crimes as John (of whom we made often mention before) laid to his charge.

CAP. XIX.
How Cyrill head of the vigilant monks sent unto Felix bishop of Rome charging
him with slacknesse in revenging such injuries as the faith sustained.

ERe the aforesaid Vitalius and Misinus came unto the Emperor, Cyrill head of
the vigilant monks, charged him with slacknesse of duty, seeinge so many
grievous practices take place against the true and sincere faith. Felix then
wrote unto Misinus that he should do nothing before he had conferred with
Cyrill and learned of him what was to be done.

CAP. XX.
What Felix wrote unto Zeno the Emperor, and Zeno unto him again.

FElix wrote not only unto Zeno, but also unto others, where he brought them
into remembrance partly of the council of Chalcedon, and partly also of the
persecution in Aphrik in the reign of Theodorichus. He wrote an other Epistle
unto Acacius, but Zeno wrote back again, and told him that he fought with
his shadow, in giving ear unto John's report, and in contendinge with his
adversaries: for he was the man that bound him self with an oath, that he would
never be Bishop of Alexandria, yet afterward was found perjured, and to
commit every kind of sacrilege: that Peter was advanced unto the priestly
function, not without good trial of his faith, that he subscribed with his
own hand, and approved the faith of the hree hundred and eyghteene holy
fathers in the council of Nice, which faith was afterward Zeno the Emperor
unto Felix b. of Rome.
ratifyed by the council of Chalcedon. These were the words of Zeno: We
would have you assure your self that our highness with most holy Peter
(mentioned before) and all the Christian congregations do embrace and
reverence the sacred council of Chalcedon, which council is one in effect
with the Nicene creed. There are Epistles to be seen among the acts of the
aforesaid council, partly of Cyrill (mentioned before) and partly of other
governors of the monasteries of Constantinople, and of the bishops and clergy
within the province of Egypt unto Felix bishop of Rome, against Peter as an
heretic, and against all them that communicated with him. As many of the
vigilant monks as came to Felix rebuked Misinus and Vitalis because that until
their coming to Constantinople the name of Peter was secretly used to be
read in the holy catalogue, but since that time continually unto this present
hour Misinus and Vitalis communicated with Peter. The Epistle which the
Bishops of Aegypte wrote signified this much of Peter, and that John was of
the true faith, and consecrated according unto the canons of the Church: that
Peter was ordered only by two Bishops infected with the same exror with him,
and that immediately after the flight of John he left no punishment unpracticed
upon the true professors. All which circumstances are said to have been
signified unto Acacius and that Acacius aided Peter in all what so ever he went
about.

CAP. XXI.
How Symeon one of the vigilant monks went to Rome, accused them that came
from Rome to Constantinople, that they had communicated with heretics and
procured their deprivation.

THe aforesaid accusations were augmented at the report of Symeon one of the
vigilant monks whom Cyrill had sent unto Felix. For Misinus and Vitalis were
reprehended of him because they communicated with heretics, specially seeing
the name of Peter the heretic was openly read in the holy catalogue: and
that in so doing many simple men were snared of the heretics, who sticked not
to brag that the Bishop of Rome received Peter into the communion. Symeon
said moreover that when certain interrogatories were demanded, Misinus and
his company would not confer with the true catholics, would not receive
their writin^gs, neither exquisitly sift out such things as were done, and
greatly did prejudice the true faith. Syluanus the priest who accompanied
Misinus and Vitalis to Constantinople was brought forth and he auoutched that
the monks allegations were true. They read moreover the Epistle of Acacius,
where he gave Simplicius to understand that Peter was lately deposed and
pronounced the child of darkness. To be short Misinus and Vitalis were
deposed of their dignities, and cut of from the holy and undefiled communion,
and that by the censure of the wholl assembly which pronounced of Peter as
follows. The Church of Rome does not communicate with Peter the heretic ^e
Church Rome pro^^nceth ^ against ^er b. of ^^^xandria.
who was lately condemned by the Apostolic s^ae, excommunicated the Church,
and held for accursed: although there were no other crime to charge him with
all, yet is this of force sufficient, that he can not govern the faithful
people of God, because he was ordered of heretics. In the same decree this
also was comprised: It appeared evidently that Acacius bishop of Constantinople
was greatly to be blamed, because for all he wrote unto Simplicius and called
Peter an heretic, yet he would not make Zeno priuey thereunto, when as in
very deed, if he had borne good will unto Zeno he should have done it. And
rather he should have pleased the Emperor then provided for the faith. But let
us return to discourse of the history. There is extant an Epistle of Acacius
unto the bishops of Egypt, priests, monks, and all the people where he
endeuoreth to bring such as raise schism and dissension, to embrace peace and
unity* of the same matter also he wrote unto Peter Bishop of Alexandria.

CAP. XXII.
Of the schism raised at Alexandria, and in sundry other places toutching the
council of Chalcedon.

WHen the schism waxed hot, and the sedition grievous within the city of
Alexandria, Peter persuaded certain Bishops and governors of monasteries to
communicate with him. There he condemned and accursed the decrees of Leo, the
acts of the Chalcedon council, and such as would not receive the books of
Dioscorus and Timothee. Many others he banished their monasteries when he
could not allure them to his heretical opinion. wherefore Nephalius took his
voyage to Constantinople, revealed the wholl unto Zeno, who therefore was
wonderful sorry, and sent thither Cosmas one of his guard for to threaten and
rebuke Peter very sharply, partly for coutemninge the Epistle of Zeno
entitled of concord, and partly also because that through his rough dealinge
so great a sedition was raised. But when Cosmas could prevail in nothing save
only that the expulsed monks were restored by his means unto their
monasteries, back again he got him to the Emperor. Wherefore the Emperor
the second time sent Arsenius lieuetenant of Egypt, and captain of the
garrison amongst them, who together with Nephalius went straighte to
Alexandria, entreated them to keep the peace: but when he could not obtain
his purpose, he sent some of them to Constantinople. And for all there was great
reasoninge in the presence of Zeno about the council of Chalcedon, yet was
there nothing concluded, for neither did Zeno wholly cleave unto it.

CAP. XXIII.
Of Phranitas and Euphemius Bishops of Constantinople: Athanasius and John
Bishops of Alexandria: Palladius and Flauianus of Antioch with others.

ABout that time when Acacius Bishop of Constantin^^^, had finished the mortal
race of his natural life, Phranitas was chosen to succeed him in the
Byshopricke. He wrote letters of amity unto Peter, but Peter answered him
again, and inueyed bitterly against the council of Chalcedon. This Phranitas
continewed Bishop no longer then four months but he died and left Euphemius
to succeed him. When Peter wrote unto him also letters of amity, and
Euphemius perceived that in them he accursed the council of Chalcedon, he was
all out of quiet, and would in no wise communicate with Peter. Both their
Epistles are extant, Phranitas unto Peter, and Peter unto Phranitas, the which
I will omit, because they are long and tedious. When Euphemius and Peter
contended among them selves, and while they purposed to call synods together
one against the other, it fell out that Peter departed this life, in whose
rowme Athanasius succeeded, which labored with all might to reconcile such as
were at discord and dissension, but he could not prevail because their minds
were so drawn into diverse and different opinions. The same Athanasius wrote
afterward letters of amity unto Palladius the successor of Peter in the
byshopricke of Antioch, specially concerning the council of Chalcedon. So did
John the successor of Athanasius in the seae of Alexandria. Moreover when
Palladius Bishop of Antioch had departed this life, Flauianus succeeded him,
and sent Solomon priest of Antioch to Alexandria with letters of amity unto
John, requiringe an answer by the same messenger. After the deceasse of John,
an other John succeeded him in the byshopricke of Alexandria. These things
continewed in this sort the reign of Anastasius (for he deposed Enphemius of
his byshopricke) yet was I feign here to rehearse them in order for the playner
deliverance, and better understanding of the storye.

CAP. XXIIII.
How Armatus cosen to Berina the Empress was put to death.

KEno through the procurement of Ilus dispatched out of the way Armatus the
cousin of Berina Zeno slew Armatus who saved his life.
the Empress, whom Basiliscus sometime had made captain against him, yet he
won him to his side, made him in stead of his enemy his companion, and
created his son Basiliscus, Caesar at Nice. notwithstanding these great
benefits, he got him to Constantinople, and conspired the death of Armatus:
his son Basiliscus in stead of Caesar he made priest, who afterward was
preferred to be Bishop.

CAP. XXV.
The death of Theodorichus the Scythian which took armor against Zeno.

ABout that time Theodorichus a Scythian borne, prepared him self to give Zeno
the Emperor battle, he raised a wonderful great army in Thracia, and
marched forwards toward Constantinople: he destroyed all the country before
him unto the entry of Pontus, and verily he had taken Constantinople, had not
some of his dearest friends been displeased with him, and conspired how to
bereave him of his life. he himself being given to understand of the hatred
that was borne unto him, gave back, yet not long after he dyed, but what
kind of death I am now about to declare. There honge on high before his camp
after the Barbarian manner, a spear cleft in the end. He being desirous to
revive his spirits, and exercise his body, commanded they should bring him
a horse. In all the have (as he was in other things altogether impatient) up
he gets him, the horse being unbroken and fierce, praunced about, fette diverse
carrieres ere Theodorichus could settle him self in his sadle, he fanned the
aer with his forefeet, and stood bolt upright only upon the hinder feet, so
that Theodorichus had much ado to struggle with him, yet durst he not pull
the bridle lest he fell upon him, neither was he fast on his horse, but was
tossed to and froe, so that the point of the spear which honge over his head
toutched him, and at length stuck in his ri^bes, that he was daungerously
wounded. thereupon he was constrained to keep his bed, and shortly after
dyed.

CAP. XXVI.
How Martianus raised battle against Zeno, and what became (...) him ^n the
end.

AFter the death of Theodorichus, Martianus the son of Anthemius Emperor
sometime of Rome, and allied unto (...) the Emperor, rebelled against Zeno.*
He had married Leonti^ the younger daughter of Leo, and fell to practice
tyranny. When they had fought in the palace, and many fallen of both sides,
Martianus foiled his adversaries, and had taken the palace, had not he posted
his devise over unto the next day, and let slip the opportunity that was
given him. Occasion is a slipperie thing, being once past, perhaps it will
not come again: being gone out of our hand, it flies with the aer* laugheth
the pursuers to scorn, and bids fools farewell. For he that will not when he
may, when he will, he shall have nay. Poets and Paynters Front capillata post
h^^ o^^asio calua.
the fathers of glosses and vizards, use to portract the forepart of the head
with a bushe of hear, and to leave behind the bald skull: geuinge us very
wittily to understand that while occasion or opportunity is behind it can not
be held, for there is no hear to take hold of, but while it is in the
forehead it flies away and makes of the pursuer a fool. Which verily
happened unto Martianus, who as he refused time when time was offered, so
afterward could he not get it to turn again. For the day followinge he was
betrayed of his own men, left desolate, and constrained to fly unto the
temple of the holy Apostles, but thence he was driven out, and removed to
Caesarea i^ Cappadocia: While he crept there among certain Monks and coueted
to hide him self, the Emperor sent him as far as Tarsus in Cilicia, there
was he shaven and made priest. Eustathius Syrus has exquisitly discoursed of
these things.

CAP. XXVII.
The conspiracy and tyranny of Ilus and Leontius.

THe aforesaid Eustathius does write how Zeno conspired diverse times the
death of Berina his wives mother, banished her into Cilicia, removed her thence
again into a castle called Papirium, where Ilus played the tyrant, and there
she departed this life. Eustathius handles very artificially the doings of
Ilus how he escaped the hands of Zeno, and how Zeno executed him whom he had
sent to dispatche the other, taking his head from of his shoulders for
faylinge of his purpose. For to cloak his doings he made Ilus captain of his
power and army in the East. He acquainting him self, not only with Leontius,
but also with Marsus a worthy man, and with Pampreps remained still in the
east. Again how Leontius was proclaimed emperor at Tarsus in Cilicia: what
end these tyrants enjoyed: how Theodorichus a Gotth of great honor among the
Romans, was made general captain and sent against them with great power both
of our own men and of Barbarians: how Zeno executed the poor wretches in
recompense of the good will they bare unto him, and the travel they had taken
in his affairs, and how Theodorichus understanding of Zenos malicious purpose
pretended against him got him to old Rome, Eustathius has excellently laid
down in writing for the knowledge of the posterity. Yet some do report that
Theodorichus through the procurement of Zeno overcame Odoacer, so conquered
Rome and called him self King.

CAP. XXVIII.
Of Mammianus and his doings.

John Rhetor declares that Mammianus lived in the days of Zeno, who though he
were basely borne, yet came he to be Senator: that he builded Antiphorum in the
suburbs of Daphne, a place before time where vines did grow, being erable
ground, over against the publyque bath where there stands a brazen picture
with this inscription Mammianus lover of the city. The same John writes how
he builded in the city two princely gates very gorgeous both for the
magnificencie of the buyldinge and curious workemanshippe of the stone: how he
erected Tetrapylon as a distance or separation of both the gates artificially
set up with brazen pillours. We our selves have seen these gates retayninge as
yet not only the name, but also relyques of the ancient beauty, in that there
are now stones there which were carried thither out of the Isle Proconnesus,
where with the floor is paued. As for the buylding it self, it is nothing as
it was. For of the old stone there is new buylding made, yet setting forth in
no point the ancient erection. As for Tetrapylon builded by Mammianus, there
stands not a foot of it to be seen.

CAP. XXIX.
The death of Zeno the Emperor, and the creation of Anastasius.

WHen Zeno without issue had departed this life of the falling sickness in the
seuententh Anastasius created emperor An^ Dom. ^92.
year of his reign: Longinus his brother raised great power, was in good hope
of obtaining the Empire, yet missed of his purpose. For Ariadne took the
Emperial scepter and crowned therewith Anastasius, who as yet was not made
Senator, but only entered in the schole of such as were called Silentiarij.
Eustathius moreover remembers that from the reign of Diocletian unto the
death of Zeno, and the creation of Anastasius, there were two hundred and seven
years: from the Impery of Augustus who reigned alone, five hundred thirty two
years and seven months: from the reign of Alexander Magnus, king of
Macedonia, eight hundred thirty two years, and seven months: from the
buylding of Rome and the kingdom of Romulus, one thousand fifty two years
and seven months: from the destruction of Troie, one thousand six hundred,
eyghtie six years. This Anastasius was borne in Epidamnum, now called
Dyrrachium: he took not only the Imperial scepter after Zeno, but also
Ariadne his wife: and first of all he sent Longinus the brother of Zeno,
master (as of old it was called) of the hauliers into his country, and to
diverse others of Isauria which requested the same, he gave leave to depart
unto their own home.

CAP. XXX.
How Anastasius the Emperor would in no wise alter any thing of the
Ecclesiastical state, but persecuted and banished such as disturbed the quiet
state of the Church and sought to thrust in novelties.

ANastasius was a great maintainer of peace and tranquillity, he would have
nothing altered either toutchinge the regiment of the common weal, or the
government of the ecclesiastical affairs: nay endeavored with all means
possible that the most holy Churches should be void of tumults and dissension,
and that all his subjects should enjoy peace and quietness, riddinge as well
clergy as laytie from all discord and dissension. As toutching the council of
Chalcedon, it was then neither openly preached in the most holy Churches,
neither generally rejected. For every governor of the several congregations
did therein as it seemed good unto him self. And as some mayntained earnestly
the canons of that council grauntinge not one jot, neither admitting the
change of one syllable, but rather avoided the company of such as rejected
the same, and refused to communicate with them: so other some not only
condemned the council with the decrees thereof, but also accursed it with Leos
determination of the faith. Some other cleaued wholly unto Zenos Epistle of
unity, yea when they were at bitter contention amongst them selves whether
there was one or two natures in Christ. Some of them were deceived in the very
joining of the letters together, some others were rather disposed to
reconciliation and maintenance of peace, in so much y^ all the Churches were
divided into sundry factions, and the bishops them selves refused to
communicate one with the other. so that there rose thereof great ado in the
East, West and Libya, while the bishops of the East would communicate neither
with the western bishops, neither with the bishops of Libya, neither among
them selves, but fell every day to exceed more then other in malicious
contention. for the bishops of y^ East would not be reconciled among them
selves, neither would the bishops of Europe, neither of Libya be at one either
with them selves or with forrainers. wherefore Anastasius the Emperor
understanding of this hurliburly deposed all the autors of novelties, and all
such as contrary to the custom of the place, either preached the council of
Chalcedon, or accursed the same. And first he banished Euphemius out of
Constantinople, after him Macedonius whom Timothee succeeded, and besides
these he drove Flauianus out of Antioch.

CAP. XXXI.
How the monks of Palaestina wrote unto Alcison of Xenaias the monk and
others.

THe monks of Palaestina wrote unto Alcison toutching Macedonius and Flanianus
in such sort The monks (...) Palaestina unto Alci^^n.
as follows. When Peter had departed this life, Alexandria, Egypt and Libya
were at variance among them selves, and other c^u^treis of the East contended
within them selves: for the west Churches would in no wise communicate with
them save under this condition, that they would accurse Nestorius, Eutyches,
Dioscorus, Peter syrnamed Moggus and Acacius. Wherefore seeing the churches
throughout the world, were at this point, the favorers of Dioscorus and
Eutyches were brought to a narrow rowme. And now being as it were every one
rooted and weeded from of the face of the earth, one Xenaias after the
Etymology of his name far estraunged from God, we know not what wicked fiende
had bewitched his mind, or what malice he owed unto Flauianus, under cloak of
religion (as report goes) he made an insurrection against him and charged him
with the here^ie of Nestorius. When he had accursed Nestorius with his
heretical opinion, he left him and turned to Dioscorus, and Theodorus and
Theodoritus, and Ibas, and Cyrus, and Eutherius, and John, and to others, we
wot not who, neither out of what countreye: of which number some in very deed
were Nestorians, some others to avoid the suspicion of that heresy, accursed
Nestorius, and returned unto the Church. Unless thou accurse, (^^yd Xenaias)
all these which savor of Nestorius filthy sink of heretical doctrine, thou
thy self shall seem to be of Nestorius opinion, although thou accurse both
him and his doctrine, yea a thousand ty^^es. The same Xenaias moreover dealte
by letters both with the accomplices of Dioscorus and the favorers of Eutyches,
perswadinge them to hold with him against Flauianus, not that they should
accurse the Council, but only the persons above named. After Flauianus the
Byshope had wythstoode them a long while, and saw that others h^ld with
Xenaias against him, namely Ele^sinus Bishop of some city or other, within
Cappadocia the less, Nicias bishop of Laodicea in Syria with others of other
countries (whose accusations proceeding of abject minds we will pass over
with silence, and give others leave to report them) at length remembering him
self, they would be pacified, if the aforesaid persons were accursed, yielded
unto them. And after he had condemned those men with his own hand he wrote
unto the Emperor, for these men had set him up against Flauianus, as if he had
been patron of Nestorius heresy. Neither was Xenaias satisfied with this,
but again required Flauianus to condemn both the Council and such as
affyrmed there were two natures in Christ, the one humane, the other divine,
who for refusinge to do this, is charged a fresh with Nestorius opinion. Last
of all after much ado, when the patriarch had published a form of faith where
he had unfeignedly given to understand that the council as toutching the
deprivation of Nestorius and Eutyches was to be approved, but not for their
decree of the faith and doctrine: they threaten to take him in hand again, as
one that secretly sauored of Nestorius, unless he would accurse both the
Council it self, and them that affirmed there were two natures in Christ,
one divine, the other humane. Moreover with flattery and fallacies they
allured the Isaurians to their side, and patched together a form of faith
wherein they accursed both the counsel, and such as affirmed there were two
natures in Christ: in the end divided them selves from Flauianus, and
Macedonius, and joined with them, who had subscribed unto that patched faith.
In the mean space they requested the Bishop of Jerusalem to lay down his
faith in writing, the which he did, and sent it by the faction of Dioscorus
unto the Emperor. This Heretics are wont to corrupt ancient writers.
faith at length with shame enough they brought forth, accursinge such as
said there were two natures in Christ. But the bishop of Jerusalem charged
them they had corrupted his faith, wrote an other where there was no such
accurse: But no marvel at all, for they have corrupted oftentimes the books
and writings of the holy fathers, by chaunginge their titles and
inscriptions, and fatheringe the works of Apollinarius the heretic upon
Athanasius, Gregory the renowned, and Julius, snaringe many of the simple
people with these their wiles and subtlety in their heretical opinions. They
craved also of Macedonius they might see his belief in writing, who protested
he only allowed the faith published of old at Nice by three hundred and
eyghteene holy fathers, and afterward ratified at Constantinople, accursinge
Nestorius, Eutyches, with such as said there were two sons, or two
Christ's, or divided the natures: yet spoke he not a word of the Ephesine
Council, which deposed Nestorius, neither of the Chalcedon Council, which
deprived Eutyches. Wherefore the Monks of Constantinople were wonderfully
moved with this, and divided them selves from Macedonius. All this while
Xenaias and Dioscorus having linked unto their side many other Bishops,
behaved them selves intollerably toward such as would not accurse whom
they would have accursed, in so much they procured diverse, because they
would not yield unto them, to be banished. Thus they made Macedonius, John
Bishop of Platum, and Flauianus to leave the country. So far of the monks
letters.

CAP. XXXII.
How Macedonius bishop of Constantinople and Flauianus bishop of Antioch were
exiled.

THe things which secretly vexed the mind of Anastasius were far otherwise.
For when Ariadne purposed to present Anastasius with the Imperial robe,
Euphemius the Bishop would in no wise consent to his coronation until y^
Anastasius delivered him his hand writing confirmed with an oath, where he
plainly declared if he were Emperor, he would maintain the true faith, and
bring no nouelty into the Church of God, which hand writing he gave
Macedonius the treasurer to keeping. Euphemius did this because Anastasius was
suspected to be a Manichee. When Macedonius was advanced to the reverend
office of priesthood, Anastasius called for his hand writing, It is (says he)
a great discredit unto our scepter, that our hand should be kept to testify
against us, or that we should be tied to pen and paper. But Macedonius
denied him very stoutly, and affirmed plainly it should never be said of him
that he betrayed the faith: therefore Anastasius the Emperor devised how to
work him mischief, to the end he might colourablye depose him. At length there
came forth young men sclaunderinge both them selves and Macedonius also of an
heinous offense: they found him to have wanted the member of generation, then
proceeded they to espy other holes in his coat, neither rested they until at
length through y^ fetches of Celer master of y^ hauliers, they had privily
wrought his deprivation. There ensued after this conspiracy against Flauianus,
other troublesome business. For we our selves have learned of old Heretical
monks, idle brains, all set upon contention, were slain like dogs at Antioch
and thrown into the river Orontes.
men, who remembered very well such adventures as befell unto Flauianus, how the
monks of Cynegica, which inhabited the chiefest country of Syria, being
persuaded by Xenaias bishop of Hierapolis bordering upon Antioch, and syrnamed
after the grecians Philoxenus, made an insurrection, came all upon a head to
Antioch, purposinge to force Flauianus, both to accurse the council of
Chalcedon and Leos decree of the faith. When Flauianus took the matter very
grieuouslye, and the monks urged him with violence: The citizens by reason of
that great stir and sedition, made such a slaughter of the monks, that
many of them, nay an infinite number in steed of quiet earth and still grave,
were buried in the swifte waves of the river Orontes. There happened an other
thing that was no less lamentable then the former. The monks which
inhabited Caelosyria now called Syria Minor, bearinge singular good will and
affection unto Flauiames, who some time lead a Monastical life in the Abbeye
of Tilmognum, came in all the ^aste to Antioch for to assiste Flauianus, so
that there ensued thereof great mischief. Wherefore Flauianus, whether it were
for the former slaughter, or the later calamity, or peradventure for both, was
banished the province, and enjoined to inhabit the craggie deserts in the
furthest part of Palaestina.

CAP. XXXIII.
Of Seuerus bishop of Antioch.

WHen Flauianus was exiled Seuerus was chosen bishop of Antioch, in the month
Dius, Seuerus b^ of Antioch yet an heretic.
the five hundredth three score, and first year after the city bare this name,
but now, that is the time I penned this history, the six hundredth forty, and
first year. This Seuerus was borne in Soxopolis a city of Pisidia, before
they made him bishop, he pleaded law at Berytus. But as soon as he was
baptized in the Church of Leontius the holy martyr, whom Tripolis a city
lyinge on the Sea cost of Phoenicia does honor, he translated his study from
law unto monastical life the which he led in a monastery, lyinge in the
mids between Gaza and Maiuma. Where Peter the Iberian, Byshope sometime of
Gaza, and the companion of Timotheus Aelurus, both in sustayninge of
banishment, and substance of doctrine, was much spoken of. Furthermore Seuerus
(of whom I purpose to entreat) conferringe with Nephalius (who sometime was of
one religion with him, to wit, that there was one nature in Christ, yet
afterward held with the Council of Chalcedon, and such as said there were
two natures in our Lord Christ Jesus) was expulsed the monasterye by
Nephalius and his accomplices, together with many others of his opinion. Thence
he went straight to Constantinople, both for him self and in the name of all
the rest that were expelled with him, and so became acquainted with the
Emperor Anastasius, as it is reported by him that wrote Seuerus life.
Wherefore he wrote letters unto the patrons of his opinion of their mutual
love and agreement, where by name he condemns the Council of Chalcedon. This
which I speak of, is laid down by the monks in their Epistle unto Alcison.
The monks of Palaestina unto Alcison
The Epistle which Timothee now Byshope of Constantinople, wrote unto the
monks here in Palaestina of mutual love and agreement was received: But the
deprivation of Macedonius and Flauianus, together with the letters of Seuerus
was rejected. The messengers that brought the letters, were as they deserved
contumeliouslye entreated (for the citizens and monks conspired their deaths)
that they were feign to run away for to save their lives. And thus it went
with us in Palaestina. But of the provinces of Antioch, they were partly led
into error with others, namelye Martinus Byshope of Berytus, and partly
constrained to subscribe unto Seuerus letters of mutual love and agreement,
which accursed not only the Council, but also who so ever affirmed there
were two natures in Christ, the one divine, the other humane. But such as were
compelled to geeue their consent, repented them afterward, and returned unto
the Church, namelye the Byshopes throughout the province of Apamia. There were
other some that would in no wise agree, of which number Iulianus Byshope of
Bostra was said to be, Epiphanius Byshope of Tyrus with other Byshopes. The
Isaurians after repentance condemned their former error and follye, and
accursed Seuerus with all that favored him. Other Byshopes and priests within
Seuerus jurisdiction, forsook their Churches, namelye Iulianus Byshope of
Bostra, Peter Byshope of Damascus, who live here with us: Mamas also with one
of the two Dioscorians, who affirmed there were two natures from the
beginning, whose wilful frowardness made Seuerus whether he would or no to
condemn them. After a few lines. The monasteries both here, and at Jerusalem
(God be praised for it) do hold with the right faith, even so do many
cities and Byshopes. For all which, and for us our selves vouchsafe most holy
Lord, and our right honorable father to pray that we fall not into temptation.

CAP. XXXIIII.
How Cosmas and Seuerianus two Byshopes within the province of Antioch sent
Seuerus their Archebyshope a deprivation.

IN so much the aforesaid letters make mention how the province of Apamia
fell from Seuerus, now we thought good to lay down a certain historye
delivered us by our elders, which we found no where recorded. Cosmas Byshope
of our Epiphania upon the river Orontes, and Seuerianus bishop of Arethusa a
bordering city, being very much offended with Seuerus letters of mutual love
and agreement, first of all divided them selves from his communion, next sent
unto him a Libell of deprivation, for all he governed the Byshopricke of
Antioch, deliueringe it unto Aurelianus chief Deacon of Epiphania: who because
he feared Seuerus, and reverenced the autoritye of so worthy a Byshopricke, at
his first coming to Antioch, arrayed him self in woman's attire, and so got
him to Seuerus: He behaved him self so softlye, and so effeminatly, that they
took him to be a woman in deed: He muffled him self and pulled the veyle
over his head as far as his breast: He whined with a shrill and pitiful
voice, he sighed deepelye: He crooched like a poor suter, and as Seuerus
passed by, he reached into his hand the bill of deprivation, when he had so
done, he priuelye conveyed himself away from the train that followed
Seuerus, and so was out of their reach ere Seuerus could learn what was
contained in the Libell, But Seuerus though he received the Libell, and
perceived what they had written therein, continewed never the less in his
Byshopricke unto the death of Anastasius the Emperor. When Anastasius
understood of the circumstances which happened unto Seuerus (I can not choose
but record in this place the good nature and clemency of Anastasius) he
charged Asiaticus Lieuetenant of Libaeesa in Phoenicia, to remove Cosmas and
Seuerianus from their Byshoprickes, because they sent unto Seuerus the Libell
of deprivation. After his coming into the East, and perceauinge how that
many were of Seuerianus and Cosmas opinion, and that they defended their
cities manfullye, he wrote back unto Anastasius that The clemency of
Anastasius.
there was no displacinge of them without slaughter and bloodshed. Wherefore
there was so much mercy and pitye in the mind of Anastasius, that he
signified unto Asiaticus in plain words he would have no enterprise taken in
hand, were it never so noble, or so worthy, if it did cost him as much as
one drop of blood. In this state were the Ecclesiastical affairs duringe
the raygne of Anastasius, whom some men have blotted out of the sacred
catalogue as enemy unto the council of Chalcedon, for at Jerusalem he was
accursed.

CAP. XXXV.
The foil and overthrow of the Isaurian tyrants.

Peradventure we shall not otherwise choose but perform that which we promised
before, if we annexe unto the aforesaid historye, other famous acts that were
done in the days Longinus.
of Anastasius. Longinus the brother of Zeno after his coming as I said
before into his native soil, made preparation to proclayme open wars against
the Emperor: Gathered great power from every place together with the
Isaurians, and he him self being an Isaurian, The b. of Apamia a rebel.
marched forwards to battle. There came to aid him the Byshope of Apamia in
Syria. Shortly after the battle was ended, partlye because the Isaurians
which fought with Longinus were foiled every one, and partlye also because
the heads of Longinus and Theodorus were sent of John the Scythian to
Constantinople, and there by the commandment of the Emperor stickt up on
polles beyond the water, over against Constantinople, in a place called Sycae.
It was a goodly sight unto the citizens of Constantinople, for Zeno and the
Isaurianus had grieuouslye vexed them diverse times before. A second Longinus
syrnamed Selinuncius one of the Longinus. ^* Indus.
chief rebels, and Indus were sent alive by John syrnamed Cyrtus, unto
Anastasius the Emperor, which made both the Emperor and the citizens of
Constantinople marvelous glad, for Longinus and Indus were tied with iron
chains about their necks, and wrists of their hands, led throughout the
streets, and about their stage and theater as the guyse is in triumphs.
Immediately upon that, the Isaurian tribute which mounted to five thousand
pound, and was yearly paid unto the Barbarians thenceforth was brought into
the Emperors treasury.

CAP. XXXVI.
Of the Barbarians called Scenetae how they rebelled, yet afterward joined in
league with the Romans.

SCenetae, Barbarians so called, because of their dwelling in tents and
tabernacles, were so puffed Scenetae.
up with pride that they took armor against the Empire of Rome, yet to their
great hurt and damage: they destroyed Mesopotamia: both Phoenicia and
Palaestina. In the end they were so plagued of the captains and lieuetenants
throughout every province, that thence forth they cried truce, and joined in
league with the Romans.

CAP. XXXVII.
The besieginge of Amida and buylding of Daras.

THe Persians moreover breakinge their league and passinge beyond their proper
bounds were led by Cabades their king into Armenia: they overcame the
country: they took Theodosiopolis and came to Amida, a strong city in
Mesopotamia and besieged it, the which was afterward recovered by the Emperor
of Rome, not without great pain and trouble. If any Eustathius the
historiographer died Anno Do^. 504.
be disposed to know exquisitly all the circumstances thereof, and as commonly
we say, to have all at his fingers ends, let him read Eustathius, where the
whole is laid down in writing with great skill and diligence: who when he
had continued the history unto the twelfe year of Anastasius reign, and the
time which our pen does now prosecute, he knit up his story and departed this
life. When this battle was ended, Anastasius made of a wild country a
civil town, in a place of Mesopotamia called Daras, lyinge in the furthest
parts of the Roman dominions, as a bound between one country and an other:
walled it very strongly about: erected goodly and gorgeous buyldings: founded
holy Churches: princely towers, public baths, with diverse other such
monuments wherewith cities are set forth and adorned. The report goes that the
place Daras a noble c^ue.
was called Daras because Darius was there overcome by Alexander king of
Macedonia, the son of Philip.

CAP. XXXVIII.
Of the place called the Long wall builded by Anastasius.

THe aforesaid Emperor made a noble and a princely piece of work in Thracia,
called the long wall, situated in a goodly soil, from Constantinople at the
furthest two hundred and fourscore furlonges, the Sea compasses either of
them about four hundred and twenty furlonges in breadth much like a narrow
Sea, and makes of the city an Island, being all in manner environed with
water: it transporteth with great speed such as sail from Pontus to
Propontis and the Thracian Sea: last of all it repelleth such Barbarians as
make inrodds, out of the Sea Euxinum, Colchis, and the fenne of Meotis, out of
the deserts beyond the hill Caucasus, and out of Europe.

CAP. XXXIX.
Of Chrysargyrum the tribute for baudrie which Anastasius the Emperor took
away.

THere is besides an other worthy act, or rather divine, done of this
Emperor in taking away the tribute Chrysargyrum which is to be recorded of
us to the knowledge of the posteritye in time to come. And to speak thereof
sufficientlye, we have need of Thucydides tongue or some other more eloquent
and copious, yet I will discourse thereof being not so much encouraged with
my simple style and sclender words as with the noble mind of the author, and
the worthynesse of the act. There was a wicked trybute, odious to God and man,
unseemly among the Barbarians them selves, and no less abominable to be
spoken of among Christians throughout the Roman dominions, set and demanded
of the ample and renowned common weal of Rome, not spoken of unto the time of
Anastasius, and why so, I am not able to declare, the which his noble and
virtuous mind took away, not without the great commendation of all people
under heaven. This tribute was set (omitting diverse sorts of people) upon
such as lived by filthy lucre and gain, upon naughtipackes which made sale
of shamefastness, haunted brothelhouses, and prostrated them selves in blind
corners of the city: To be short, upon all such as were not ashamed to
committee whoredom: Who injured nature not a little, and brought the common
weal to great reproach and infamy, in so much that the filthye gain gotten
thereby allured thereunto such as burned with bruitishe lust and
concupiscence, no otherwise then a law or proclamation. Again the gatherers
of this impious and abominable tribute acrueinge by reason of such heinous
offenses brought it every fourth year unto the chief magistrate, so that it
was thought to be one of the chiefest tributes that belonged unto the crown,
and laid it up in the Gardiuiance or priueye coffers. The ceassers were not of
the simplest sort, and meanest persons, neither the office numbered among the
basest in the common weal. Anastasius understanding the whole made the Senate
priueye thereunto, told them what an heinous and an horrible act it was,
commanded it should quite be taken away, and burned the rolls which
directed them unto the ceased and taxed polls. Furthermore when he purposed
with him self to offer sacrifice unto God in rootinge out that filthe and
abomination, to the end it might be impossible for any after him to revive
those old dregs of Lecherye: He feigned him self to be in a great agonye,
accused him self of rash dealinge, and mere madness, saying he was toe
vain glorious, and by that means weyed not the vtilitye and profitte of the
common weal, in that he had taken away both foolishlye and without
aduisement, so large a tribute, begone so many years ago, and continewed so
long a time not foreseeinge the discommodityes that ensued, by reason of the
want thereof, the charges for mayntenance of soldiers, the strength of the
common weal, The tribute being as a fortress to defend it, the liberalitye
risinge thence, and turned to uphold the service of God. Last of all making
no man of his counsel, he proclaimed that his will was the tribute should be
wholly restored again: therefore he called unto him the old receauers, he
told them that he was sorye for the burninge of the records, that he knew
not what to do, how to excuse his folly, neither what to devise, seeinge
their registeries were consumed to ashes. When as they unfeignedly and from the
very heart bewailed their loss, and the want of the ill gotten goods which
came thereby into their hands, and told him plainly that it was in manner
impossible to restore the tribute again: he requested them to do all their
endeavor, and to search if happily they might find among all the records
that were in any place preserved, the order of demaundinge the tax and
tribute. Wherefore he sent unto every one of them his charges for searchinge
the countries and records, and commanded that every deed or scrole which
made mention thereof, where so ever it were found should be brought unto him,
to the end this tax might be restored again in such good order that it could
never fall afterward into decay. Shortly after when these messengers of
trust brought tidings what they had found, Anastasius was wonderful glad, and
seemed to tickle at the heart for joy, he reioysed in deed because now he had
brought about that which troubled him so much. What (says he unto them) have
ye found any records? where found ye them? be they to any purpose? do ye
think there are any where any more left behind? they answered that their
travel had been great, that they rode about day and night, that they had
searched both town and country, and swore by the life of the Emperor, that
there was not left in all the empire of Rome, not as much as a patch of any
scrole that was not brought unto him. then the Emperor commanded a pile to be
made, all the papers, registers, records, bills, and baudy notes to be set
thereon, and burned to ashes. when the fire had done his part, he gave
commandment they should throw water upon the ashes, either quite to drown
them, or to drive the^ away with the stream, purposing fully by this means for
ever to tread underfoot the scroles of the baudy tribute, that neither sparcle,
neither ashes, neither letter, neither any memorial should remain after the
firing of the records. But while we commend Anastasius so highly for banishinge
this shameful tribute, lest we seem ignorant what diverse men of old being
wedded to their own affections have reported of him, we thought good here to
lay down their sayings, and convince them with their own words.

CAP. XL.
What Zosimus wrote of Chrysargyrum the shameful tribute, and of Constantinus
the Emperor.

ZOsimus one of them that was bewitched with the impious rites and abominable
service The scla^de^ous reports that Zosimus a Ethnicke made of Constantinus
magnus.
of Paganes, being incensed against Constantinus, because he was the first
Emperor which forsook the detestable Idolatrye of the Gentiles, and embraced
Christian religion: reports how that the tribute Chrysargyrum was first
devised by him, and decreed it should be paid every fourth year. With
infinite other sclaunders, he goes about to defame the godly and noble
Emperor Constantine. For (says he) he devised mischiefs against all sorts of
men, of what degree or calling so ever they were: that he slew his son
Crist us very lamentablye: that he dispatched his wife Fausta, by shuttinge
her up i^ a boylinge bathe: that when he would have had his priests to purge
him by sacrisice of these horrible murders, and could not have his purpose,
(for they had answered plainelye, it lay not in their power to cleanse him) he
lighted by chance upon an Egyptian which came out of Iberia, and persuaded
him that the Christian faith was of force to wipe away every sin, were it
never so heinous, and that he embraced willingly all what so ever the Egyptian
told him. Last of all, that he forsakinge his country religion cleaued unto
impietye as this lewd varlet reports, but that all these reports be no other
then lies and sclaunders, I will immediately declare, and so much in the mean
while of Chrysargyrum.

CAP. XII.
An inuectiue against Zosimus the Ethnic for reuiling of Constantine, and
rayliage at the Christians.

THou say (O wicked spirit and fiende of hell) that Constantine purposinge to
build a city comparable to Rome, laid the fundation of an ample and worthy
city, first in the country of Troie, and the palace of Priamus: after the
stones were laid, and the wall being erected on high, to have espied that
Byzantium was a goodlier soil for his purpose, to have environed it with a
wall, to have enlarged the old and ancient city, to have adorned it with
goodly and gorgeous buylding, that it seemed not much inferior to Rome, which
grew by a little and a little the space and continuance of many years to that
perfection she is of. Thou say moreover that he gave to the citizens of
Byzantium a measure of grame: that such as departed this world at Byzantium
left him great sums of gold for to build and erect his palaces. Again thou
reportest (I will use thine own words) that the Imperial scepter befell unto
Constantius after the death of Constantine his father, and the deceasse of his
brethren: that Constantius (at what time Magnentius and Bretannio rebelled)
endeavored to persuade Bretannto to shake of armor: that when both armies
joined together, he made an oration, and put them in remembrance of the
liberality and bountifulnes of his father toward them, under whose banner they
had foiled many an host, and received of him large rewards, that the soldiers
immediately after y^ hearing of his oration took away the princely robe from
Bretannio, and led him like a private man unto Constantius, who (for all thou
reuilest him with his father) did him no hurt at all. how it can be that so
liberal, and so bountiful a prince could be so great a karle and pinche
penny, as to raise of his subjects so wicked a tribute, I can not see. That he
murdered neither Fausta nor Crispus, neither was instru^^ed in y^ mysteries of
our Christian religion by any Egyptian at all, hear I beseech thee what
Eusebius syrnamed Pamphilus, who lived the same time, both with Constantine and
Crispus, and had great familiaritye with them wro^e of that matter. As for thy
self, thou writest such things thou never heardest of, and are far from
being true, for thou wrotest long after, to wit, in the time of Arcadius and
Honorius, or after their reign. Eusebius in the eight book of his
Ecclesiastical history writes in this sort. Not long after, Constantius the
Emperor passinge all other throughout his life time useb. eccle. ^st. lib. 8.
^p. 14.
in clemency and goodness toward his subjects, singulerly affected toward
Gods word, ended according unto the law of nature the common race of his
mortal life, leauinge behind him his natural son Constantinus Emperor and
Caesar to supplye his rowme. A little after. His son Constantinus being
proclaimed full Emperor and Caesar by the army, and long before by God him
self, the universal king, became a follower of his fathers piety in
Christian religion. And about the later eude of his story he writes thus.
Constantinus the mighty and puysant Emperor being renowned for every rare
virtue and godliness, together with his son ^seb. lib. 10. p 9.
Crispus the most godly Emperor, like unto his father in all things subdued
the East parts of the world. No doubt Eusebius who lived after Constantine
would not so highly have commended Crispus, had he been slain of his father.
Again Theodoritus writes how Costantine about his later end was baptized at
Nicomedia, and y^ therefore he differred it unto yt time because he had a great
desire to be baptized in Jordan. But thou most wicked Zosimus reportest, yt
since christian religion was published throughout y^ world y^ state of y^
Romain empire decayed and came to naught, y^ which proceeds from thee either of
ignorance, that thou have not read over y^ ancient writers, or of malice. For
the contrary is soon proved that the Empire of Rome increased together with
our faith. The Empire of Rome increased with the faith. Macedonia^s. Albania.
Ibetia. Colchi. Arabians. Frenchmen. Germans. Buttanns. Indaea. Luke 2.
Remember I beseech thee how about the time of the incarnation of our Savior
Christ Jesus many of the Macedonians were by the Romans subdued: Albania,
Iberia, Colchi and the Arabians: moreover the Frenchmen, the Germans, the
Brittanns, in the hundred twenty and third Olympiade after Caius Caesar had
overcome them with great and grievous battaills, and made the five hundred
cities which they inhabited, tributaries (as historiographers do write) unto
the Empire of Rome. This Caius was the first which after the Consulls governed
the Empire alone, he made the way sure for the setting up of the glorious
Monarchy, and in steed of the populare and common regiment, brought into the
world that kind of reign. No doubt it came to pass through the providence of
God, because that the Monarchy of Christ was shortly after to take place. All
Iudaea besides, and the bordering countries were annexed unto the Empire of
Rome, so that the first taxing where Christ also was to be taxed, then first
began, and Bethleem likewise laid before their eyes, how that which of old
was prophesied of her, was then fulfilled. For thus had the Prophet Micheas
foretold of her. And thou Bethleem Judah art not the least among the Princes
Mich. 5. Math. 2. Egypt. Many countries of Persia.
of Judah, for out of thee there shall come unto me the captain that shall
govern my people Israel. When Christ our God was borne into y^ world, Egypt
was joined unto the Empire of Rome in the time of Augustus Caesar (for the^ it
was that Christ appeared in the flesh) who overcame Antonius and Cleopatra
which afterward dispatched themselves. After their death Cornelius Gallus was
by Augustus Caesar made Liuetenant of Egypt: and after yt Ptolomaeees decayed
he reigned over Egypt. What countries were won from the Persia^s by Ventidius
and Curbulon the captain of Nero, by Seleucia. Ctesiphon. Nisibis. Armenia.
Seuerus, Traianus, Carus, Cassius and Odaenathus of Palmyra, by Apollonius and
sundry others: how often Seleucia and Ctesiphon were taken: how often Nisibis was
now the Romans, anon the Persians, and after what sort Armenia with other
borderinge nations became under the Empire of Rome, thou thy self haste penned
it as well as others. And yet I had almost forgotten what thou wrytest to have
been done by Constantine (who by means of our religion governed the Romayne
dominions with valiant mind and noble prowess) also what befell unto
Iulianus, nusled up in thy wicked mysteries, what wounds and skarres he left in
the common weal. As for the prophecies which concern the end of the world,
or whether it had a beginning and whether it shall have an ending it is an
higher matter the^ can sink into thy brain. Therefore let us see if thou C.
Julius C^sar. Caius Cali^gula. Nero. Galba. Otho. Vitellius. Titus. Commod^^
Pertinax. Didius I^^i^nus. Antonius. Macrinus. Aurelius Antonius. Alexander
Maximinu^ Gordianu^ Philip. Decius. Gallus. Volusianu^ Aemilianu^ Valerianu^
Galienus Carinus. Maximia^^ Maxentiu^ Licinniu^ Julian.
wilt, how the Emperors which were Ethnickes and panyms mayntayners of
Idolatry and Paganism, and how of the contrary such as cleaued unto the
Christian faith ended their raygne. was not Cains Julius Caesar the first
Emperor slain by conspiracy? did not certain soldiers with naked swords
dispatch Caius y^ nephewe of Tiberius? was not Nero murdered by one of his
familier and dear friends? had not Galba the like end, Otho and Vitellius who
all three raygned only sixteen months? what shall I speak of Titus whom
Domitianus poisoned, for all he was his own brother? what say thou of
Commodus did not Narcissus dispatch him out of the way? what shall I speak of
Pertinax, and what of Inlian enjoyed not both they one kind of death? what did
not Antonius the son of Seuerus murder his brother Geta, and did not
Martialis requite him with the like? what shall I say of Macrinus did not the
soldiers handle him like a captive about Byzantium and cruelly put him to
death? was not Aurelius Antoninus of Emessa murdered together with his mother?
was not Alexander immediately after hi^ together with his mother likewise put to
death? what shall I say of Maximinus whom his own army dispatched? Or of
Gordianus who through the treason of Philip was in like sort by his own
soldiers put to death? tell me I pray thee thy self O Zosimus, what happened
unto Philip and after him unto Decius, were they not slain by the enemy? take
Gallus and Volusianus with them were they not murdered by their own armies?
what of Aemilianus had not he y^ like miserable end? what Valerianus was not he
taken by y^ Persians in battaill and led about of them in triumph? what when
Galienus was slain through treason and Carinus beheaded, came not Diocletian
to be Emperor, whom Diocletian cut of lest they should raygne with him.
After these Herculius Maximianus, his son Maxentius and Licinnius dyed with
contumely and shame enough. But since the time the most noble Emperor
Constantine began to raygne, since he consecrated unto God the city he had
builte and called it after his own name, look about I pray thee and speak
indifferently, was there any one Emperor in that city ( Julian a man of thine
own religion and thy Emperor only excepted) that was murdered either by his
own subject, or by the enemy: or any one tyrant that vanquished the Emperor,
Basiliscus excepted, yet for all that, he thrust Zeno beside the Imperial
scepter, he was overcome of him again and lost his head? As for Valens that
persecuted the Christians, I will yield, take him to thee, thou speak of none
other. Let no man take this our discourse for impertinent stuff or bayne
digressio^ it is both profitable for the reader and agreeable with our purpose,
because the heathenish historiographers of spite and malice, have endeavored to
corrupt the true histories. And now let us return unto the rest of Anastasius
raygne.

CAP. XLII.
Of Chrysotelia a kind of tribute devised by Anastasius.

Even as the acts mentioned before were nobly done of Anastasius and agreeable
with the majesty of an Emperor: so there ensued immediately after, other
doings of his which darkened the commendation and renown of the former. For he
devised the tribute called Chrysotelia, He made merchandise of the soldiers
stipend and wages not without great damage unto the common weal. He took
away from the courts and places of judgment their tribute and revenues and
appointed throughout every city such as they call Proctors or Attorneys
through the procurment as they say of Marinus Syrus the chief Magistrate
called Presidente of the haule. Thereof it came to pass that the greater part
of the tribute and revenues was lost, the worship and honor of cities decayed.
For unto that time y^ names of the Senators or Aldermen were matriculated, and
every city counted of the benchers as of a Senate.

CAP. XLIII.
The rebellion and tyranny of Vitalianus.

VItalianus a Thracian rebelled against Anastasius, ouerranne Thracia, Mydia,
as far as Odyssus and Anchialus, marched toward Constantinople with a
great multitude of people, which had no certain dwelling, but roged about and
lay in the fleldes: the Emperor sent Hypatius to give him battle. But
Hypatius being betrayed of his own soldiers, taken alive, and ransomed with a
great sum of money: Cyrillus made expedition agayust him, fought a
dangerous and a doubtful field, so that many began to flee. Again when
Cyrillus by pursuing after the enemy and calling again his own soldiers
seemed to have the upper hand, Vitalianus turned him unto Cyrill and as the
soldiers recoyled of spite, he took him in Odyssus. Last of all be invaded
the wholl country unto Sycae, destroying with sword and consuming with fire all
that lay in his way, purposing fully to take Constantinople and to be crowned
Emperor. As he pitched his camp in Sycae, Marinus Syrus (mentioned before)
went from the Emperor with a great navy to give him battaill. Wherefore when
their armies came nigh together the ones front was toward Sycae, the others
toward Constantinople. First and that for a while they stir not, next they
skirmish and flourish upon the water no otherwise then daliaunce, In the end
they close their nauies and fought a sore battaill about Bytharia where
Vitalianus having lost the greater part of his power was altogether
discouraged, and took his flight. Away went his soldiers with all speed so
that the day after there could not one of the soldiers be seen either
passing over the seaes, or wandering about the city. The report goes that
Vitalianus abode a while in Anchialus and there lived quietly. Furthermore an
other sort of Barbarians, who likewise lived abroad cut over the seae and
invaded Pylas a city in Cappadocia. About the same time Rhodos on a certain
night now the third time was shaken with a wonderful great earthquake and in
manner all overthrown.

CAP. XLIIII.
When Anastasius would have had this clause: who was crucified for our sakes,
added to the hymn called Trisagium, the people were on an uproar, so that he
sent unto them he would be no longer their Emperor, the people with that were
appeased. Not long after Anastasius died.

ABout that time there was among the citizens of Constantinople a sore tumult
and sedicio^, because the Emperor had added unto their Trisagium, who was
crucified for our sakes, as if the interlacinge of that clause had been an
overthrow unto Christian religion. The captain and ringeleader of this
hurlyburly was Macedonius with the Priests of his diocese, as Seuerus writing
unto Sotericus does remember. This Seuerus was not then made priest, but lived
in the Emperors palace being not expulsed his monastery with the rest as I
said before. I take that Macedonius was banished not only for the crimes he
was falsely charged withal, but also for this present sedition. And when the
people were furiously disposed because of the former clause, not only the
nobility were in great danger of their lives, but also many goodly buyldings
were set on fire. The people in their rage found a certain Monk a rude and
simple fellow in the house of Marinus Syrus, first they strike his head of
his shoulders, saying that through his procurement the aforesaid clause was
interlaced, afterward they tied him to a long poll and lifted him on high,
with great shoutinge in derision of him: here is he that conspired against the
Trinitye. The slame of sedition did so flash about, and their behavior was so
outrageous that the Emperor for sorrow wist not what to do, he threw aside
the Imperial scepter, came unto the theater, sent the bedells about to
proclaim that with good will he would be Emperor no longer: that many in no
wise were to be preferred to that rowme for y^ place allowed but of one which
was to succeed him in the Empire. The people hearing of this changed their
minds upon a suddayne, requested Anastasius to take the crown and in so doing
they would be quiet. Anastasius Anno Do. 519.
shortly after this stir departed this life when he had been Emperor of
Rome twentye seven years three months and so many days.

The end of the third book of Euagrius Scholasticus.
THE FOVRTH BOOK OF THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF EVAGRIVS SCHOLASTICVS.
CAP. I.
Of Justinius the first Emperor of that name.

WHen Anastasius had changed the worse for the better life (as I said before)
Justinius Justinius was proclaimed Emperor Anno Don 519.
a Thracian, the nynth day of the month Panemus called of the Romans Iulie
the five hundredth threescore and sixte year after that the city of Antioch
was so called took the government of the Empire, and was proclaimed Emperor
by the pretoria^ soldiers, whose captain he had been, what time he was
master of the hauliers He came unlooked for unto this Imperial dignity, for
there lived the^ many worthy personages of Anastasius alliance flowing in all
wealth and felicity and of that great power which accustometh to advance and
prefer men to that great honor and royalty.

CAP. II.
Of Amantius the Eunuch and Theocritus, and how Justinius put them to death.

ABout that time Amantius a man of great power and chief of the Emperors
chamber seeing that no eunuch could be Emperor wished that Theocritus his
sworn brother might In reign and love few fello are faiths
attain unto y^ Imperial robe. Wherefore he called Justinius, delivered him a
great sum of money bad him distribute it among such as he thought could do
most in preferringe Theocritus to the crown. But Justinius either by bribing
the people in his own behalf, or by winning with money the watch and good
will of the guard (both is reported) got to be Emperor him self. And
immediately after, he executed Amantius, Theocritus, with many others.

CAP. III.
How Justinius through wiles bereaved Vitalianus of his life.

WHen Vitalianus who sometime attempted to vanquishe Anastasius the Emeperour
led his life in Thracia, Justinius sent for him to Constantinople. For he feared
not only his power, but the variable adventures of battaill, the fame of his
person which was rife in every man's mouth, and his aspiringe mind unto the
Empire. And when he foresawe by conjectures, nay perceived without all doubt
that he could by no means overcome him unless it were Dissimulatio^
under cloak of feigned friendship: he put on a dissembling visage which easily
may not be espied and made him one of the captains called Present. And to the
end Vitalianus might build the more boldlye upon him and be snared the
sooner, he advanced him to be Consul. When he was made Consul and had his
conversation in the palace, he was by conspiracy slain in a certain gate
behind Blood will be recompe^ced with blood.
the Emperors haule and suffered this punishment for the heinous offenses he
had unadvisedly practiced against the Empire of Rome. But these things were
done a good while after.

CAP. IIII.
After the deprivation of Seuerus Bishop of Antioch, Paulus succeeded, and
after him Euphrasius.

SEuerus Bishop of Antioch because he ceased not daily to accurse the council
of Chalcedon specially in his stalling letters (so called of the settling of
bishops in their episcopal seaes) and in other Epistles written in the defense
of these, although they were sent unto all Patriarchs yet only John Bishop of
Alexandria the second of that name, Dioscorus and Timothee, accepted of them
(the letters are to be seen in these our days) and because that hereupon
there rose great sch^sme and contention in the Church, so that the people were
divided into sundry factions: therefore Seuerus b. of Antioch for reuilinge the
council of Chalcedo^ and railinge against magistrates, had his tongue pulled
out of his mouth.
Seuerus was severely punished. For Justinius in the first year of his raygne
commanded (as some do write) that his tongue should be pulled out of his
mouth and that Irenaeus a magistrate of Antioch sittinge then upon some matter
in commission in the East, should see the execution done. Seuerus him self
does witness in the letters he wrote unto the citizens of Antioch, declaring
the manner of his flight, that Irenaeus was autorised to work the feate, where
passing the bounds of modesty he reuileth Irenaeus, saying that he laid all
the wayt that could be to the end he might not escape his hands. There are
which report that Vitalianus being then in great favor and credit with
Justinius, requested of the Emperor that he would give him Seuerus tongue,
because that Seuerus had reviled him out of measure in his sermons. He for
sooke his Bishopric and fled away in the month Gorpieus called of the
Romans September the five hundred threescore and seventh year after the city
was called Antioch. After him succeeded Paulus, who was charged publicly to
preach the council of Chalcedon. This Paulus voluntarily left Antioch, his last
hour came, then followed he on the way where all flesh must go, his
Byshopricke Euphrasius one that came from Jerusalem took and governed.

CAP. V.
Of the fire and earthquake at Antioch, and how Euphrasius lost his life in
that lamentable calamity.

ABout the same time in the raygne of Justinius there happened in Antioch so
great and so grievous a fire and burning, as preambles and forewarninges of
the dreadful earthquaks ^nno Dom. ^6.
with other lamentable calamities that were to follow after, and to light upon
that city. For immediately, the seventh year of Justinius, in the month
Artimesius called of the Romans, May the nine and twentieth day being friday
in the after none there was such a shiuering, rattling and shaking of the
fundations which in manner ouerthrewe the wholl city, after these came fire
again, joining as it were in league with the former calamities and ready to
make a hand of all. For whatsoever the earthquake had not destroyed, that did
the fire take hold of, flashed about very horribly to be seen and burned y^
wholl to ashes. What parts of the city came by this means to utter ruin: how
many men perished (as it is very likely) with fire and falling of houses: what
lamentable misfortunes so strange that they can not sufficiently with any
style be expressed, happened in those dismal days, John Rhetor has very
lamentably bewailed them, so that the reader by perusing of Where John Rhetor
ended his history. Euphrasius b. of Antioch died in the earthquake.
his history can not choose but be moved to shed tears, and with the rehearsal
of them he ended his story. Last of all Euphrasius whose departure was a
second destruction unto the city, was crushed to death with ruinous building,
lest any one migh remain for to ouersee the city.

CAP. VI.
Of Euphraemius who succeeded Euphrasius in the seae of Antioch.

THe careful and louinge providence of God toward mankind, which accustometh
before the plague lights to provide remedy, and to slike the sword of his
wrath with clemency, and when things grow unto a desperate point to set wide
open the fountaynes of his mercy, raised up Euphraemius Liuetenant of the East
countries, to be careful of the city that she might want no Euphraemius
necessaries, whom the people of Antioch reverenced highly therefore, and
chose to their Bishop. Wherefore in recompense and reward of so great a care
over the city he was presented with the Apostolic seae. Again two years and
six months after, that city was shaken with an earthquake, at what time in
steed of Antioch she was called Theopolis and enritched by the Emperors
Antioch by change of the name was called Theopolis.
bountifullnes with diverse great benefits.

CAP. VII.
Of Zozimas and John Chuzubites who were famous about that time for their life
and miracles.

Seeing we have remembered the aforesaid calamities now we think best to
annexe thereunto certain other things worthy of memory, credibly reported unto
us by such as saw the^ with their eyes. One Zosimas a Phoenician borne in
Sinda a village upon the seae coaste of Phoenicia not twenty furlo^gs of Tyrus,
leading a monastical life, had y^ grace of God so abundantly bestowed upon him
partly by abstinence from meats and partly by receiving of them, with other
virtuous and godly living, that he not only foresawe things to come but was
void of all perturbation. When by chance he was in company at Caesarea in
Palaestina with a noble Senator and wise man by name Arcesilaus, one that was
of great honor and renown, even in that very momente when Antioch fell, upon
a suddayne he began to mourn and to lamente, to fet sobs and sighs from the
heart root: he shed tears so infinitely that the earth was moystened therewith:
next he called for a sensar and filled the quire where they sat with the savor
of the insence: he fell grouelinge upon the ground seeking to pacify the wrath
of God with earnest and zealous prayer. Arcesilaus seeing him in this taking
said unto him, what is the matter y^ makes you so much out of quiet? Oh (says
he) the rattling sound of Antioch falling to ruin has now persed mine ears.
Arcesilaus with as many as were present hearing this were amazed, wrote the
hour he spoke it and sound it to be true as Zosimas told them. There are many
other strange things wroughte by him, but the greater part of them I will
pass over with silence (for they can hardly be numbered) and some I will lay
down for the knowledge of y^ posterity. At y^ very same time when Zosimas
flourished, there lived one with Zosimas of equal virtue and renown by name
John of Chuzica laura, (a place in the further vale upon the northside of the
high way which goes straight from Jerusalem to Jericho) one that led a
monastical life severed from all worldly affairs and governed the Byshopricke
of the aforesaid Caesarea. This John Chuzubites hearing that the wife of
Arcesilaus (spoken of before) had one of her eyes struck out with a weauers
shittell wherewith he throws yarne into the web, came immediately unto her for
to see y^ wound, when he espied y^ the apple of y^ eye was fallen and quite
removed out of his seat, he called to one of the Phisicions then present for a
sponge, bad him put in the fallen eye again as well as he could and to tie the
sponge that was laid thereto. Arcesilaus was not the^ at home, for he was with
Zosimas in his monastery standing in Sinda at the furthest five hundred
furlongs from Caesarea. There went message in all the have to Arcesilaus to
certify him thereof, as the messenger came Arcesilaus sat with Zosimas, and
spente the time in communication. Hearing of the circumstance he began to
lament, to pull the hear of his head and throw it into the aer. As Zosimas
demanded of him the cause of his heauynes, Arcesilaus with many a sobb and
sheding of many tears told him the wholl. Immediately Zosimas left him, got
alone with speed into his chamber, where (as it is lawefull for such kind of
men) he called unto God very familiarly. In a little while after, he came forth
unto Arcesilaus, pleasauntly disposed with a modest kind of laughter saying:
get thee home merely, go on thy way, the gift is given unto Chuzubites, thy
wife is healed, she has both her eyes wholl, that misfortune could not
stick by her seeing it so pleased Chuzubites. Both which miracles were wroughte
at one time by these two just men. Moreover as Zosimas on a certain time took
his journey toward Caesarea driving before him an ass with a fardell of
necessaries upon his back, there met him a lion, which took from Zosimas his
ass and went his way. Zosimas pursued after the lion through y^ midst of y^
thicket, so long until the lion had eaten his fill of the asses carcass and
beholdinge him with a cheerful and smilinge countenance he said: O friend
thou have now hindered my journey for altogether, I am heavy and old, not
able to bear the burden laid upon the asses back. Wherefore come thy ways
contrary to thine own nature, for of necessity thou must bear me this
burden, if thou will have Zosimas to go hence: yet afterward thou shall
return again unto thine old fierce and sauadge nature. The^ the lion laing
aside his rage and fury began to faune and very gently to come unto Zosimas
profering him his service. Zosimas laid the asses burden upon the lions back
and led him unto the gates of Caesarea, to the end he might declare the power
and might of God, and that all things were for the use and service of man, so
long as we behaved our selves after his will and abused not the grace and gift
he has bestowed upon us. But lest I seem over tedious in rehearsinge of these
things, I will return where I left.

CAP. VIII.
Of the calamities which befell in many places throughout the world.

WHile as yet Justinius held y^ Emperial scepter the town now called Dyrrachiu^
but of old Dyrrachium Corinth. Anazarbus. Edessa.
Epidamnus was sore shaken with an earthquake. So was Corinth in Greece,
Anazarbus an head city in Cilicia the less which endured that calamity now
the fourth time, but Justinius repaired them not without great sums of money.
About the same time Edessa that noble and blessed city of the Osroenians was
overflowed with the streams of the river Scirtus which slided by, in so much
that many houses were carried away with the violence there of and infinite
multitudes of men were drowned with the water. From that time forth Edessa and
Anazarbus had new names given them by Justinius, for either of them was called
Iustinopolis.

CAP. IX.
How Justinius made Iustinianus his fellow Emperor.

WHen Justinius had reigned eight years, nine months and three days he called
Iustinianus his sisters son to be his fellow Emperor, and proclaimed him
the first day Justinius died An. Do. 528.
of the month Panthicus after the Romans, April, in the five hundred
seauenty and fifth year after Antioch was so called. This being finished
Justinius died, and left the Empire the first day of Loius after the Romans,
August, when he had reigned together with Iustinianus four months. Iustinianus
now being Emperor alone, and the council of Chalcedon preached every
Iustinianus succeeded Justinius in the Empire.
where throughout all the most holy Churches (as I said before) by the
commandment of Justinius: the ecclesiastical affairs in sundry places,
specially at Constantinople and Alexandria enjoyed not quietness. For Anthimus
was Bishop of Constantinople and Theodosius of Alexandria who both maintained
that in Christ there was one nature.

CAP. X.
How Iustinianus embraced such as approved the council of Chalcedon and
Theodora his wife of the contrary detested them.

EVen as Iustinianus was a great fauorer of the Chalcedon council and the
decrees thereof: Theodora ^he wise of ^ustinianus ^nhereticke.
so his wife Theodora held with such as affirmed that in Christ there was one
nature. Whether they were thoroughly of this opinion (for when the faith is
called into controversy, We see that the father is against the son, and the
son against the father, the wife against her husband, and the husband
against his wife) or of set purpose had couenaunted among them selves, that
he should defend such as said there were two natures in Christ our God
after the vnitinge of the divinity and humanity: and that she should hold
with the maintayners of one nature, sure I am of this that the one would not
yield unto the other. For he was very earnest in defense of the Chalcedon
council: and she of the other side was very careful for the Patrons of one
nature, in so much that she louinglye and friendly entertained her own
faction, specially her own country men: if they were strangers she sent them
presents and gifts, nay she persuaded Iustinianus to call home Seuerus from
exile.

CAP. XI.
Seuerus the heretic corrupted Anthimus Bishop of Constantinople and
Theodosius Bishop of Alexandria, but the Emperor deposed them and placed other
in their rowmes.

THere are extant Epistles which Seuerus wrote unto Iustinianus the Emperor
and Theodora his wife, where we may learn how that at the first when he fled
from the Byshopricke of Antioch, he went not straight to Constantinople, but in
a good while after: that being at Constantinople he conferred with Anthimus,
found him of his own opinion and persuaded him to leave his Byshopricke. He
wrote of the same matter unto Theodosius Bishop of Alexandria where he glories
that (as I said before) he had persuaded Anthimus to make more account of that
opinion then of worldly honor and Bishoplicke dignity. There are moreover to be
seen toutching that matter, the Epistles of Anthimus unto Theodosius, and of
Theodosius again unto Seuerus and Anthimus, all which I purposely do omit
lest I seem to stuff this present volume with toe many such allegations,
leauinge them for such as are desirous to sifte them out them selves. Both
these Bishops when they had withstoode the Emperors edictes, and rejected the
canons of the Chalcedon council were deposed of their Byshoprickes: in the
seae of Alexandria, Zoilus did succeed, and Epiphanius in the Byshopricke of
Constantinople, to the end from thence forth the council of Chalcedon might
openly be preached in all Churches, and that none durst be so bold as to
accurse it, and if any were found of the contrary opinion they were by all
means possible to be persuaded. For Iustinianus published an edicte where he
accursed both Seuerus and as many as held with him, and enjoined great
penalties, for such as maintained their opinion, to this ends that from that
time for the there might no dissension take root in any of all the Churches
throughout the world, but that the Patriarchs of every province might hold
together, and the Bishops of every city obey their Archebyshops, and that the
four counsels, the first held at Nice, the council of Constantinople, the
first held at Ephesus and the council of Chalcedon should be preached in
the Churches. There was a fifte council summoned by the commandment of
Justinian, whereof what shall seem convenient I will declare when occasion
shall serve. In the mean space we have severally to discourse of the worthy
acts done about those times.

CAP. XII.
Of Cabades king of Persia and his son Chosroes out of Procopius history.

PRocopius Rhetor who penned the life of Belissarius, writes that Cabades king
of Persia purposed to bequeath the kingdom unto Chosroes his youngest son,
and that he took council how he might procure the Emperor of Rome to
adopte him, hoping by that means to assure him of the regal Scepter. But when
he could by no means bring his purpose about, Proclus one that was always
conuersante with Justinian, and by office his Quaestor, was the cause that
there rose greater enmytye between the Romans and Persians then ever was
before. Furthermore the said Procopius discourses at large of the Romayne and
Persian affairs, of the bloodye battaills that were between them, when
Belissarius was captain of the Eastern power. And first he reports how
the Romans had the victory at Daras and Nisibis, what time Belissarius and
Hermogenes were chief over the Romayne Armies. Unto these he annexeth the
state of Armenia and the mischief which Alamundarus captain of the
Barbarians called Scenetae, wrought in the borders of the Roman Empire, how he
took Timostratus the brother of Russinus alive together with his soldtours,
and afterward took for them a great ransom, and let them go.

CAP. XIII.
Of Alamundarus and Azerethus, and the sedition at Constantinople, where the
people had this watchword Nica, that is, overcome.

THe aforesaid author handles very learnedly, how Alamundarus (spoken of
before) and Azerethus invaded the marches of the Roman dominions: how as they
returned into their country, Belissarius was compelled of his army to join
with them a little before Easter day, beside Euphrates: how the Roman power,
for not following Belissarius counsel, was utterly foiled, and how Russinus
and Hermogenes concluded a perpetual league with the Persians, so that he
moves the reader very much. Immediately he entreats of the popular sedition
raised at Constantinople, called Nica, by interpretation overcome. For that was
the watchword which they had chosen to discern and know their friend from
their foe. In which insurrection Hypatius and Pompeius were of the people
constrained to rebel, yet after the rebels were overcome, Iustiman
commanded they two should be beheaded and thrown into the sea. Procopius
writes, that in that skirmish there were stain thirty thousand persons.

CAP. XIIII.
Of Honorichus king of the Vandals, and the Christians, whose tongues he caused
to be pulled out.

AGain, the said author committing to letters the history of the Vandals,
reports such stories Honorichus king of the Vandals, was an Arian.
as are worthy of memory, and the printing in Marble, the which I am now about
to declare. Honorichus the successor of Genzerichus in the kingdom, being an
Arian heretic, raised great persecution against the Christians which
inhabited Libya. For such as maintained the sound and sincere faith he
compelled to embrace the Arian heresy, and such as would not yield, he burned
to ashes, and executed with sundry kinds of lamentable death, pulling out
from some their tongues: Of which number, after their flight to Constatinople,
Procopius says, he saw certain of them with his own eyes, and that they spoke
as if they had had no such mischaunce, and for all their tougues were plucked up
by the rotes, yet talked they very plain and distinctly, which was very
strange and in manner incredible. Of these kind of people there is mention
made in It may seem strange how men could speak without tounges.
the Edict of Justinius, two of them (says Procopius), lost their speech, for
immediately after they went about to talk to women, their voice was taken from
them, and the Martyrs gift remained no longer with them.

CAP. XV.
Of Cabaon, captain of the Maurusians.

ANother miracle (besides the aforesaid) worthy the admiration, is remembered of
him to have been wrought by the power of our Savior among men, who though they
were such men as were not of one opinion with us, yet led they a godly life. He
says that Cabaon was governor of the Maurusians, inhabiting about Tripolis.
This Cabaon, (I will use the proper words of Procopius, who orderly discoursed
hereof) as soon as he perceived that the Vandals took armor against him,
did as follows. First, he commanded all the subjects within his dominions,
to refrain from all unrighteousness, to abstain from such meats which
provoked to sensuality, and specially to forgo the company of women. Next,
he made two trenches, pitching in the one his own tent and pauillion, with all
his men: In the other he shut up the women, threatening that who so ever
repaired unto the women's trench, should die the death. Afterward he sent to
Carthage a skoutwatch, commanding that as soon as the Vandals made
expedition, and prosaned any Christian temple worthy of honor and reverence,
they should mark well what was done, and them selves after the Vandals
departure, purge and rid away the filth with reverence of those temples: the
report is moreover, he should say that he knew not the God of the Christians,
yet that it was very like, if he was so mighty as Fame went of him, he would
be revenged on them that contumeliously dealt with him, and that he would aid
and assiste his ser uauntes and such as honored his blessed name. The
skoutwatch coming to Carthage labored to know throughely the Vandals
expedition. And when the Vandals marched toward Tripolis the espies came
draglinge after in beggars weed and base attire. The Vandals even the first
The cruchie of the Vandals.
day spoiled the Temples of the Christians: filled them with horses and other
beasts: left no beastliness or contumelye unpracticed: took their fill of
sensualitye and intemperancie: laid the priests in hold, scurged their sids,
rent their backs with the lashe of the whip, made many of them to serve them,
and become their drudges. After their remouinge, Cabaons skoutwatch did as The
humanity of insidels.
they were commanded. For they fell a purginge of the temples, they carried out
the dunge, they lighted all the tapers, they honored the Priests, they behaved
themselves honestly, last of all they gave money unto the poor which sat
about those temples. This being done they trudged after the Vandals in all
that voyage, as the Vandals continewed in their heinous acts, no less did
they in their humanitye and Godly deeds. Coming nighe to Tripolis, the
espies prevented them, with all speed they tell Cabaon what both the Vandals
and them selves had done as toutchinge the Christians temples, and that the
enemy was at hand. Cabaon hearing this made ready for battaill, in the
which many of the Vandals were slain, many taken by the enemy, and very few
returned back to bring tidings of the battaill. Thus did the Maurusians
plague Thrasymundus, who after he had reigned over the Vandals seven and
twentye years departed Thrasymundus king of the Vandals.
this life.

CAP. XVI.
How Belissarius made expedition against the Vandals and ouerthrewe them.

THe same writer declares that Iustinianus had compassion on the Christians
that were thus lamentably afflicted, in those cuntreis and proclaimed wars
against y^ Vandals, yet changed his mind by the persuasion of John Master of
the haule, after this again that he was admonished by a vision to take that
voyage in hand, that by reuenginge the injuries which the Christians
sustained, he should utterly foil the Vandals. Being animated with this
vision, the seventh year of his reign, he sent Belissarius unto Carthage to
give the Vandals battaill. The This battaill was ^oughte An. Do. 535 A godly
use to baptize Ethincke soul diers and t^ pray before the taking i^ hand of
ar^ mour. Procopius Caesariens. histor.
Admiralls ship appointed for Belissarius was brought to shore over against the
palace, about the Calendes of July: Epiphanius Bishop of Constantinople prayed
as the manner was, baptized certain of the soldiers, last of all brought
them to the Admiralls ship. Moreover the said author reports certain
things toutchinge Cyprian the Martyr which necessarily must be enterlaced in
this our history, he writes thus: All the people of Carthage every one do
honor the most holy martyr Cyprian, and have dedicated unto him a worthy
temple without the walls of the city upon the seae shore, and besides other
godly reverence, they yearly keep holy day in remembrance of him, which
they call Cypriana. The Mariners called the tempest which commonly rose about
the time, when the Libyans took this to their holyday, Cyprians showers. The
Vandals in the time of Honorichus took by force this Temple from the
Christians, thruste out the Priests very contumeliously and thenceforth gave
it unto the Aria^s to enjoy as their own. When the Libyans conceived no small
sorrow and were in great heaviness therefore, the report goes that Cyprian
appeared unto them in their sleep and said the Christians ought not to be
sorry at all or pensive therefore: that after a few years he would be revenged
of them for that injury, which prophecy took place in the time of
Belissarius for the same Cyprian and martyr foretold that after the nyntieth
and fifteyeare when Carthage was taken and ransacked of the Vandals, it should
be conquered by Belissarius the Romayne captain, the Vandals utterly foiled,
the Arian opinion rooted out of Libya and the Christians restored unto their
temples.

CAP. XVII.
Of the spoil which Belissarius brought out of Aphricke to Constantinople.

BElissarius the valiaunte captain, after his return to Constantinople, and
the victory he got of the Vandals, led about the City the spoil and
captives, and Gelimeres him self captain of the Vandals: rode about Circus
in Triumph with great pomp and admiration. Of these spoils there were very
precious monuments to wit of Genzerichus, who had rifled (as I said before) the
palace of Rome, when as Eudoxia wife to Valentinianus Emperor of the Romans
inhabiting the West dominions of the world, lost her husband through the
treason of Maximinus, was her self very contumeltously defloured, sent for
Genzerichus and promised to deliver the city into his hands. Then came
Genzerichus, set Rome on fire and brought Eudoxia with her daughters into
Vandalia. At the same time together with other monumentes he took away such
things as Titus the son of Vespasian after the winning of Jerusalem had
carried to Rome, that is to say such momuments as Solomon had consecrated unto
God, whom he honored greatly. All which Iustinianus sent back again to
Jerusalem, for to set forth the service of christ our God, and there in verily
(as it was very meet) he did God good service, saying they were consecrated to
him before. Procopius remembers that then also Gelimeres fell prostrate upon
y^ ground before Iustinianus the Emperor where he sat, beheld all that was
done and repeated in his mother tongue that divine sentence of Solomon. Vanity
of vanities and all is but vanity. (...)


CAP. XVIII.
Of the Phoenicians who fled from the face of Iosue the son of Naue. Of
Theodorichus the Gotth and the things from his raygne at Rome unto the time of
Iustinianus, and how Rome was again recovered by the Romans.

PRocopius writes of an other thing worthy the memory and of great
admiration, which was not written before his time. He says that the
Maurusians a Libyan nation were driven out of Palaestina and came to Libya:
that these were the Gergesits Iebusits with other nations, whom holy Scripture
testisieth to have been overcome by Iosue the son of Naue: that it may be
justified for truth by the epigramme, he saw with his own eyes engraven in
Phoenician letters, hard by a font where there stood two pillours of white
stone. The words were these: We are they which fled from the face of Iosue
the robber, the son of Naue. Thus it came to pass, that these things were
forgotten when Libya the second time was subdued of the Romans and paid
yearly tribute, as in times paste. It is reported that Iustinianus repaired
again a hu^ored and fifty cities, of which number some had been utterly
destroyed, some other for the most part gone to ruin: that he set them
forth with such majesty, with such ornaments and with such workmanship
both of public and private buyldinge, inuironinge them with strong walls and
other goodly buylding, wherewith cities are adorned and the divine Godheade
honored in his throne of majesty, last of all with so many conduites partly
for profitte and partly for show, whereof some were then first erected and
some other repaired, that nothing could posibly be done more excellent. Now
I come to discourse of the affairs in Italy, whereof some part is
artificially handeled by Procopius Rhetor. As soon as Theodorichus (mentioned
before) took Rome, vanquished Odoacer the tyrante, governed the Romayne Empire
for a while and departed this life: Amalasuntha his wife governed the common
weal in steed of Astalarichus her son whom Theodorichus begat upon her,
and so ruled the Empire with such circumspection that in her doings she seemed
rather a man then a woman. She first of all persuaded Iustinianus to be so
willing to war with the Gotths, and sent Ambassadors unto him toutching the
conspiracye that was wroughte against her. But when Astalarichus, being of
very tender years departed this life: Theodatus the kinsman of Theodorichus
obtained the Western Empire. He at the coming of Belissarius into the Weste,
delivered up the crown for he had more mind to study then skill to wage
battaill. At that time also Vittiges a valiaunte man was captain of the
Romayne power in the Weste dominions. Yet we have to learn by the historye of
Procopius that when Belissarius came to Italye, Vittiges left Rome: that
Belissarius came with his army into the city of Rome: that the Romans
opened their gates and received him most willingelye, for Siluerius the Bishop
had brought this to pass and had sent as toutching that matter Fidelius the
Surueior of Astalarichus unto Belissarius. Wherefore the city was yielded unto
Belissarius without shedinge one drope of blood and Rome again was subdued by
ome was re^uered and ^e Gotthes ^quished ^. Do. 539.
the Romans threescore years after the Gotths had taken it, the nynth of
Apellaeus after the Romans, December, and the eleventh year of Iustinianus
raygne. Procopius writes moreover, how that after all this when the Gotths
besieged Rome a fresh, Belissarius suspectinge Siluerius the Bishop of treason
banished him into Greece and placed Vigilius in his rowme. Siluerius. Vigilius.


CAP. XIX.
Of the people Eruli, how they received the Christian faith in the time of
Justinian.

ABout the same time (says Procopius) Eruli who in the time of Anastasius the
Emperor passed over the river Danubius being curteouslye entreated of
Justinian and rewarded with great sums of money received every one from
the highest to the lowest the Christian religion and changed their brutishe
and barbarous trade of life, for modeste and civil behavior.

CAP. XX.
How the Gotthes won Rome, and Belissarius the second time recovered it.

VHe aforesaid author declares, that after the return of Belissarius into
Constantinople, with Vittiges and the spoil he carried out of Rome, Totilas
became Emperor, and the city again was subdued of the Gotths: that
Belissarius the second time came to Italy, recovered Rome, gave the Medes
battaill, and was sent for by the Emperor to Constantinople.

CAP. XXI.
How the people Abasgi about that time received the faith.

IT is recorded moreover by the same writer, that the people Abasgi being
brought unto a more civil kind of life, received about that very time the
Christian faith: that Iustinianus the Emperor sent unto them one Euphrata an
Abasgian borne and of the court Eunuchs, for to charge them that none of all
that nation should offer violence to nature and gelde him self. For the
Emperors chamberlaines whom commonly we call Eunuchs, were oftentimes taken
of that nation. Then also Iustinianus the Emperor erected a Temple unto the
Mother of God among the people Abasgi, and ordained them Priests of whom
they were thoroughly instructed in the principles of Christian religion.

CAP. XXII.
Of the people which inhabit Tanais, how then they became Christians: and of
the earthquakes in Greece, Boetia and Achaia.

THe aforesaid historiographer has written y^ the nation dwelling about
Tanais, (the inhabitants of that region do call the river that rumeth out of
the fenne of Maeotis into Pontus Euxinus, Tanais) requested Iustinianus to
send them a Bishop: that Iustinianus was very careful of their suit, and
sent them a Bishop with heart and good will. He declares moreover and that in
good order how the Gotths in the time of Justinian brake out of the fenne of
Maeotis into the Romayne dominions: that there happened strange earthquakes in
Greece, Boetia Achaia and the countries about Crisaeus haven: that many regions
were destroyed, cities overthrown, chinkinge and gapinge of the earth which
gulphes in some places closed together, and in some other places continewed so
still.

CAP. XXIII.
The expedition captain Narsis made into Italy and his piety Godwardes.

PRocopius discourses how Justinian sent captain Narsis into Italy: how he
overcame Totilas, afterward Teias, and how Rome was now taken the fifth time.
It was reported moreover by such as accompanied Narsis in that voyage, how
that when he prayed unto God and offered unto him his bounden duetye and
service, the virgin Marie the Mother of God appeared unto him, prescribed the
time when he should deal with the enemy and that he should not girde him
self to battaill before he had a sign given him from heaven. Many other acts
worthy of memory were done by this Narsis. For he won Buselinus and
Syndualdus and subdued many other countries reaching unto the Ocean sea. Which
things Agathius Rhetor has written of, and be not as yet come into our hands.

CAP. XXIIII.
How Chosroes fretting with envy at the prosperous affairs of Iustinianus
took armor against the Romans, destroyed many cities, and among others
great Antioch.

IT is laid down in wrytinge by the same Procopius, that Chosroes hearing of
the prosperous successes which befell unto the Empire of Rome, both in Libya
and Italy, fretted within him self for envy and charged the Emperor that he
had done certain things contrary unto the couenantes agreed upon between
them. and therefore that their (...) was broken, that Iustinianus at the first
sent Ambassadors unto Chosroes entreatinge him not to break the perpetual
league that was concluded, neither to dissolve that link of love and peace
that was knit between both countries, but if there were any rash enterprise
committed or any quarelous occasion given, it might friendely and louingely be
put up. That Chosroes of spite and malice which boiled within his breast,
would by no means be brought to any good order, but gathered a great army
and assaulted the marches of the Romayne dominions in the thirteenth year of
Iustinianus raygne. He writes moreover how that Chosroes took Surus a city
upon the shore of Euphrates, who couenantinge with them one way dealte with
them an other way and that most leudly, for look what he promised that would
he never perform, he won that city more with falsehoode and subtletie then
by force of arms. He set Beroea on fire, he came with violence against
Antioch when Euphraemius governed the Byshopricke (but left at that time the
city because none of the espies which he had sent forth were returned unto
him) whose politic foresighte as report goes preserved the Church and all
that belonged thereto. For he adorned her with goodly monumentes hopinge that
way to recover the violence of the enemy. The same author declares with a
vehemente style easy to move any reader, how the said Chosroes took
Antioch, destroyed all with sword and fire, and how afterward he came to
Seleucia, then to Daphne the suburbs thereof, last of all to Apamia, whose
Church governed Thomas a man very famous both for life and for learning.
This Thomas sticked not to accompany Chosroes unto the Theater and there
behold the runninge at tilte (for all the canon of the Church forbad it) to
the end in so doing he might use all means possible to mitigate and aswage
his fury. The report goes, when Chosroes demanded of him, would you see me
in your city? that he answered: I speak unfeignedly and as I bear faith unto
God, I would not gladly see you there. Chosroes marueled at his liberty of
speech, and reverenced the man highly as he deserved for the trueths sake.

CAP. XXV. The sight of the Crosle was comfortable unto them to put the^ in
remembrance in that a n^ntable plight and to ^ust only in ^^m that died
hereon. The tree is ^alled huelye because christ that gives (...)se unto the
^o^lde died ^er^on.

Of the miracle wroughte at Apamia by the virtue of the reverend cross.

Saying that by discourse of our historye we are fallen to entreat of this
matter, it shall not be amiss here to remember a certain miracle worthy the
notinge and wroughte at Apamia. As soon as the Citizens of Apamia heard say
that Antioch was set on fire, they requested Thomas (spoken of before) to
bring forth (although it were contrary unto order and custom) the wholesome
and liuelye Cross and set it before them all, to the end they might
behold and embrace it when their last hour came, for therein the only
health of man consisted: and now taking their voyage into an other world,
they might have the reverend Cross for their wayefare to safeconduyte them
into a better soil. Wherefore Thomas did as they requested him, and after the
limitation of some certain time for the preparation thereof, he brought forth
the lively Tree of the Cross that all the neighbors might come together and
participate of the health that proceeded thereof. Thither went my parents
together with others and took me in their* hand being a child and then
goinge to school. After we were licensed to honor and embrace the reverend
Cross, Thomas The curse of sin was by Christ take away. This miracle was not
by virtue of the cross, but b^ the providence of God for to comfort his
people, the christians which were not ashame of him that dyed on the cross,
neither discouraged for a the threats of the Bar^ rian ethnic
lifted up his hands, and let all see the wood of the cross, whereby the old
curse of sin was wiped away, compassed the Sanctuary as the use was upon
high and solemn feasts. But as Thomas passed from place to place, there
followed him a great flame, not of burninge, but of shininge fire, in so much
that to men's seeminge all the place where he stood and showed unto the people
the reverend cross, was inflamed. This was done not once, neither twice, but
oftener, when Thomas went about, and the people gatheringe together, requested
him so to do. Which sight foreshewed unto the citizens of Apamia, the health
and sauegarde that was to ensue after. Wherefore there was a picture set in the
roufe of the Sanctuary, at the foot whereof this miracle was written for
such as were ignorant thereof. This picture was preserved until that
Adaarmanus, and the Persians invaded that country, and burned both Church and
city. Thus ended all that circumstance. Chosroes in that voyage of his,
having profaned the holy league, committed at his pleasure other heinous
acts agreeable with his light and unconstant behavior, yet not decent for a
man endued with reason, much less fit for a prince, which has regard of
his word and promise.

CAP. XXVI.
The expedition of Chosroes made against Edessa.

FUrthermore the same Procopius has laid down in writing the things which
of old were remembered, touching Edessa and Agbarus, and how Christ wrote an
Epistle unto Agbarus: Again how Chosroes made an other invasion, and
determined to besiege Edessa hoping to disprove the report and fame that was
spread far and nigh of that city, to wit, that no enemy would ever be able
to subdue Edessa. Which thing is not mentioned at all in the Epistle which
Christ our God wrote unto Agbarus (as it is to be seen in the history of
Eusebius Pamphilus, where the Epistle is laid down word by word) yet it is
not only noysed, but believed of the faithful, and his pretended event
confirmed the report to be true. For when Chosroes went about to take the
city, although he made many an assault, and raised a wonderful great
contremure, so that he might easily scale the walls of the city with sundry
other engines, yet went he away and could not prevail. And how it so fell
out I will declare. Chosroes first commanded his soldiers to carry thither a
great pile of timber, how so ever they were for to besiege the city, which was
in manner as soon done as spoken. The timber being framed round, and earth
heaped in the midst, it was set right over against the walls, and raised by
a little and a little with timber and other fillinge stuff, until it came to a
great height, that the top thereof was higher then the walls of the city.
From thence they shot at the city, and at such as hazarded their lives in
defense of the walls, the citizens seeinge this contremure much like an high
mountain to draw nigh their city, and that by all likelihood the enemy
would come in a foot, they got them very early and made a ditche over against
their hillocke, threw fire therein, that the flame might take hold of their
timber, and make their contremure even with the ground. This being done and
fire cast in, it fell not out as they wished, because the fire could not
break out, and take into the aer for to consume the pile of timber. Last of
all, when as they seemed now to yield, despairinge of their safety, they
bring forth an Image which God himself, and not the hands of man had
shaped, the which Christ had sent unto Agbarus, when Agbarus desired to see
him. This holy picture they drew through the ditche they had made, and
conveyed in water, of this water they threw upon All that we done here
referred unto the p^o^ dence of God, and (...) fayd^ of (...) Edesla^^ns, not
to the picture.
the pile and heap of timber, so that by the providence of God aydinge and
assistinge the faith of such as practiced the circumstances, that which they
could not bring to pass before is now easily compassed. For immediately the
undermost wood took fire, and was quickly burned into coals, the flame
flashed upwards, and set the whole pile on fire. The Edessaeans being besieged,
and espiinge at length that both smoke and flame brake out, devised this
slight which follows for to deceive the enemy. They called for little
flagons, filled them full of towe, hirds, brimstone, with other kind of stuff
that easily would take fire, and threw them upon the enemies pile or
contremure. The flagons being violently thrown and chafed, yielded forth
such clouds of smoke as darkened altogether the smoke and flame that rose of
the enemies pile, so that as many as were ignorant of the policy thought
verilye there was no other smoke save that which proceeded from the flagons.
But the third day after, the flames were espied to flashe out of the earth,
and then the Persians which fought on the contremure, perceived the danger they
stood in. notwithstanding all this, Chosroes going about to withstand the might
and power of God, brought the co^duits which were without the walls of the
city, unto the pile, hoping thereby to quench the fire. But the fire received
the water as if it had been oil, brimston, or some other such like thing,
raged out of measure, burned all to ashes, and brought the pile even with the
ground. In the end Chosroes despairinge altogether of his purpose, perceauing
what reproach and infamye he had incurred, because he determined to conquer God
whom we honor and worship, returned home with shame enough.

CAP. XXVII.
Of the strange vision that was seen at Sergiopolis.

ANother thing yet done by Chosroes at another time at Sergiopolis, I think
best to lay here down in writing, which is both worthy the penninge, and
the knowledge of the posterity. Chosroes made preparation to assault this city
also, and to besiege it, being come to the walls, the citizens within, and the
enemy without ^ell to parle, and concluded that the city was to be redeemed
with the holy treasure and monuments, among which one was the cross sent
thither by Justinian, and Theodorus. When these things were brought unto
Chosroes, he demanded of the priest and Persians which were sent for that
purpose, whether there were any more left behind? to whom, one whose lips
were not acquainted with the truth, made answer that there remained certain
other monuments, which a few citizens concealed. Yet the messengers that
brought away the treasure with other jewels had left behind nothing that was
gold or silver, but some other metal that was far more precious and
consecrated unto God, namely the holy relics of Sergius the valiant martyr of
Christ, which lay in a long chest that was ouerlaid with silver. wherefore
Chosroes being persuaded with the aforesaid words, let his host go to besiege
the city and to win it. The When a man is either pricked in conscience or
otherwise fear full; any falsehood will seem true, and a mouse ^s then as big
as a bear.
enemy espied upon a soddaine a great multitude of men upon the walls, fenced
with shieldes, and ready to fight for the city, they were amazed, they wondered
at the multitude and armor, they went back unto Chosroes, and told him the
whole. when he was again given to understand that there were but very few
left in the city, and that they were either spent with age or of tender
years, (for all that were of ripe years and man's state had been rooted out)
he took that of a surety to be a miracle wrought by the holy martyr, he was
stricken with fear, and had the Christian faith in admiration, he returned
home, and (as report goes) was baptized in his later days.

CAP. XXVIII.
Of a pestilent disease which continewed two and fifty years.

Now I am about to declare a certain history which was not penned unto this
day, it is of a certain pestilent disease which plagued mankind the space of
two and fifty years, and Anno Dom. ^44.
prevailed so much that it destroyed in manner the whole world. For it is
reported that this contagious disease lighted upon Antioch two years after the
Persians had taken the city: in some part much like that which Thucydides has
described, in other respects far unlike: it began in Aethiopia, even as
that which Thucydides wrote of, and spread it self afterward throughout the
whole world, neither was there almost any one that escaped the infection
thereof. It raged so vehemently in some cities that all the inhabicantes
thereof were dispatched: with other towns, it dealt more gently and mildely.
Neither began it at any one certain time of the year, neither did it cease and
relent after one manner and order: for in some places it entered with winter, in
some other places about the end of the spring, in certain countries about the
mids of so^mer, in cert^^ others in Autumn. In some regions when it had
infected some part of on city or other, it left ye rest vntoutched. the^ might
a man have seen very often where this malady reigned, certain families wholly
dispatched, at an other time one or two rooted out, and all the city besides,
not once visited. more over (as we have marked diligently) the families which
escaped this year, were alone, and none others dispatched the next year. And
yt which is most of al to be marueiled at, if any which inhabited ye infected
cities fled into other countries where ye sickness was not, they only were
visited, for all they removed, hoping y^ way to save their lives out of y^
contagious into ye clear aer. This calamity during ye term and compass of
these years, which they call reuolutions, passed through both town and
country, but the greatest mortallitie of all fell upon mankind, the second
year of the revolution which comprised the term of fifteen years, so that I
my self which write this history (neither will it be a miss Euagrius is
visited with his family. (...) is both the secret part of the body, and the
disease. The age of Euagrius when he wrote this history.
to enterlace this that the consequentes may agree with the premises) while as
yet I frequented the schools, was then troubled with an impostume or swellinge
about the priuey members, or secret parts of the body. morouer in process of
time when this sickness waxed hot, and dispatched diversely, and sundry kinds of
ways, it fell out to my great grief and sorrow, that God took from me many of
my children, my wife also, with diverse of my kinsfolks, whereof some dwelled
in the city, and some in the country. such were my adventures, and such were
the calamities which the course of those lamentable times distributed unto me.
When I wrote this I was eight and fifty year old. Not two years before, this
sickness had been four times in Antioch, and when as at length the fourth
revolution and compass was past, besides my aforesaid children God took
away from me a daughter and a nephewe of mine. This disease was a compounde,
and mixed with many other maladies. It took some men first in the head, made
their eyes as red as blood, and puffed up their cheeks: afterward it fell into
their throat, and whom so ever it took it dispatched him out of the way. It
began in some with a flixe, and voydinge of all that was within them, in some
other with swellinge about the secret parts of the body, and thereof rose
burninge fevers, so that they died thereof, within two or three days at the
furthest, in such sort and of so perfect a remembrance, as if they had not
been sick at all. Others died mad, and carbuncles that rose of the flesh
killed many. It fell out oftentimes that they which had this disease and
escaped the first, and the second time, dyed thereof afterward. The order
and manner that men came by this disease was so diverse that it can not with
pen be expressed. Some had it by keeping of company and lyinge together: some
other only by touching, and frequenting the infected houses: some again
took it in the market. Many of them which fled out of the contagious
cities, and were not visited them selves, infected where they came. Others
which kept company with the sick, and toutched not only the sick but the
dead also, were not sick at all. Others some who gladly would have dyed for
the sorrow they conceived, because their children and dear friends were
departed, and therefore thrust them selves among the sick, could not have
their wills, the sickness did as it were fly away from them. This pestilent
disease as I said before, reigned throughout the whole world the space of two
and fiftye years, and exceeded all the diseases that ever had been before.
Philostratus wondered at the plague which was in his time, because it continewed
fifteen years. But the things that are to come, are uncertain and unknown
unto men, and they shoot at the end which God has appointed, who knows both
their causes, and what shall become of them. Now let us return where we left,
and prosecute the rest of Iustinianus reign.

CAP. XXIX.
The insatiable desire and gredinesse of Justinian in getting of money.

IVstinianus had so insatiable a desire to money, and so shameful a mind
toward other men's possessions, that for love of gold he made sale of his
subjects goods, unto the magistrates, unto the tribute gatherers, and unto
such as mischieued others upon no occasion. He deprived many, nay an
innumerable sort of people which enjoyed great possessions, upon false and
fained causes of all that they had. If any harlot bore mind unto any man's
wealth, and fained that she had had company and familiarity with him,
immediately all that belonged to law and justice (so that she made Iustinianus
partaker of her shameful booty) was of no force, and all his goods whom she
had falsely accused was brought into her house. Furthermore he was so liberal
and bountiful that he builded many holy and gorgeous Churches, that he erected
many other houses, where both men and women, old and young, and such as were
visited with sundry diseases, might be diligently looked unto, and to bring
these things about, he laid aside great sums of money. he wrought many other
good deeds, no doubt very holy, and acceptable unto God, if that either he, or
others whosoever that bring such things to pass, caused or do procure them
to be done of their own proper goods, and offered unto God for sacrifice their
lives and conversation void of spot and blemish.

CAP. XXX.
The description of the Church of wisdom in Constantinople, and of the holy
Apostles.

THe aforesaid Iustinianus besides sundry other holy churches of goodly
workmanship, erected to God and his saints, founded in Constantinople y^
notable and worthy building, I mean the gorgeous church of wisdom: such a one
as y^ like whereof has not been seue heretofore, the which so passed for bewty
and ornature as may not for y^ worthiness thereof sufficiently be expressed, yet
will I do mine endeavor to describe the same. The roufe of y^ sanctuary being
lifted up on high with four arches, was of such height y^ they which stood
beneath on the ground, and looked upwards could hardly see the ridge and the top
of the valted circle: again they y^ were above, were they never so courageous
durst not look down, neither once behold y^ fundations. The arches from ground
to the roufe (so far do they reach) are wide open, and empty, on the right
side of the temple, and the left hand as ye go in there are goodly pillours set
in order, and made of stons yt were brought out of Thessalia. there are also
high sollars underset and staid up with other such like pillours where they
that are disposed may see and hear the mysteries handled. There the Empress
uses to sit upon the holy days, when y^ blessed communion is celebrated.
these pillours for all they reach up both on the East and west side of the
temple hinder not at all ye sight of so worthy a building, and unto these
sollars there are porches of pillours whose tops are likewise wrought and
turned with little arches. But to thend I may paint forth lively the portracture
of this worthy buildinge. I think best here to lay down how many foot it
was in length, how many in breadth, and how many in height: in like sort of
the arches how many foot they were in compass, and how many in height.
The manner (...) signifies (...) ves^^ll that is hollo^^ on the top, and so
conseque^t (...) here to be taken for a ^uppe.
was as follows. The length from the door over against the holy * cup,
in the which the vnbloodye sacrifice is offered unto this cup and holy
vessel was one hundred and fyftye foot. The breadth from North to northest
was a hundred and fifteen foot. The height from the top of the circle in
the roufe unto the pauement on the ground was a hundred and four score foot.
The breadth of every arche was three score and six foot. The length of the
whole Temple from East to West was two hundred and three score foot. The
breadth over the Arches in the light and open body of the Church was three
score and fifteen foot: There are two other goodly porches to the West set up
very strongly of either side with a wide entrye in the midst. Furthermore
the same Justinian builded the Temple of the holy Apostles, inferior to none
other, where both Emperors and priests most commonly are buried. But of these
things this much shall suffize.

CAP. XXXI.
Of the solly rather then the friendship of Justinian, in fauouringe toe much
seditious persons and robbers.

AS yet I have more to say of Justinian besides the aforesaid, and whether it
may be referred unto the naughtines of his nature, or to the fearefulnes of his
faint courage, I am not able Behold the properties of this Justinian whom he
^ns loc so ^o^or and reverence. ^f any good thing ^e sound in ^im it
deser^eth com^endation.
to say, yet was it such a thing as passed all brutish and savage cruelty,
and sure I am it began of that popular sedition, whose watch word was Nica, by
interpretation over come. It pleased Justinian so earnestly to hold with the
faction of them which were called Prasini, that it was lawful for them
without correction at noonday and in the midst of the city to slay their
adversaries, and not only stood in awe of no punishment but also were thought
worthy of great honor, so that in the end it fell out y^ there were many
homicides. It was lawful for them to rush into other men's houses, to spoil
the^ of their proper treasure, and to sell men leases of their own lives. And
what magistrate so ever went about to restrain the^, he did naught else save
heap coals on his own head. Whereupon a certain magistrate of the East
going about to chastise these rebels, clapped gyues on their feet for to bridle
their violence, was led him self through the mids of the city and grievously
tormented with fetters. Callinicus also lieuetenant of Cilicia, when two
Cilicians, Paulus and Faustinus both murderers rebelled against him, and
conspired his death, because he put in ure y^ penalty which the law had
ordained for such malefactors, was him self hanged on the gallows, and
endured this punishment for his good conscience and execution of the laws.
Hereupon it fell out that such as were of the other faction being driven to
leave their dwelling places, and could no where be lodged, but were shoueled
here and there as shameful miscreants, fell to assault travelers, to rob and
to steal, and to murder every one y^ met them, until it grew unto such
outragiousnes y^ all places sounded of untimely slaughter, of spoiling and
other such like heinous offenses. Yet at length some good mood was found in
him that made him to change his mind, and to execute such kind of men,
suffering the law to take place against them, whom he permitted before time to
rage throughout the cities like Barbarians and blood suckers. But to discourse
of these things sufficiently, time will not serve, neither will my pen be able
to paint them accordingly. By these few ye may conjecture of the other horrible
acts which Justinian committed.

CAP. XXXII.
Of Barsanuphius the Monk.

THere lived about that time very godly men, who in many places wrought great
miracles, Believe it who will, there is non I^ovve tha^ will blame
Eustochius, for counting it a tale of a tubbe. If he was not sen^ in all that
space, how was it know that he did not eat?
so that their Fame was every where spread abroad. Of which number one was
Barsanuphius an Egyptian borne. This man led his life in a monastery hard by
Gaza, although he were in the flesh, yet bridled he the motions thereof, in so
much that he did many notable miracles. It is thought that he shut up him
self in a certain caban, and since the time he went in for the space of fifty
years and more, that he was never seen of any, never took sustenance or any
other thing on earth. When Eustochius bishop of Jerusalem would not believe it
to be true, but took it for a fable, he went and dug up the caban where this
holy man had pend him self, and as report goes, there rose out thence fire
which almost burned such as came thither with him.

CAP. XXXIII.
Of Symeon the Monk, who fained him self to be a soole for Christ's sake.

THere was at Emesa, a man whose name was Symeon, who laying aside all desire
of vain glory, although he was wise in every respect, and replenished with the
grace of God, yet seemed he unto such as knew him not, as if he had been a
stark fool. He lived for the most part a solitary life, neither did he make
any man privy either when, or what he prayed unto God, neither at what time he
alone fasted or refreshed nature by taking of sustenance, sometime when he
walked in the open streate or market place, he seemed far from the common
trade of living, nay, he showed him self as though he had neither wit nor
understanding. Again, if hunger drove him into a Tavern, he would feed upon
pottage, meat and whatsoever first came to his hand. If in case any did him
obeisance, and saluted him with the bowing of the head, he would straight be
angry, and get him thence with speed, fearing left the common people would
epsy his virtue. Thus was Symeon wont to do at his being in the market. Yet
there were some with whom he made him self familier, and that unfeignedly. Of
which number one had a maid that was ravished and gotten with child, and
being compelled by her master and maistresse openly to reveal the father and
him that played so lewd a part: made answer that Symeon had secretly layen
with her, and that she had conceived of him, that she would not only swear
it to be true, but also It is meare folly, and a dishonor v^ to God, for man to
slander himself.
if need were prove it with plain evidence. Symeon hearing of this, said it
was so in deed, that he was a man as other men were, and that the flesh was a
frail thing. When the rumor thereof was noised abroad, and Symeon therefore
as it was very likely defamed for ever, he got him out of sight, and made
them believe he was ashamed. When the hour came that she should be delivered,
as the manner is, she lay in, her labor was so grievous, so great, and the
pain so intolerable, that the poor seely wretch was ready to yield up the
ghost, yet was she not rid of her burden. Wherefore when Symeon (who of
set purpose came thither) was entreated to pray unto God for her, his answer
was: that the woman was not like to be delivered, before she confessed truly
who was the father of the child. When she had so done and named them the true
father, immediately the child came spraulling out of her womb, and truth
played the office of the midwife. The same Symeon was seen on a certain time to
go into an harlots house, who shut the door after The simplicity of old
time deceived many a^ godly man the like we done in the days, ther^ were no
cloak for it
him, and tarried there a long while, when none was within but they two: Again,
was seen to unlock the door, and to put out his head, looking about whether
he could see any, the which berely caused great suspicion, in so much that such
as beheld him, called the harlot unto them, demanded of her what business
Symeon had in her house? which swore unto them, that for poverty she had not
tasted of any thing in three days before, save only water: that Symeon had
brought her vitailes and a boule of wine: that he had shut the door and covered
the table: that he had commanded her to sit down and to eat her fill, and
that she was sufficiently chastised and brought low enough with abstinence.
When she had made this protestation, she showed them the fragmentes which
remained of Symeons vittailes. Furthermore the self same Symeon a little before
the earthquake which shook in pieces Phoenicia, on the sea shore (at what time
Berytus, Biblium, and Tripolis were lamentably turned to the ground) took a
whip in his hand, and beat many of the pillours which stood in yt market
place, crying these words. Stand fast, be sure of your footing, ye are like to
dance shortly. Wherefore because he was wont to do nothing unadvisedly, they
that were then present, and beheld the circumstance, noted diligently what
pillours he ouerskipped without stripes, which verily not long after were
overthrown with the violence of the earthquake. Many other things are
remembered to have been done by him which require a peculiar volume if they be
sufficiently handled.

CAP. XXXIIII.
Of Thomas the monk which played the fool in like sort as Symcon did before.

ABout that time Thomas who had led a very austere life in Coelosyria, came to
Antioch, for the relief which was yearly given thence unto his monastery.
This Thomas had been in times past made priest in that Church. Anastasius
bishop of that seae, because Thomas had at sundry times wrought him great
displeasure and vexation, boxed this monk about the ears. When they that were
then present, were sorry to see this combat, Thomas said unto them: that he
would take that no more at Anastasius hands, and that Anastasius would never
offer it him again. Both which fell out to be true. For Anastasius within one
day after departed this world: and Thomas as he went home from Antioch, left
this world, and posted to immortal bliss, at the hospital in the suburbs of
Daphne, and was buried in the sepulcher that was provided for strangers. When
they had buried one or two other dead carcasses in the same sepulcher with him
(God after his death wrought that great miracle) his corpse was cast vpermost,
and the other carcasses were severed and pushed far asunder: the men seeing
this, had the Saint in admiration, and revealed the whole unto Euphremius.
Wherefore his most holy corpse was carried to Antioch with great ^ead carkas^es
do commonly rather ^^ing a plagu ^hen take it ^way.
pomp and solemnity, and there was buried in the churhyard, by occasion
whereof it came to pass that the plague which then reigned in the city,
ceased. In honor of whom the people of Antioch have yearly kept holiday unto
this our time, but now let us return unto our history.

CAP. XXXV.
Of Menas the patriarch, and the miracle then wrought in the Hebrewe boy.

When Anthimus bishop of Constantinople was deposed (as I said before)
Epiphanius took his rowme: after the deceasse of Epiphanius, Menas (in whose
time a worthy miracle was wrought) succeeded him in the byshopricke. There was
an old custom at Constantinople, that if there remained many portions of the
pure and immaculate body of Christ our God, young children which went to school
should be called to eat them. When it was done, a certain man's child, in
religion an Hebrewe or Jew, in trade of life a glasiar, kept company with the
other children: who after yt his parents demanded the cause that made him
tarry so long behind, told them plainly the matter as it was, and how that
he eat for company with the other boys. The Hebrewe hearing this, boiled
within for anger, was all set on rage and fury: he took the boy and threw
him into the fiery furnace, where he used to make his glass. The mother
strange miracle if it ^e true, how (...) ever it be ^^e have to ^ike it as
^heape as we ^nde it.
missinge the child, sought him out, yet could not find him: she went
throughout the city, and to every street calling upon God with deep sighs
and lamentable tears. The third day after, as she sat at the door of her
husbands shop, being now pitifully wasted with weeping, she gave out sighs,
and withal called the boy by his name, the child knowinge the mothers voice
answered her out of the furnace. The mother burst open the doors, and in she
went, she was no sooner in but she espied her child in the mids of the hot
burning coals, yet preserved that the fire toutched him not. The child being
asked whether he felt not great heat, and how it came to pass that he was
not burned to ashes, made answer saying: A woman clad in purple came very
often unto me, reached me water to quench the fiery flames which compassed my
body, last of all gave me meat as often as I was an hungered. Justinian hearing
of this, thought good that the boy with his mother should be baptized, and
that the father which refused to become a Christian, should be hanged on the
gallows, at a place called Sycae. And so an end of that.

CAP. XXXVI.
The Bishops of the famous cities about that time living.

WHen Menas had run the race of his mortal life, Eutychius succeeded him in
the Byshopricke Menas. Martyrius. Salustius. Helias. Peter. Macarius.
Theodosius. Zoilus. Apolinarius.
of Constantinople: after Martyrius Bishop of Jerusalem came Salustius, and him
succeeded Helias: Peter followed Helias, and after Peter, Macarius crept into
y^ Byshoprick, when as yet the Emperor had not given him his consent. He was
afterward deposed, for the report went of him that he defended the opinions of
Origin. In the seae of Alexandria when Theodosius (as I said before) was
deposed, Zoilus governed the Bishopric, and after his desease Apolinarius.

CAP. XXXVII.
Of the fist holy and general council and wherefore it was summoned.

AFter the desease of Euphraemius, Domninus was chosen Bishop of Antioch. Now
therefore when Vigilius was Bishop of old Rome: Menas at the first Bishop of
new Rome, whom Eutychius succeeded: Apolinarius Bishop of Alexandria,
Domninus Bishop of Antioch: and Anno Dom. 555.
Eustochius was Bishop of Jerusalem: Iustinianus summoned the fifth council
upon such an occasion as follows. When the patrons of Origens opinions
prevailed in many places, but specially at New Laura (so did they call it)
Eustochius employed his wholl care and industry to the banishing of them. He
made a voyage into New Laura, drove them all out of that coaste, and in so
doing, he seemed to put to flighte the common plague and destruction of them
all. They being scattered abroad into sundry countries persuaded many to
embrace their opinions. There favored them Theodorus syrnamed Ascidas, Bishop
of Caesarea the head city in Cappadocia, who was continewally with Justinian,
one that was both faithful and necessary. When this Theodorus incensed the
Emperors court, and palace against Eustochius making relation unto them as
of an heinous and horrible matter: Eustochius sent Rufus Abbot of Theodosius
Monastery and Conon Abbot of Saba, to Constantinople: both which partly for
their virtue and excellency, and partly also for the biggenesse of their
Monasteries, were counted chief and principal of the Monks which inhabited
the deserts. There accompanied them also, other religious men, not much
inferior unto them for worthiness. These men as their special drifte called
into controversy the opinions of Origin, the behavior of Euagrius and
Didymus. But Theodorus Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia being desirous to
bring them from that argument, proposed the cause of Theodorus Bishop of
Mopsouestia, Theodoritus and Ibas: neither did he this without the providence
of almighty God, who disposed all the circumstances so notably, to the end
every profane and wicked opinion, of whether side so ever it were, might be
rooted out. First of all when the question was propounded whether it were
lawefull to accurse the dead or no, Eutychius then present, a man Eutychius.
very well seen in holy Scripture, yet none of the famous personages, or of
great authority, Menas was then alive, whom he succeeded in the bishopric,
and at that time he sat to answer for the Bishop of Amasia: when he perceived
that the council went not a right, but rather the wrong way, he told them
plainly there was nothing to be doubted in that question, neither any thing
that required deliberation at all. That king Josias not only executed the
Idol Priests then alive, but caused also the tumbes of such as were lately
deseased to be dug up. These words of Eutychius being so well applied,
pleased them all and satisfied them fullye, Iustinianus also hearing of this
grave censure of his, preferred him to the Bishopric of Constantinople
immediately after the death of Menas. Vigilius sent his consent in wrytinge
unto the council, but came not Vigilius b. Rome.
thither him self. When Iustinianus demanded of the council what they
thought of Theodorus, what they said to y^ things which Theodoritus had
written against Cyrill, and to his twelve points of the faith, last of all what
their opinion was of the Epistle which Ibas wrote unto Maris the Persian: when
they had read many pieces of Theodorus and Theodoritus works and proved
manifestly that Theodorus had been lately condemned and his name wiped clean
out of the holy catalogue, or registrye: when they had concluded also that
heretics were to be condemned after their desease, and with general consent
to accurse not only Theodorus, but also the words of Theodoritus against the
twelve points of the faith, laid down by Cyrill, and against the true and
right faith, together with the Epistle of Ibas unto Maris the Persian, they
laid down their censure in such order as follows. Saying our great God
and our Savior Christ Jesus The sentence of the ^i^^ general council held
at Constantinople.
has spoken as it is in the parable of the Gospel etc. And a little after.
We condemn and accurse not only all other heretics heretofore condemned by
the four holy counsels above mentioned, and by the holy Catholic Church,
but also Theodorus Bishop of Mopsouestia with his wicked books, together
with the ungodly works of Theodoritus, impugninge partelye the true faith,
with the twelve poinctes of most holy Cyrill concerning the faith, and
partly also the holy council of Ephesus, and what other things soever the
same Theodoritus has published in defense of Theodorus and Nestorius. Moreover
we condemn the wicked Epistle which Ibas vvrote unto Maris the Persian.
When they had enterlaced certain other things they laid down fourteen
poyn^ts, or articles of the true and sincere faith. Thus have we learned that
these things were handled. when bills were exhibited unto the council by
Eulogius, Conon Cyri^^^us and Parcratius the Monks against the doctrine of
Origin Adamantius and such as embraced his errors, Iustinianus asked of the
council what they minded to do as toutchinge these things? He annered also
unto the aforesaid, the copy of one certain bill together with the letters
of Vigilius written in that behalf. Whereby we may learn how Origin
endeavored to stuff the plain and simple doctrine of the Apostles with the
tares of Gentiles and Manichees, to be short when they had cried against
Origin and against all them that wallowed in the like error with him, the
controversy was referred unto Iustinianus by an Epistle, whereof some part
was as follows. Thou most Christian Emperor that retainest the vertous
mind, agreeable A piece of the counsels Epistle unto Iustinianus.
with aunciente nobility. And a little after. We abhor and we detest this
doctrine, we acknowledge not the voices of strangers and aliens unto the
Church: nay rather if there be any such found, we bind him sure with the
bond of excommunication as a thief or robber and banishe him the Church of
God. Again after a few lines. Your majesty may soon understand all that
hitherto we have decided, by the view and readinge of these our acts. Unto
these their letters they annexed the articles which the Patrons of Origens
errors had learned, where they revealed not only their consent, but also their
dissension and manifold absurdites. Of which articles the sift contained the
blasphemy of certain monks inhabitinge the Monastery of New Laura, laid
down in these words: Theodorus called Ascidas Bishop of Caesarea said, If
the Apostles and Martyrs which now work miracles and enjoy so great an
honor be not made equal with Christ at the general resurrection, what are
they restored unto? sundry other blasphemies of Didymus, Euagrius and Theodorus
were rehearsed by them that diligently collelected these things. Within a
little while after that the council was dissolved, Eutychius bishop of
Constantinople was deposed and John of Sirimis a village of Cynegia borderinge
upon Antioch, succeeded him in the Bishopric.

CAP. XXXVIII.
How Iustinianus fallinge from the right faith affirmed that the body of
Christ was in every respect void of corruption.

THe self same time Iustinianus treadinge out of the way of true doctrine and
lightinge on such a pathe as neither the Apostles, neither the Fathers ever
ledd him unto, fell among briers and brambles, with the which he purposed to
stuff the Church of God, yet The here^ic Iustinianus the Emrour. ^^st wept ^er
Ierus(...), he hun^d he slept, (...) sweet ^od^, he ^d upon the ^sse was ^rein
these ^es no ^unge?
brought he not his will about, for the Lord had fortified the high way with
such strong hedges that murderers could not leap over, as if (according
unto the prophecye) the wall had been thrown down and the hedge broken.
Wherefore the same time when John syrnamed Cateline was Bishop of Old Rome
after the death of Vigilius, John Sirimis of Constantinople, Apolinarius of
Alexandria, Anastasius after Domninus of Theopolis otherwise called Antioch and
Macarius now restored unto his proper seae of Jerusalem, when the council
after the deprivation of Eustochius condemned Origin, Didymus and Euagrius: *
Iustinianus wrote an edicte, where he affirmed that the body of the Lord was
not subject to death, or corruption, that it was void of such affections, as
nature ingraffed and were unblameable, that the Lord eat before his passion
in such sort as he did after his resurrection, that his most holy body was
nothing altered, nor changed for all the framinge thereof in the matrix and
for all the voluntary and natural motions, nay, not changed, no not after
his resurrection, unto which opinions he purposed to compel both Priests
and Bishops to subscribe. But all they made answer, that they expected
Anastasius the Bishop of Antiochs opinion, and so posted him of for the first
time.

CAP. XXXIX.
Of Anastasius Archbishop of Antioch.

ANastasius was a man of such profound skill in holy Scripture, and so wary in
all his doings throughout his wholl life time, y^ he weyed greatly of small and
light matters and would in no wise be changed or altered in them, much less
in matters of great weight and importance, and especially which concerned God
him self. And furthermore he so governed his nature, that neither for his
softenes and gentleness he would easily yield unto such things as were
unreasonable, neither again for his bluntnes and austeritie he would
condescende where right and reason did so require. He gave diligente ear to
the recital of grave matters, and as he flowed in speech so was he acute, and
quickewitted in dissoluinge of doubts and questions. He would not once as
much as vout^e the hearing of vain and idle matters, but as for his tongue
he so brydled it, that he moderated his talk with reason, and held his peace
where it so behooved him. Iustinianus took him in hand with all policy, as if
he had been to batter a well fortified hold, perswadinge him self verily if
he might win him, that he would easilye take the wholl city, yoke the true
faith as it were in servitude, and last of all lead the sheep of Christ
captives out of the Church. But Anastasius was of so divine a courage (for he
stood upon the sure rock of the faith) that he wrote letters freely against
Iustinianus the Emperor, prouinge both plainly The body of Christ was like
unto ours in all things sin only excepted.
and wiselye, that the blessed Apostles and holy Fathers confessed and
delivered unto them, the body of the Lord to be subject unto death, and
partaker of the unblameable affections naturally impressed in the mind. In
like sort he answered the Monks of the greater and less Syria which reasoned
with him as touching this matter, he confirmed the minds of all men to fight
in defense of the truth, to be short, he read daily in the Church that
sentence of Paul the elect vessel of God. If any preach unto you any other
Gospel besides that which ye have received, Galat. 1.
yea if he be an Angel from heaven, let him be held for accursed. Whereunto
all (few only excepted) gave their consentes, and signified their endeuer,
and study in defense of the faith. Moreover the said Anastasius
understanding that the Emperor would banishe him, wrote an exhortation unto
the people of Antioch for to confirm their minds in the faith, the which
partly for his fine style and flowing sentences and partly also for the
infinite testimonies alleged out of holy Scripture and the history therein
fittly applied, is highly to be esteemed.

CAP. XL.
The death of Justinian.

BUt the edict of Justinian by the providence of God, which provided far
better for us, was Anno Dom. 566.
not published. For Justinian who threatened exile unto Anastasius and his
clergy, was suddenly taken him self, when he had raygned thirty eighte
years full and eight months, and departed this life.

The end of the fourth book of Euagrius Scholasticus.
THE FIFTH BOOK OF THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF EVAGRIVS SCHOLASTICVS.
CAP. I.
The creation of Justinius the second Emperor of that name, and of his life.

IVstinianus therefore when he had set the wholl world on tumultes and
sedition and Iustinianus went to hell as ^^^g^us thin^^th. Justinius 2. was
proclaimed Emperor Anno Dom. 566.
in his later days received that which was due for such leude practices,
departed into endless tormente appointed for him by the just judgment of God.
Instinus the^, his sisters son, President of the palace was invested and
clad in the Imperial robe, when as none (his own friends only excepted) knew
either of Iustinianus death, or of Justinius that he was proclaimed Emperor,
until that both he him self and others also celebrated in Circus the wonted
solemnity of the Empire. After the finishinge of the spectacles when as none
rose to take armor, or to rebel against him, he returned into y^ palace. And
first of all he gave out a commandment that all the Bishops and Priests which
were gathered together at Constantinople out of all contreys should depart
every man to his own home, there to serve God in holiness and not to alter or
practice any nouelty as toutching the faith. That act of his is worthy of
commendation, The sensuality and coueto^^nes of Justinius.
but as for his life and trade of living, he swomme in sensualitye, he
wallowed in filthy pleasure, and was so greedy of other men's goods that he sold
every thing for lewd gain and set benesices them selves (without any fear of
God) to open sale. Moreover being entangled with two contrary vices
foolehardines and faint courage, first he commanded Justinius his kinsman to
come unto him, a man of great honor and estimation both for his prowess in
martial affairs, and for other rare ornaments of his person, who then made
his abode about the river Danubius for to wtstand the people Abari, least they
cut over that water and invaded the Romayne dominions. These Abari be people of
Scythia called Hamaxobij inhabiting y^ regions beyond Caucasus. who being Abari
a Scythian nation were driven out of their country by the Turckes.
driven out of their country by the Turckes their neighbors and diversely
grieved by the^ came first to Bosphorus, thence forsaking the banks of Pontus
Euxinus (where there dwelled many Barbarian nations, yet the cities and holds
were kept of y^ Romans, where again there came both soldiers y^ were
discharged of the wars and rid of attendance and also such inahbitants as the
Emperors had sent thither) they went straight on their voyage and vanquished
all y^ Barbarians before the^ until they came unto the shore of Danubius,
whence they sent Ambassadors unto Justinian y^ Emperor. From thence it was
that Justinius was called home as it was told him for to participate the
benefit of the couenauntes drauen between him and the Emperor Justinius. For
when as both of them seemed to be of equal fame and the Empire like to fall
unto either of them, after great reasoning and long disputation had about the
Imperial scepter they couenanted between them selves that whether Contention
about the Empire between Justinius the Uncle and Justinius the Nephew.
soever of them were crowned Emperor, should make the other the second person
in honor, yet in such sort, though he were second in respect of the
Emperor, that he should be first in respect of all others.

CAP. II.
How Justinius the Emperor procured the death of his cousin Justinius.

WHerefore Justinius y^ Emperor favored y^ other Justinius but from teeth
outward, forged heinous crimes against him by a little and a little, took from
him his guard, y^ pretorian soldiers also and his train, commanded hi^ to
keep his house (so y^ he was not seen abroad) and in y^ end gave charge he
should be co^ueied to Alexandria. In which city about midnight as he lay in his
bed he was murdered after a lamentable sort, and this was his recompense for
the good will he bare unto the common wealth, and the notable service he did in
the wars. Neither was the Emperors, or: he Empress fury and rage
mitigated, before they saw with their own eyes his head taken of from his
shoulders, and scornefully tumbled it with their feet.

CAP. III.
Of wicked Addaeus and Aetherius.

SHortly after, Justinius araigned Aetherius and Addaeus, who were both
senators, and of a long time in chiefest authority with Justinian for an haynons
offense which they had committed. one of them Aetherius by name confessed after
examination, that he sought to poison the Emperor, and that Addaeus was of his
counsel, and of his mind in all he went about. But Addaeus protested with
solemn and dreadful oaths, that he knew not of it, yet both of the^ were
beheaded. Addaeus Though god do wink for a while, he pays home in the end.
as his head went to the block spoke boldly, though he were innocent as
toutching that crime, yet that he had deserved y^ punishment by the just
judgment of God, who is the beholder and revenger of heinous offenses. he
confessed that he had dispatched Theodotus president of the palace by
inchauntments. but whether these things be true or no, I am not able to say.
Nevertheless sure I am that both these were wicked persons for Addaeus burned
with Sodomiticall lust, and Aetherius left no mischief unpracticed, he speyled
both the living and the dead, in the reign of Justinian under color of the
Emperors house whereof he was president, calling for the Emperor, for the
Emperors house. And so an end of them.

CAP. IIII.
The Edict of the faith which Justinius caused to be published in writing unto
all Christians wheresoever.

FUrthermore Justinius wrote an edict, and sentit abroad unto y^ christians
every where, co^taining The edict of Justinius the 2. Emperor of that name,
where the creed or christian ^aith is profoundly laid down, and strange it
may seem that so vicious a man could endite so virtuous and so godly a style.
John. 14. Faith chiefly required of christians. Of the unity and trinity. How
the natures in christ are both divided and coupled.
such a form as follows. In the name of the Lord Jesus Christ our God, the
emperor Caesar, Flauius Justinius, faithful in Christ, meek, chief lord,
bountiful, lord of Almaine, lord of Gutland, lord of Germany, lord of Antium,
lord of Francia, lord of the people Eruli, lord of the nation Gepaedi, pious,
fortunate, glorious, victorious, triumphant, all noble, perpetual Augustus. My
peace (says the Lord Christ, who is our true God) I give unto you: my peace
(says the same Lord unto the whole world) I leave unto you: which is no
otherwise to be taken, then that such as believe in him should repair unto the
one, and the only Church: that they should be at unity among them selves, in
the true and sincere faith of Christ, and detest from the heart root such as
gainesay, or uphold the contrary opinion. The chiefest point that appertains
unto man's salvation, is the free acknowledging, and protesting of the true
faith. Wherefore as we are commanded by the Evangelists, and as the sacred
creed, to wit, the doctrine of the holy fathers has taught us, we exhort al
me^ to embrace the one and the only church and discipline, believing in the
father, and in the son, and in the holy ghost: glorifying the coesse^tiall
trinity, the on godhead, to wit, nature and substance, one both in word and
deed, one might, power, and authority in the three persons, in whom we were
baptized, in whom we believe, and by whom we are coupled together in one. We
worship the trinity in unity, and the unity in trinity, having both a
division and a conjunction, so wonderful, that they can not be expressed: the
unity we mean according unto substance, to wit, the godhead, the trinity
according unto the proprieties that is the persons: the division we understand
to be undivided, and the conjunction divided. For the divinity is one in the
three persons, and the three in whom the divinity lies, or as I may better
say, which are the diuinitye it self, are one, God the father, God the son,
God the holy ghost: because that every person is taken by him self, the mind
separateth the things which are inseperable, to wit, God to be three persons,
which are understood to be joined together in on, as I may so term it, in
ide^titie of motion and nature. for it behooves us to say there is one God, and
acknowledge three persons or proprieties, we confess moreover that the only
begotten son of God, God the word was begotten of the father before all
worlds, and from everlasting, not made: that for us and for our salvation he
came down from heaven in the later days, and was incarnat by the holy ghost
of our Lady Mary the holy and glorious mother of God, and perpetual virgin,
and borne of her: that he is equal to the father, and to the holy ghost. For
the blessed trinity allows not of any fourth person, as if God the word
incarnat were so, who is one person of the trinity, one and the same our Lord
Jesus Christ, of one substance with the father according unto his divinity, of
one substance with us according unto his humanity, patible as toutchinge the
flesh, but impatible toutching the godhead we say not that God the word which
wrought miracles was one and he which suffered was another: but confess that
the one and the same our Lord Jesus christ the word Christ willingly suffered
death for the salvation of mankind.
of God was incarnat and truly made man, that both the miracles he wrought,
and the afflictions he voluntarily endured in the flesh for our salvation,
appertained unto one and the self same person. For it was no man that gave him
self for us, but it was even very God the word, who was made man without
alteration of the godhead, and of his own accord both suffered and died for us.
wherefore in acknowledging that he is God, we say not but that he is man, and in
confessing his ma^hood, we deny not his godhead. Again while we affirm that
the one our Lord Jesus Christ consists of both the natures, divinity and
humanity, we confound not the persons in the unity. for all he was made man
according unto our nature, yet is he God notwithstanding: neither because he
is God after his own nature, and has a likeness not capable of our similitude,
does he cease to be man, but contineweth as God in humanity, so no less man,
in the excellency of divinity. Therefore both the aforesaid is in one, and the
same one, is both God and man, who is Emmanuel. Further when we grant that the
same one is both perfect God and perfect man, of which two things he
consists, we severe not the coniunctio^ and unity of his person, but declare
the difference of the natures which is not taken away for all the coupling and
knittinge together of them, for neither is the divine nature changed into the
humane, neither the humane converted into the divine nature: but because both
of them is better understood, and sooner appears in the perfect description,
and order of the proper natures. Therefore say we that the confunction was made
in the person. The conjunction which is in the person, shows that God the
word, to wit, one of the three persons in divinity, was coupled not to man,
that was before, but in the womb of Marie, our Lady, the holy and glorious
mother of God, and perpetual virgin, and framed unto him self of her in his
proper person, a body of one substance with ours, subject to like affections
with us (sin only excepted) and endued with a reasonable soul and
understanding* he had a being of him self, and was made man, and is one and
the same our Lord Jesus Christ of equal glory with the father and the holy
ghost, And while we imagine or conceive his unspeakable copulation, we
acknowledge unfeignedly that the one nature of God the word was incarnat, and
took flesh endued with a reasonable and intellectual soul. Again when we
think upon the difference of natures, we affirm there are two natures and yet
divide them not at al, for both the natures are in him, and therefore we
confess one and the same Christ, one son, one person, or one propriety of
the divine essence, both God and man* wherefore as many as held contrary
opinions unto this, or presently do believe otherwise, we pronounce the^ to be
held for accursed, and judge the^ to be far estraunged from the holy,
catholic, and apostolic church of God. And seeing the true and sincere
doctrine delivered unto us by the holy fathers, has pierced our ears, and is
now as it were imprinted in our breasts, we exhort you all, nay rather we
beseech you, in the bowels of Christ Jesus to become one fold, to be of one and
the same catholic and apostolic church. for we think it no impairing of our
honor for all we are clad in this purple robe, and crowned with the Imperial
scepter, to use such phrases for the concord and unity of al christian
congregations, to thend al with one voice may sound out the praise and glory of
almighty God, and our savior Jesus Christ, that none henceforth contend about
any question, or reason of the persons of the trinity, or of any syllable
comprised therein, in so much as the syllables do lead us unto one sincere
faith and opinion, and that one custom, and order in the holy, catholic, and
Apostolic Church of God, has hitherto firmly been retained without change or
alteration, and is like hereafter to continue always. Although al agreed unto
this Edict, and confessed the same to be no otherwise then y^ true faith did
lead them unto: yet the members of the Church which varied in opinion, were not
reconciled, because the Edict signified in plain words, that the churches from
the beginning had retained one custom without change or alteration unto that
time, and that there was hope they would so continue unto the end.

CAP. V.
Why Anastasius the godly bishop of Theopolis otherwise called Antioch was
deposed.

IVstinus moreover laid to Anastasius charge, that he lauished and consumed
the holy treasure. not turning it to any necessary use, next that he had
uttered of him very contumelious languages (for Anastasius being asked what
made him so prodigallye to waste the holy treasure, as An old custom to take
money for byshopricks, and be^^fices, it is as ancient as the deuell is.
report goes, should freely answer again, lest that Justinius the monster
of the world should spoil them of it) and banished him the Byshopricke of
Antioch. Furthermore the voice goes, that Justinius was greatly displeased with
Anastasius, because when he required money of him for his admission into the
Bishopric, Anastasius would geeue him not a penny. Other crimes I am sure
were laid to his charge, by such as were the Emperors instruments, and could
do naught else save forge and flatter.

CAP. VI.
Of Gregorius who succeeded Anastasius in the seae of Antioch.

GRegorius after the deprivation of Anastasius, was preferred to the holy
Byshopricke of Antioch, a man of great fame for his gift in poetry. He led a
monastical life of a child, behaved him self therein so uprightly, and so
stoutly, that he was no sooner come to man's estate, but he attained unto the
highest and most perfect degree, and was made governor of the monasterye in
Constantinople, where he led a poor and an austere life. After that again by
the commandment of Justinius, he was appointed chief of the monasterye in
mount Sina, where he stood in great peril, by reason the Barbaria^s Scenetae,
a nation of Arabia besieged that place. And when as by his means peace was
there concluded, he was called from thence to be a Bishop. He was a man that
excelled and passed others, both for wisdom and virtue, what thing so ever
he took in hand, that would he do with great diligence, and as no fear could
dismay him, so could no other means allure him to contrary his own saying, no
not the threats and authority of the higher power* furthermore he was wont to
distribut such large sums of money (his liberality, and bountifulnes extended
unto every man) that whither so ever he went, a marvelous great multitude
besides his ordinary train followed after him, and they that either heard or
saw, he would go to any place, came flocking after. this one thing again may
be added as a second ornament unto his dignity and calling, that the people
were oftentimes very desirous of them selves, either to behold his goodly
person, or to hear the notable grace he had of utterance and pronunciation, he
was of all others the man yt soonest could bring men in love with him,
reasoned they with him of what matter so ever they would, he had an amiable and
a gracious face, his talk very gentle and pleasant. And as he was quick witted
to perceive any matter, were it never so profound, so passed he in wise counsel
and grave judgment, belonged it either to him self or to others. And thereof
it came to pass y^ he compassed so many noble acts, he was the man y^ would
post over no business unto the next day. he made not only y^ emperors of Rome,
but also y^ kings of Persia to have him in great admiration because he knew
how to use all men, as both necessity constrained, and occasion which he never
omitted did require. every his rare and singular acts can testify this which I
say to be no less then true. He was very severe and sometimes angry, again
somewhat, nay very gentle and meek, yt the witty saying of Gregory the divine
was lively expressed in him, to wit, the severity was so tempered with
shamefastnes yt nothing could take hurt by reason of either of them, but
both, because both were jointly linked together, purchased great commendation.

CAP. VII.
How the nation called Persarmeni being persecuted of the Persians for their
faith in Christ, yielded them selves unto the Empire of Rome.

IN the first year that Gregory was bishop, the nation inhabiting the greater
Armenia, of old so called, but afterward Persarmenia, which sometime was
under the Romans, and delivered by Philip the successor of Gordianus unto
Sapor, and as Armenia y^ less was subject unto y^ Empire of Rome, so all the
rest was held of the Persians, the nation I say inhabiting Armenia y^ great,
professing y^ christian faith, were grievously afflicted by y^ Persians, and
specially for their religion and conscience. Wherefore they sent Ambassadors
secretly unto Justinius, requestinge they might become subjects unto the Empire
of Rome, that thenceforth they might freely serve God without let or
hinderance. When Justinius had entertained and accepted of the embassy, when
certain articles were explicated in the letters he sent back unto the^, and
when the league was solemnly concluded, yt Armenians slew their own princes,
yielded them selves with all they had unto the Empire of No Christians may
murder then prince, what religion to ever he be of, if he be godly, God loves
his people, if wicked let them take him as a (...), yet for then king.
Rome. Not only they, but the borderinge country inhabited partly of that
nation, and partly of forainers (whose captain was Vardan, one both for his
noble parentage, and prowess in martial affairs, was honored of them for
their prince) offered their service and loyalty unto the Imperial scepter.
When Chosroes king of Persia charged the Emperor with these injurious
dealinges, Justinius put him of with this answer, saying: that the date of
the league was expired, and the days out, that it was not for the professors
of the Christian faith, to leave succourlesse such Christians as fled unto
them for aid in time of wars, but to relieve and cherishe them. For all that
Justinius gave Chosroes this answer, yet made he no preparation for battle,
but wallowed him self in his wonted sensuality, and preferred pleasure before
all.

CAP. VIII.
Of captain Martianus and the siege of Nisibis.

IN the mean while he sent captain Martianus his kinsman into the East, not
furnishing him with soldiers and armor, and other necessary provision to give
the enemy battle: so that he came into Mesopotamia, not without plain
danger and wrecke to the state, having with him a few naked soldiers, of
which number some were tributarie dichers and carters. He gave certain
Persians a very sclender battle (God wot) about Nisibis, while as yet the
other Persians were not in armor, and by chance getting the upper hand, he
besieged the city. But the Persians thought good not to shut their gates at
al, they reviled very contumeliously the Roman host, they made no account of
them, as if they had there been set to keep sheep. For all this there were
many strange monsters seen about that time, which prognosticated the
calamities that were shortly to ensue, and among others a calfe newly calued,
was seen to have two heads, yet but one neck.

CAP. IX.
How Chosroes when he had sent captain Adaarmanes against the Romans who
vexed them above all measure, went him self to Nisibis.

CHosroes being now furnished to battle, brought Adaarmanes on his way as
far as the other side of Euphrates, which was with in his own dominions,
sent him with an army into the marches of the Empire of Rome, and commanded
him to break into the town Circesium, Circesium is a town very conunodious
for the Romans, situated in the furthest parts of the Roman dominions, not
only fortified with strong walls, raised up to a marvelous great height, but
also environed with two rivers, Euphrates and Aboras, and become by reason of
them as it were an Isle. Then he him self went with his power over the river
Tigris, and got him straight to Nisibis. But the Romans of a long time
understood not of these voyages, and Justinius was made a fool. For he
believed a flimflame report that was blased abroad, how Chosroes was either
dead, or at the point of death. They say again that he was sore displeased,
because the siege of Nisibis was lingered, and that he sent certain men for to
egg Martianus forwards, and with all speed to bring him the keys of the
city. When their affairs took no prosperous success, but Justinius bore away
great shame and reproach, because he would seem to attempt that which was
impossible for him to do, that is to besiege so great and so wide a city,
specially with so simple an army: first of all Gregory Bishop of Antioch,
was certified of the whole. For the Bishop of Nisibis was his dear friend,
and liberally rewarded of him, and therefore being very sorry that the
Christians sustained such losses, and such vexations of the Persians, being
also desirous that the city whereof he was Bishop, were part of the Roman
dominions, signified unto him all that was done about Nisibus, without the
bounds of the Empire of Rome. Gregorius wrote immediately of these tidings unto
Justinius, and told him with all speed how Chosroes invaded the countries. But
he wallowinge still in the filth of his wonted voluptuousnes, neither gave ear
unto Gregory's letters, neither believed them, thought that only to be true,
which his own sick brain had conceived. For he immitated the manner of
intemperate and riotous persons, who as they are lither and rechelesse, so they
build toe much upon prosperous success and fortune, and if any thing happen
contrary to their mind, they will in no wise be brought to believe it for
true. Wherefore he wrote back again unto Gregory, rejecting his letters for
false reports. if they were true, that the Persians should not win the city
and raise the siege before his power came, or if they won it before, they
should be met withal ere they left the country. Afterward he sent Acacius a
proud man, of a disdainefull condition unto Martianus, with this commandment,
that if Martianus had before put one foot in the City and recoyled back, he
should put him beside his honor and dignity. The which he did in all the have
to the great hurt of the common weal, and all for to satisfy the Emperors
will. For he went into the Roman camp and took Martianus being out of the
Empire, and deprived him of all martial dignity, unknowing unto the army.
The captains of the bands and Centurions after their watch was ended,
understanding that their captain was put out of office, shook of their
armor, stole away privily, scattered them selves here and there in their
flight, and left the siege to the great laughter of all men. Adaarmanes
therefore who had a mighty army of the Persians and Barbarians called
Scenetae passing by Circesium, destroyed all the Roman Countries before him
with fire, sword, and every other sort of lamentable invasion, showed no mercy
at all, neither in word, neither in deed. He took castles and many villages,
and no man with stood him, first, because the Roman host wa^ted a head or
captain: next for yt Chosroes had beset all the soldiers about Daras, and
therefore the country was ouerrun and destroyed freely without fear at all.
furthermore Chosroes invaded Antioch by his soldiers only, for he him self
was absent, who lost their labor and were driven back thence, yea when as
very few remained in the City, when as also the bishop fled away, and
conveyed with him the holy treasure of the Church, because that the greater
part of the wall lay on the ground, and the people as it falls out at such
times was up all on rebellion, and when they were gone, the City was left
desolate, neither was there any one that devised engines to repel the violence
of the adversary, or that was disposed to resist the enemy any kind of way.

CAP. X.
The winning of Apamia and Daras.

AFter that the assault of Adaarmanes took no prosperous success at Antioch,
and the City Heraclea, afterward called Gagalica, was by him set on fire, he
made his voyage straight into Apamia, the which Seleucus yt son of Nicanor
builded, a city sometime flourishing, yet by long tract of time fallen to great
decay and ruin. And when he had required the city with certain covenants
concluded between them, it booted not for the citezens to resist, their walls
were so old that they fell to the ground, he burned the city, bereaved them of
all their substance, destroyed all, contrary unto the covenants drawn between
them, subdued not only the city but the country about, went his way and took
with him not only the bishop, but also the lieuetenant of the city. Again in
his journey homewards he wrought great mischief without let or resista^ce, a
few soldiers only excepted, whom Justinius had sent thither, whose captain was
Magnus, master sometime of the exchange at Constantinople, and afterward by
the commandment of Justinius, put in trust with one of the Emperors palaces, the
which soldiers were so discomfited, yt they fled away and were almost taken.
These things being brought to this pass, Adaarmanes returned unto Chosroes,
who as yet had not taken ye city which he besieged. As they joined powers
together, their army became very strong, the soldiers were animated, and last
of all, the enemy terrified and altogether dismayed. He found the city
trenched about, with a great contremure raised nigh the walls, all warlicke
engines prepared for the winning of the city, as the great holow catapelts,
which shoot the darts from a (...)
loft, commonly called brakes or slings. Chosroes with these helps won the
city by force in the winter season, when as John the Mayor of the town took
no thought at all how he might repel the violence of the enemy, nay rather he
betrayed the city, for both is reported. Chosroes had besieged the city above
five months, and in all that while there was not one that withstode him, last
of all, The win^ of Daras*
when he had ransacked the city of all that was in it, and slain many after a
lamentable sort, and taken many also alive, he fortified the city lying very
commodiously both for him and his subjects, and so returned home.

CAP. XI.
Justinius the Emperor fell into frenzy, and Tiberius took the government
of the whole Empire.

I Vstinus understanding that his dominions were invaded in such sort as we
have declared before by reason of his over much insolency and pride, banished
wit, removed reason out of her seat, took his unfortunate success far
more grievous then the common course of nature could bear, and fell into
frenzy and madness, so that he had no sense or understanding of any thing that
was done. Wherefore Tiberius a Thracian borne, one that was of chiefest
authority and estimation with Justinius, took in hand the government of the
Empire. This man had lately been sent by Justinius, with great power to give
battle unto the people Abari: Who when as his soldiers could not find in
their hearts to behold the Barbarians in the face, had without all peradventure
been taken, had not the divine providence of God beyond all man's expectation
saved and restored him alive into the Roman dominions: for by following the
rash and headie aduisement of Justinius, he together with the whole common weal
of Rome, was in great danger of utter foil, and of loosing unto the
Barbarians, the great renown of the Roman Empire.

CAP. XII.
How Traianus went in embassy unto Chosroes king of Persia, and concluded a
league between the Romans and the Persians.

Wherefore speedy counsel was taken, such as was meet and convenient for the
Roman affairs, to the end that which they had lost with rashness, might be
recovered with reason and sobriety. they sent unto Chosroes king of Persia,
Traianus a man of great renown, by office a Senator, of great honor and
estimation with all men, partly for his hoar hear, and partly also for his
great wisdom, his Embassy was not in the person of the Emperor, or in the
name of the Roman common weal, but only a message from Sophia the Empress.
For she wrote letters unto Chosroes, where she lamented the woeful plight her
husband stood in, and the lamentable state of the common weal wanting a head,
that it stood not with his honor to triumph over a seely widow, to insult
over an Emperor that was sick and dedred, and to invade a common weal that
was destitute of aid and succor. That he of old being diseased had not only
the like humanity showed unto him, but also of the best Physicians sent unto
him from the Empire of Rome, which might ease him of his grief. Chosroes being
persuaded with these circumstances, although he had determined immediately to
ouerrunne the Roman dominions, yet confirmed he a league for three years
space concerning the East countries, and decreed withal that Armenia should
enjoy the like benefit, that no battle should be fought there, and that none
throughout the East countries should be molested at all. While the affairs of
the East stood in this sort, Sermium was taken of the Barbarians, a City of
old inhabited of the people Gepaedi, and afterward by them delivered unto
Justinius.

CAP. XIII.
Of Tiberius who was made fellow Emperor, and his disposition.

IN the mean while Justinius through the counsel of Sophia the Empress,
proclaimed Tiberius, Caesar, and uttered such lamentable words at his
coronation, as no history either ancient or otherwise howsoever has recorded
unto this day, God no doubt of his mercy granting unto him so much time and
space as might suffice him both to confess his own sins, and also to
pronounce such things as were for the profit and commodity of the common
wealth. For when John the Bishop together with his company, the princes and
magistrates, last of all the pretorian soldiers were assembled in the open
hall, where of old such solemnities were usually celebrated: Justinius cladde
Tiberius in the Imperial robe, and compassed him with the soldiers cloak,
saying aloud as follows. Let not the glory of this garment lead thee into
error, neither be thou deceived ^inus the ^erour, ^g fallen (...) frenzy
(...) madness, (...)saileth ^erius his (...)slour in (...) words.
with the glorious shovv of such things as are subject unto the senses,
vvhervvith I my self now (alas) being snared, have brought my self
foolishly into these grievous torments. Wherefore in governing the Empire with
great moderation and mildnes of spirit, redress what is amiss, and correct
what I have leudly committed. And poynting at the Magistrates with the finger:
Thou must in no wise (says he) be ruled by these men, for these be they
which brought me into this lamentable plight, and the misery thou see me
in. These with other sorrowful words he uttered with many sobbes and sighs,
which made all that were present wonderful pensive, and the tears to trickle
down their cheeks. This Tiberius was a goodly tall man and well set, one that
excelled in the opinion of all men for comely proportion, so that he passed not
only kings and Emperors, but also all other sorts of men. And first of all
as touching the manner of his person, it became very well the majesty of the
Imperial scepter, and as for his mind it was adorned with modesty,
gentleness, and courtesy. His gracious favor was such that it allured all men
at the first sight to love him. He supposed that to be riches which suffised
every man, to give not only for necessity, but also for plenty and
abundance. For he was of the opinion, that not they only were to receive
benefits which wanted, but that it became the Emperor of Rome to be
bountiful, and liberally to give. He took that gold to be counterfeit, which
was gathered with If Tiberius were now alive, to execute for such counterfeit
coin, no doubt he would hang a great many, and perhaps a few lawye^s.
the tears of the commonaltie. He was so moved with these circumstances that
he forgave unto them that were tributaries unto the Empire one whole years
tribute. Again, such manours and fermes as Adaarmanes had in manner brought to
decay, by ceasing them at grievous tribute, he restored unto their former
liberty, and not only considered their loss, but recompensed them over
besides. He forgave the miurious exactions and pencions for the which other
Emperors accustomed to deliver, and in manner to sell their subjects to be
abused of the magistrates at their pleasure, and made a law there should no
such thing afterward be committed.

CAP. XIIII.
Tiberius the Emperor sent Iustinianus with a great army against Chosroes,
and drove him out of the Roman dominions.

THe aforesaid Tiberius having set in order, as right and reason did require,
such sums of money as his predecessor had both wickedly and injuriously
appointed to be gathered, made ready for battle, gathered together a great
army of valiant soldiers and noble persons beyond the Alps about Rhene, and
on this side of the Alps, of the nation called Messagetae, with other Scythian
nations, out of Paeonia, Mysia, Illyria and Isauria, so that he had well nigh a
hundred and fifty * troops of chosen horsemen ready and well appointed, by
means whereof he * (...), in Latin t^rma, a troop, as Varro thinks, quasi
terdena thirty, their captain is called decu^io, sometake the troop to be
32. horsemen, some other 64. horsemen.
gave the utter foil unto Chosroes, who immediately after y^ winning of Daras,
had in the summer time ouerrunne Armenia, and thence marched forwards toward
Caesarea, y^ head City of Cappadocia. This Chosroes behaved him self so
insolently toward the Empire of Rome, that when the Emperor sent Legates unto
him, he would not once voutchsafe to give them the hearing, but very
disdainefully bad them follow him to Caesarea, and that there he would sit
and hear what they had to say. When he saw the Roman host (whose captain
was Iustinianus the brother of Justinius, that was piteously murdered at
Alexandria) all in armor coming of the contrary to meet him, the trumpettes
sown to battle, the armies ready to join together, the clamor of the
soldiers pearcing the clouds in the sky, orderly placed in the front in
battle array, foming out with great fury present death. Last of all, when he
espied so great and so goodly a troop of horsemen, as none of the Emperors
before ever thought of, he was greatly astonished, and by reason it so fell out
unlooked for and upon a sudden, he sighed heauely and would not give the first
onsette. As he deferred the battle, lingered still, spent time idly, and
craftily went about to deceive them, Curs a Scythian, Captain of the right
wing of the battle set upon him, Curs a Scythian.
and when the Persians could not withstand his violence, but quite forsook the
front of the host, Curs made a great slaughter of the ennemies. Last of all he
pursued the soldiers at their backs, where the artillarie and preparation of
Chosroes, and of his whole army lay. He took all the kings treasure and
Iewelles, all his ordinance for war, yea when Chosroes both saw and suffered
it, thinking that to be far better, then that Curs should set on him. Curs
with his soldiers got great spoil and sums of money, and took away their
beasts loded with fardelles and packes, where also the fire lay which Chosroes
king of Persia worshipped for his God, thus having A wise God, that could be
taken in wars.
foiled the Persian army, and sounding a hymn to the praise of God, he
returned in the Evening about candlelight unto his company, who by that time
had left the array they were set in. Chosroes in all this while stirred not,
neither as yet was the battle begone, but only light skirmishes, one while
of this side, an other while of that side, as the manner is. Chosroes set a
mighty beacon on fire in the night, and purposed then to give the ennemie
battle: the Romans having two armies: he set about midnight on that host
which lay in camp of the Northside, they being suddenly taken and unprovided,
recoyled and gave back, he went forwards, took Melitina a City not far
of, that was destitute of a garrison and Citizens to repel his violence, set
all on fire, and sought to cut over the river Euphrates. When the Roman
armies joined together and pursued after him, he fearing him self, got up on
an Olyphant, and passed over Euphrates* but the greater part of his army in
swimming and conueying them selves over, were drowned in the deapth of the
water. He understanding of this misfortune, got him away with all speed.
Wherefore Chosroes in the end being thus plagued and recompensed for his
insolency and disdain toward the Romans, returned into the East with as
many as were left him alive. There the league was of force, that none should
assault him. Iustinianus after all, ouerrunne the marches of the Persian
dominions, continued there all winter long, without let or anoyance. About the
eight ^alends of Iulie he returned back without the loss of any one part of
his host, and spent all summer with prosperous success and joy of Martial
prowess about the bounds where the Romain and Persian dominions do part a
sunder.

CAP. XV.
How Chosroes after great sorrow that he was foiled in battle, died, and
bequeathed the kingdom of Persia to his son Hormisda.

CHosroes being on every side beset with misery, all dismayed and discouraged,
languishing for sorrow, and pining away for care and pensiuenes, and as it were
swallowed up in the gulphs of his deep sighs and heavy sobs, died after a
lamentable sort: leaving behind him a law, the which he made that the king of
Persia should never from that day out take armor against the Romans, as an
everlasting memorial of his flight and utter foil. After his desease, his
son Hormisda king of Persia.
Hormisda was crowned with the royal scepter, of whom I will presently say no
more, for the Ecclesiastical affairs do call me away, and look that now I
should thitherwards direct my pen.

CAP. XVI.
Of the chief Bishops, which flourished about that time.

WHen John, otherwise named Cateline, departed this life, Bonosus became
Bishope of This Bonosus, is of other writers called Benedictus.
Rome, whom an other John succeeded, and after him Pelagius. In the seae of
Constantinople, after John came Eutychius, who had been Bishop there before.
The Citizens of Alexandria after the death of Apolinarius, had John to their
Bishop, whom Eulogius succeeded. The Bishoprike of Jerusalem, when Macarus had
finished his mortal race, was governed by John, who sometime led a very poor
and austere life in the monastery of the vigilant Monks, during whose time
the Church continewed at one stay, without change or alteration.

CAP. XVII.
Of the earthquake at Antioche, in the reign of Tiberius.

IN the third year of Tiberius Caesar's reign, there rose about noone day so
great an earthquake Anno Dom* 580.
at Antioche and Daphne adjoining thereunto, that all Daphne, with the force and
violence thereof fell to the ground, and many both public and private
buildings within the City of Antioch, were unjointed and broken asunder, yet
not so much that they fell to the ground, there happened both at Antioch and at
Constantinople, other calamities which require a long discourse, and vexed out
of measure either of the Cities with great tumultes and sedition, yet as they
rose upon a godly zeal, so ended they very straungely. But of them afterward.

CAP. XVIII.
Of the tumultes at Antioch and at Constantinople, about wicked Anatolius.

ANatolius, one sometime that was but a light and a commen fellow, yet
afterward crept through wiles, I wot not how, to be a Magistrate and to bear
office in the commen weal. He lived at Antioch, where with great diligence he
went about such affairs as he had in hand, there he grew into great
familiarity with Gregory Bishop of that city, and had often recourse unto him,
partly to confer about his business, and partly by frequenting thither, to
purchase unto him self greater authority and estimation. It fell out that
this Anatolius was found to have sacrificed Anatolius an Ethnicke. The Picture
of Marie was ^ot wor shipped of any Christian, but of Anatolius t^^ infidel
It is vvorthie of memory ^ayth ^uag^ius to see a dumb creature ^^^u^^ the
vvors^ippe d^vve unto ^od.
to Idolles, and being examined, he was manifestly proved a wicked man, an
Enchaunter and entangled with diverse other enormities. Yet this magistrate
together with his companions (for he had others that held with him, and
convinced of Idolatricall sacrifice) had almost escaped without punishment, had
not the people made an insurrection, and set all on tumultes, that the
hearing and examination of their impiety would by that means have been quite
omitted. Moreover, they exclamed at Gregory the Bishop, and said openly that
he was altogether of Anatolius counsel. for the cursed devil, disquieter of
mankind, persuaded many of the citezens to accompany Anatolius in his
abominable sacrifice. Hereupon it rose that Gregory was in great suspicion,
that the people were so earnestly bent against him, and hereupon he was so
vehemently suspected, that the Emperor Tiberius him self labored to sift out
the truth of Anatolius own mouth. Wherefore he gave out his commandment, that
both Anatolius and his company should with all speed be brought to
Constantinople. Anatolius hearing of this, ra^ne unto the picture of Marie the
mother of God that hong a loft in the prison by a cord, set his hands behind
him, made supplication and prayed Here you may ^ee that Anatolius an inchaun^er
and s^^^^ficer to Idols, prayed (...) pi^^^^es which God detested.
unto it. the image detested him as a wicked person and one y^ God abhorred,
and turned it self from him, a spectacle very strange, and worthy of
everlasting memory. the gailer and keepers with the soldiers of the garrison saw
it and reported it to others. The holy virgin appeared unto diverse of the
faithful, and set them against wicked Anatolius, saying that he had reviled
her son. Anatolius being brought to Constantinople, and there chasticed very
extremely, he could not charge yt bishop with any thing, but together with his
company, was an occasion y^ the city was on far greater sedition and uproar
for when some of these idolatrical sacrificers were condemned not to die, but
to perpetual banishment: the people of a godly zeal boiled with anger, and
would not suffer them to be banished, but took them in a fisherbote where they
were set, and with uniform consent of all the people they were burned quick.
they cried out also against the Emperor and Eutychius their bishop, as
traitors to the faith. for without doubt they had dispatched both Eutychius and
such as were in commission to arraine Anatolius with his company (they sought
them out in every place, and beset them on every side) had not the providence
of God which preserves his people, taken them out of their enemies claws, and
appeased by a little and a little, the rage of so furious a multitude. So The
execution of Anatolius, that sacrificed to Idols.
it came to pass that they committed no horrible act: that Anatolius was
first thrown to the ravenous beasts in compass of y^ theater, of the^ to be
torn in pieces, next hanged on the gallows. neither ended he his life with
those punishments, but the wolves came, pulled his carcass to the earth
(which was never seen before) and cruelly rent it in quarters with great
rau^ning. there was a Christian that said before these things came to pass,
that in his sleep he saw the people pronounce the sentence against Anatolius.
And again, a noble man president of the Emperors palace, one that made great
friends for Anatolius, said he saw Marie the mother of God, and that she spoke
unto him in this sort: how long do thou take part with Anatolius, who dealt
contumeliously, not only with me but with my son also? but this much of
these things in this sort.

CAP. XIX.
Of Mauricius the valiant Captain, and his virtues.

Tiberius being cladde with the Imperial robe, after the desease of Justinius,
deposed Iustinianus of his dignity, because his later enterprises against the
Barbarians, took not such prosperous success as before time, and appointed
Mauricius Captain of the Eastern power, who by birth and by name was of old
Rome, yet because of his ancestors and parents, he took Arabissus a City of
Cappadocia for his country. He was a politic and a wise man, The virtues of
Mauricius.
very diligent and careful in all his affairs, of a firm and a constant
mind, of good government in life and conversation, and well disposed. He so
brideled fleshly desires, and feeding of the panche, that he abstained not only
from necessaries and such things as might easily be gotten, but also from other
things whatsoever provoked to intemperate lust and sensuality. He would not
give the common sort of me^ the hearing, neither harkned he to every man's tale.
for he knew y^ the one bred contempt, and the other brought nothing but
flattery. He would very seldom grant his presence unto any, yea and yt toe,
when he were earnestly besought unto, he stopped his ears from hearing of idle
talk, not with wax (as the Poet cou^saileth) but with wisdom and reason, which
was unto him in steed of a key, both to open and to shut them as time and
occasion did require. Ignorance the mother of boldness (for none is more bold
then blind bayard) and faint courage her next neighbor, be so banished from
him, that he thought verily in rashness there was peril, and in pawsing great
security. for wisdom and fortitude which were resiant in his breast, so ruled
his affairs as time and occasion required, without giving appetites the
bridle, that measure and moderation both set them up, and pulled them down.
but of this more at large hereafter. Rule and government do most commonly
declare how excellent a man is, his nature and condition, Magistracy opens
what man is: for when life has liberty and power to do what her list, then
reuealeth A man in office is sone espied.
she the secret clossets of her mind, and settes them wide open to the face of
the whole world. This Mauricius waging battle in foraine countries, took
both cities and castles that lay most commodious for the Persians, and carried
thence so great a pray, that he filled with the captives he had brought with
him, Isles, towns and countries, that lay of a long time desolate and not
inhabited: the land also that was unmanured, he caused to be tilled and made
arable soil: of these men he had to serve his turn great armies, which both
valiantly and courageously fought against other nations, and last of all he
stored every family of servants, for then there were captives great store,
and cheap enough.

CAP. XX.
Mauricius foiled both Chosroes and Adaarmanes, which led the Persian armies.

FVrthermore, the same Mauricius waged battle with the head and chiefest of
all Persia, namely, Tamochosroes and Adaarmanes, which led great armies to
the field. but after what sort, when, and how prosperously his enterprises went
forwards, either we give other men leave to commit them to letters, or
peradventure we our selves (seeing that in this present volume we have promised
to discourse of other matters) will entreat of them in an other several work.
yet thus much will I now say, that Tamochosroes was overthrown in the front of
the host, not with the fortitude of the Roman army, but with the only
piety of the Captain, and his faith in God: that Adaarmanes was foiled with
plain force of arms, and after great loss of his power put to flight, yea
and that not only when Alamundarus captain of the Barbarian nation, called
Scenetae* betrayed Mauricius, in that he would not come over the river
Euphrates, and aid him against Scenetae, which fought against him (these
Scenetae are so swifte on horseback, that they can hardly be taken, yea though
their passage be stopped, but when it stands them upon, they far outrunne the
ennemie) but also when Theodorichus Captain of the Scythians durst not tarry
within their reach, but showed them immediately a fair pair of heels
together with his soldiers.

CAP. XXI.
Of the signs prognosticating the reign of Mauricius.

THere were signs which went before, and foreshewed that Mauricius should be
crowned Emperor. As he offered frankencense very late in the night, within the
chauncell of S. Mary's Church, which the people of Antioche do call the temple
of Justinian, the curteine or canapie was all set on fire, and therewith he
fell into such a dumpe, that he feared the vision exceedingly. Gregory Bishop
of that City standing by, said that without all peradventure the vision was
sent from above, and foreshewed the brightness of glory, and the great renown
that was to befall him. Christ moreover appeared toward the East, seeking
vengeance on the ennemies. In that vision also was the reign of Mauricius
plainly prognosticated. for of whom (I pray you) sought he that, unless it
were of the Emperor, and of such a man as served him in holiness? As I
searched out the truth and certainetie of these things, his parents told me
other things worthy of memory and the knowledge of the posterity in time to
come. His father The dream of Mauricius father.
remembered that what time Mauricius was conceived, he saw in his sleep a
mighty Vine to burgeine out of his chamber, and that there hunge thereon
infinite clusters of ripe grapes. His mother told, that when she was
delivered, the earth breathed up of her self a redolent savor, that was
strange, and varied it self by turns. Also that a griesly ghost, commonly
called a Goblin or a Hegge, tombled the infant from place to place, as though
he would devour him, (...), that is, a Goblin.
yet had no power to hurt him. Symeon likewise that dwelt in a pillour not
far from Antioche, a man of great wisdom and experience, sufficiently
adorned with all divine gifts, gave forth many tokens both in word and deed,
which plainly declared that Mauricius would be crowned Emperor, concerning
which Symeon, if ought seem expedient to be written, the next book shall
perform it.

CAP. XXII.
The coronation of Mauricius and Augusta.

When Tiberius was ready to yield up the ghost, and now come unto deaths
door, he Mauricius was crowned Emperor, Anno Dom. 583.
gave unto Mauricius, who then was proclaimed Emperor, his daughter Augusta in
marriage, and the Empire for dowry: who for all that his life during the term
of his reign was prolonged but for a short space, yet because of his noble
acts (which conveniently may not presently be committed to writing) he left
unto the common weal both an immortal memory of his name, and a passing
inheritance, to wit, Mauricius whom he proclaimed Emperor, neither only
this, but he gave them also his own title, for he called Mauricius, Tiberius,
and Augusta, Constantina. but what famous acts they did, the next book God
willing shall declare.

CAP. XXIII.
A supputation of the times, from Justinius the second Emperor of that name,
unto Mauricius.

TO the end we may diligently note the succesu^on of the times, we have to
learn that Justinius From the buildi^g of Rome and the kingdom of Romulus, unto
the reign of Mauricius, there are 1148. years. Euagr. lib. 3. cap. 29.
the younger reigned by him self alone twelve years, ten months and odd
days: together with Tiberius, three years and eleven months, so that his
whole reign comes to sixteen years, nine months and odd days. Tiberius was
Emperor by him self alone four years, with Justinius three years and eleven
months, so that if we number the years from Romulus unto the reign of
Mauricius, they will appear just according unto the supputation which went
before, and this present rehearsal.

CAP. XXIIII.
Are^itall of such as continewed their histories one after an other from the
beginning unto his time.

AS touching the order and continewance of times agreeable unto the
Ecclesiastical history, it is come to pass by the goodness of God, that we
have it at this day compendiously delivered unto us by the works of such
famous historiographers as have written the said history unto the posterity
following. for Eusebius Pamphilus has written from the birthe Eusebius.
Socrates. Theodoret. Sozomenus. Euagrius.
of Christ unto the reign of Constantinus Magnus: Socrates, Theodoret, and
Sozomenus have continewed the times from Constantine unto Theodosius Junior, of
which Emperors doings, this work also of ours has somewhat discoursed. As
for the divine and profane histories from the beginning of the world unto this
day, they are orderly continewed by painful writers. And first of all Moises
began to write (as it is declared of them which compiled these things
together) Moises.
of the things that were done from the creation of the world, even as he had
truly learned of God in mount Sina. Again others followed him, showed the ready
way to attain unto our religion, Esdras and the Prophets Josephus.
and committed to writing, the acts done since his time. Moreover Josephus
wrote a very large story, full of every kind of good matter. What fabulous
things so ever are reported to have been done either by the Grecians or
Barbarians of old time, who either were at civil wars within them selves,
or waged battle with foraine enemies, or if any other thing can be remembered
Characes. Theopompus. Ephorus. Dionysius Halicarnassaeus. Polybius. Appianus.
since the first molde of man was cast, all I say besides sundry other writers
is laid down by Characes, Theopompus and Ephorus. As for the Roman history,
comprising in manner the arts of the whole world, or if any other thing fell
out by reason of their civil discord, or of quarelles risen between them and
foraine nations, it is exquisitely handled by Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, who
began his story from the time of the people called Aborigines, and continewed
it unto the reign of Pyrrhus king of Epitus. from thence unto the overthrow of
Carthage, Polybius Megapolitanus has excellently discoursed, all which
treatises though occasioned at diverse and sundry times, Appianus with grave
judgment has contrived into order and compacted together, adding thereunto of
his own, such things as were worthy of memory after their days unto his
time. Diodorus Siculus Diodorus Siculus. Dion Cassius. Herodian. Nicostratus.
wrote unto the time of Julius Caesar, Dion Cassius likewise continewed his
story unto the reign of Antoninus of Emesa, the like matter and order has
Herodian in manner followed, ending with the death of Maximus. Nicostratus also a
Rhetorician of Trapezus, began with the reign of Philip, the successor of
Gordianus, and wrote unto Odaenatus of Palmyra, and the ignominious expedition
of Valerianus against the Persians. Of the same things entreated Dexippus at
large, beginning with Dexippus.
the reign of the Macedonians, and ending with the Imperie of Claudius, the
successor of Galienus, the said author laid down the wars of the Carpians,
and of other Barbarians in Hellada, Thracia and Ionia. Eusebius continewed his
story from Octauianus the Emperors reign, unto Eusebius. Arianus. Asinius.
the time of Traian, Marcus, and the death of Carus. Arianus and Asinius
Quadratus, wrote somewhat also of those times. The times following, reaching
unto the reign of Arcadius and Honorius the Emperors, Zosimus has
prosecuted, and of the things which happened since their Zosimus. Priscus
Rhetor. Eustathius Epiph.
times, Priscus Rhetor with others has discoursed. All which hystories
Eustathius of Epiphania, has briefly run over, but very excellently, and
divided the whole into two volumes: The first contains the Acts from the
beginning of the world unto the destruction of Troie, and the Palace of
Priamus, the second contineweth the story from that time unto the twelfe year
of Anastasius the Emperors reign. There began Procopius Rhetor, and ended
with the days of Procopius Rhetor. Agathius. John.
Justinian. What happened since unto these our days, although Agathius Rhetor,
and John both my fellow Citezen and kinsman, have orderly written of, unto the
time when Chosroes the younger both fled unto the Romans, and also was
restored unto his kingdom by Mauricius, (who went not therein faintly to work,
but courageously as it became an Emperor, and brought Chosroes into his
kingdom with great treasure and armed soldiers) yet have they not as yet
published their hystories. Of whom hereafter by the grace of God we mind to
speak as occasion shall serve.

The end of the fifth book of Euagrius Scholasticus.
THE SIXTH BOOK OF THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF EVAGRIVS SCHOLASTICVS.
CAP. 1.
The solemn marriage of Mauricius and Augusta.

MAuricius being crowned Emperor, first of all made preparation for the
solemnity of his marriage: next celebrated such rites as became the Imperial
scepter, and coupled unto him in marriage Augusta, otherwise called Constantina,
with great pomp and royalty: last of all made sumptuous feasts and costly
bankets, with great glory and renown. Theosebia and y^ Empress came to this
solenme marriage with ^phia the ^^fe of Tiberius.
a portly train and rich presents. The one brought with her not only the
father and the mother of Mauricius (which was never seen to have happened to
any Emperor before) for to honor the marriage with their comely horenesse and
reverend wrincles, but also his brethern of goodly stature and proportion to
set forth that royal solemnity: the other presented a garment all cloth of
gold, garnished with purple and pearls of India, she brought also crowns
covered with gold and precious stones of diverse sorts and sundry colors,
together with all the nobility, as well such as were renowned for Martial
prowess, as they that were made of, for their honorable order of the haule
and palace. all they bare in their hands burninge torches, stood very
maiestically in the sight of all men, upholding the glory of that gorgeous
spectacle, so that there was never seen among men a more excellent, and a more
roial show. Plutarchus Chaeroneus (says Damophilus a Roman historiographer)
said very well, that the puisance and prosperous success, the favor and
fortune of Rome joined hands together, but I had rather say, that true piety
and felicity so met together in Mauricius alone, that true piety forced
felicity to be present, and would in no wise suffer her to be foiled and
overthrown. These things being finished, Mauricius covered not only his head
with the crown, and clad not only his body in purple, but also his mind with
precious ornaments. for in manner he alone of all the Emperors fell a governing
of his own person, and so became an Emperor in deed: first he drove from his
mind the popular state of affections, next placinge the order of his peers
and nobility in the seat of reason, he made him self a lively pattern of
virtue for his subjects to immitate and follow after. Neither do I report
this of him to the end I might sooth him with fair words and flattery (to what
purpose I beseech you should I do so, seeing he knows not of the things
which I do write) but because the gifts which God has so bou^tifully bestowed
upon him, and the affairs which at sundry times enjoyed such prosperous
successes, do manifestly prove it to be most true. All which will we, nill we,
we must confess and acknowledge to be the goodness of God.

CAP. II.
Of Alamundarus the Saracen and his son Naamanes.

THis Emperor besides all other men, was careful over such as had been
attainted of high treason, that none of them should be executed, and therefore
he beheaded not Alamundarus captain of the Scenetae in Arabia, who (as I
mentioned before) had betrayed him, but was driven out of one only Isle with
his wife and certain children, and banished for punishment into Sicilia. And
moreover Naamanes his son, who wrought infinite mischiefs against the common
weal, who had destroyed the two Phoenicias and Palaestina, who last of all
subdued the same regions with the help of the Barbarians round about him, yea
at what time his father Alamundarus was taken, when all men craved his head:
he kept him only in free ward, and enjoined him no other punishment. the like
clemency he showed to infinite other persons, the which severally shall be
spoken of when fit occasion is ministered.

CAP. III.
Of John and Philippicus Roman captains, and their doings.

John a Thracian borne, was sent by Mauricius to guide the Eastern army, who
preuailinge but ill fauoredly in some battails, in some others again patching
that which was a discredit unto him before, did as truth is, nothing that
deserved any great commendation. Next after him Philippicus, one that was
allied unto y^ emperor (for he had married one of the sisters) made a voyage
into foraine countries, destroyed all that lay before him, took great spoil,
and slew many of the nobles and peers of Nisibis, and of others on this side
of the river Tigris. he fought hand to hand with the Persians, and giving them
a wonderful sore battle, he overthrew many that were of the chiefest of
Persia and took many alive: a band also of spear men which fled into an hill,
lying very commodious for them, he took not, but let them go vntoutched, which
promised him they would send to their king with all speed to persuade him to
peace. Other noble acts did he while he led the Roman power, he brought the
soldiers from riot and pleasure, and acquainted them with temperancie and
diligent service, All which circumstances, we give other men leave (if them
please) that either have written, or are about to write, so far to wade in
them, as they have learned by heresay, or conceived by self opinion: who most
commonly by reason of ignorance are deceived and so halt, or through toe much
partiality, or negligent, or by occasion of spite and hatred are so blinded
that they can not utter the truth.

CAP. IIII.
Of captain Priscus and the insurrection of the soldiers against him.

PRiscus succeeded Philippicus in the rowme of a captain, and was so stately
that none could speak with him, unless it were about weighty and great
matters. For he was of the opinion, that if he used little familiarity, he
might do what him self listed, and that his soldiers underneath him would
stand in awe of him, and the sooner obey his commandment. But coming on a
certain time unto his army with high looks, and hauty disdain, with his
whole body set upon toe arrogant gestures, he made them an oration of soldiers
patience in peril of wars, of fine and picked harness, and last of all, of
the rewards they were to reap of the common weal for their travel and
service: they knowinge of these things as well as he, began openly to
reveal their wrath, and conceived displeasure against him, and rushinge in
thither, where he had pitched his tent, as if they had been Barbarians, They
spoiled him of all his sumptuous store and precious treasure: not only this,
but without doubt they had also dispatched him, had not he with all speed taken
horse, and fled unto Edessa. Yet they besieged this city, and commanded that
Priscus should be delivered them.

CAP. V.
Of Germanus whom the soldiers made Emperor against his will.

When the citizens of Edessa would not restore Priscus, the soldiers left
him, and by force took Germanus captain of the warefaringe soldiers in
Phoenicia of Iabanesia, and proclaimed him their captain and Emperor. While
he refused the office, and they urged it upon him, there rose great contention
of either side, for he would not be constrained, and they would needs compel
him, they threatened to execute him, unless he would willingly accept of the
dignity, he of the contrary protested openly he was neither affraide, neither
would yield one jot. At length they went about to lash him with whips, and to
maime the members of his body: which torments they persuaded them selves verily
he would not endure, that there was not in him more hardness to bear away
stripes, then nature and years gave them to understand. they took him in
hand, and knowing well enough what he was able to suffer, dealt very
circumspectly, lest they wounded him sore, until in thend they forced him to
condescend, and with anoth to promise them his faith and fidelity. Wherefore
thus they compelled him whom they had ruled to rule, and whom they had governed
to govern, and whom they led captive to become their captain. furthermore
they displaced all other officers, as captains, tribuns, centurions,
decurions, and placed in their rowmes whom pleased them best, and reviled the
empire with railing speeches. And though they bore them selves toward such as
were tributary milder then the common use and manner is of Barbarians: yet were
they altogether alienated from their companions, and members with them of one
common weal. For they took not their wayfaring vittailes by weight and
measure, neither were they pleased with such lodginge as was appointed for
them, but took their own lust for laws, and pleasure for prescribed order.

CAP. VI.
The Emperor sent Philippicus again among the soldiers, but the army refused
him.

WHen the Emperor sent Philippicus to redress the aforesaid enormities, the
soldiers not only rejected him, but menaced and conspired the deaths of such
as seemed to take his part.

CAP. VII.
Of Gregory bishop of Antioch, how he proved the report that was raised of him
to be a meare sclaunder.

THe affairs of the common weal lying at this point, Gregory bishop of
Antioch returned from Constantinople, after the ending of a bitter conflict the
which I am now about to declare. when Asterius was lieuetenant of the east, and
contention risen between him and Gregory, first, all the head citizens took
part with Asterius, next the artificers stuck unto him, saying that Gregory
had iniuried them every one, last of al it was permitted for the common people
al to revile Gregory. both high and low conspired together, and ceased not
either in the streat or on the theater to rail very contumeliously at bishop
Gregory, neither was their scaffold and enterludes without skoffs. Therefore
Asterius was deposed of his Lieuetenantship, and John elected to succeed him,
whom the Emperor charged diligently to examine the circumstances of that
seditious controversy. This John was a man unfit for the hearing of trifling
causes, much more for the examining of so weighty a matter, and the executing
of so worthy a function. wherefore when he had set the whole Gregory B. of
Antioch i^ fal^ly accused of incest.
city on tumults, and published an edict, where it was lawful for him that
could say any thing to come forth and accuse the bishop: a certain exchaunger
presented him y^ he had companied with his own sister whom he married unto an
other. Again others of y^ kind of people charged him that he had disturbed
the quiet and good estate of the city, and that not once but very often. But
Gregory purged him self of that sclaunder, and appealed unto the Emperor, and
to a council for the hearing of the other matters. I was my self in his
company, and present when he purged him of these crimes at Constantinople. And
when as al y^ patriarchs either by them selves, or by their substitutes were
The punishment of one that accused Gregory b. of Antioch of incest.
at the hearing of Gregory's purgation, and the cause heard of the holy Senate
and of many holy bishops* after great stir and much ado the sentence went
with Gregory, that his accuser should be racked* carted about the city, and
banished the country. After all this Gregory returned unto his byshopricke
again, and in the mean while the soldiers ceased not from raising of
sedition, for Philippicus the captain made then his abode about Beroea and the
city of Chalcis.

CAP. VIII.
How Theopolis otherwise called Antioch, was again tossed with earthquakes.

Four months after the return of Gregory from Constantinople in the six
hundred thirty and seventh year after Antioch was so called, and the
threescore and first year after the earthquake which went next before, when
as I my self the last day of September had taken to my wife a virgin of
tender years, and the city therefore kept holiday, and flocked with great
pomp and solemnity to my wedding ca^^ber and feasting house, about the third
hour of the night, there rose such an earthquake that with the violence
thereof it shook together the whole city. It so tossed the fundations that
all the buildinges about the most holy Church were turned down to the ground,
except only the hemispherical rouf that Euphraemius had made of baye trees
which also was sore hurt of the earthquake in the time of Justinius, and so
tossed also by other earthquakes, after that again, that it leaned very much
into the North, and thrust out of their place the mighty wodden beams which
fell with a marvelous great crackinge, and immediately the he misphericall
roufe shrinked to his own place, and stood perpendicular wise as it did
before, without bowing to either side. Many pieces of Ostracina and Psephium
(mentioned before) all the places called Brisia, and moreover the buildings of
S. Mary's Church were quite overthrown, save one middle porche that was
marueilously saved. All the turrets that stood on the plain ground came
tumblinge down, when as the rest of the buildinge (the battlements of the wall
excepted) stood still. yet the stones of the battlements were driven back and
notthrowen down. Other Temples moreover, and both the public baths that were
used at several times were also partakers of that calamity and came to ruin.
The people perished confusely one with an other (as it was co^iectured by the
bread which was spent in that city) about a threescore thousand persons. But
the bishop escaped very straungely when the whole lodginge he sat in came to
ruin, and 60000. persons were slain with the ruin o^ buyldinge^ in the
earthquake at Antioch.
all that were about him were only saved, otherwise none, for they lifted him up
with all speed, when the earthquake the second time shook the place, and as
it were opened the lodginge, so that they let him down by a rope, and
delivered him out of danger. It fared very well with the city,
notwithstanding all that unfortunate success. For it came to pass by the
goodness of our merciful God, mittigatinge his fury, and correctinge with
the rod of pitye and mercies, the sins of his people that no fire followed
after, When as great flames flashed up out of herthes, and lights both
pudlyque and private, out of kitchens, baths, and infinite other such like
places in compass of the whole city. There dyed in this earthquake many
noble and famous personages, and so did Asterius: but the Emperor repaired
with money this lamentable ruin of the city.

CAP. IX.
The Barbarians seeing the Roman army falling to rebellion set up them
selves, but they were foiled by Germanus.

AS toutching the army spoken of before, it stood in manner at the same stay,
that the Barbarians persuaded them selves verily, none would withstand them,
but that after their wonted manner they might destroy and invade the Roman
dominions. But Germanus met them with his power, and so foiled them by force of
arms, that there was not one left to bring the Persians tidings of their
slaughter.

CAP. X.
The Emperors clemency toward the soldiers which rebelled and forsook
their captain.

THe Emperor gave money unto the army, but Germanus and others he arrained,
and although they were all condemned to dye, yet would not he have them
executed, neither otherwise punished, but gave them rewards. When these
things went in this sort the people Abari came twice, as far as the Long
wall, invaded the country before them, subdued Singedon, Anchialus, al
Hellada, with other cities and castles, destroyed all with fire and sword, yea
for all the Romans had a great army in the East. Wherefore the Emperor sent
Andreas captain of his guard for to persuade the army to take again such
officers and captains as they had over them before.

CAP. XI.
Gregory bishop of Antioch is sent to reconcile the army that refused their
captain, and of the oration he made unto them.

WHen the soldiers would not give ear unto Andreas exhortation, the
commission was directed unto Gregory, not only because he was the man that
could bring weighty matters about, but also that the army of right and duty
owed him great honor, for he had liberally bestowed upon diverse of the soldiers
great sums of money, upon others apparel, relieved others, some with food
when they were admitted by him, and matriculated in the catalogue of soldiers.
wherefore he sent posts into every place, and warned all the chief of the
army to meet him at Litarbis, out of Antioch about three hundred furlongs:
when he came unto the^ down he fell upon his knees, and made them this oration.
I had determined with my self now a good while ago (O ye valiant Romans which
worthily deserve this name) to make a voyage unto you, partly to The oration of
Gregory b. of Antioch unto the soldiers which rebelled and sooke of their
captain and Emperor.
confer of present affairs, and partly also to co^sult together with you,
bringing you in remembrance (that you need not suspect my dealing) how of mine
own free accord, and hearty good will the which I am sure you are fully
persuaded of, I found you commodious relief and necessary provision, when you
fought by sea, and were driven by tempest here and there to shift for your
selves. But hitherto my coming has been diferred, peradventure by the
providence of God which permitted me no license, that both the Persians may
have sufficient trial of the Roman power and fortitude which foiled the^,
yea without a captain and guide, and your sincere and faithful mind also
borne unto the common weal, may in time be thoroughly known, by your deeds be
approved and confirmed in all respects. For you have made manifest this one
thing unto the whole world, though you were offended and conceived high
displeasure against your captains, yet esteemed you nothing more the^ the good
estate of the commonweal. and seeing it goes so happily with us, let us now
consider what it stands us upon to do. The emperor greets you well, and gladly
would see your reconciliation, he promises to forget all that is amiss and
now past, he thinks the good will you owe unto your country, the valiant
courage and noble minds ye have in waginge of battle to be spokesme^ good
enough for your pardon. and all these sure and certain tokens lays he wide
open before you that ye may assure your selves of forgeuenes at his hands, and
of his lawful favor. He says again, I will use his own words: If God
esteemed so highly of the love you bear unto the empire of Rome, and therefore
brought to pass that after the remitting of your falts there reigned in you no
less fortitude and courage then was seen in times past (which verily is an
evident argument that all old injury is forgotten) how can we possibly choose
but yield unto that which the holy spirit leads us unto. Wherefore (O ye
Romans) condescend with all speed Occasion a slippery thig.
unto my friendelye advise, let us not loose the present occasion that is
offered unto us, let not this opportunitye through our negligence slip out of
our hands. For when she pas^eth by, she detesteth delay, and being offended
that we took her not up as she came by, she puts us ever after without hope of
obtaining her again. Wherefore succeed your fathers and ancestors in
obedience, take possession of the loyal patrimony they bequeathed unto you,
let me (your poor Bishop) obtain this at your hands, as your are valiant and
show your selves in all respects no less then Romans in deed, that no
backebiter may have occasion to blemish your same and renown, saying you are
bastardes and a brood that degenerateth from their noble lineage. For your
fathers and ancestors being governed by Consuls and Emperors have through
obedience and noble prowess, brought the wholl world subject unto them.
What should I bring you in remembrance of Manlius Torquatus who executed his
own son (although he Manlius Torquatus.
had done many feats and noble acts) for disobedience and rebellion? For
notable and worthy deeds are most commonly wrought by the wise counsel of
politic captains, and willinge obedience of soldiers. But when either of
these two fails, the counsel halteth, the enterprise falls unto the
ground and has ilfauored success: and no marvel at all, specially when two
things which should be linked together are loosed and parted asunder. Let
there be no delay in you (I crave it upon my knees) yield unto me forthwith,
let a Bishop this once plead and prevail between the Emperor and his army,
let all the world understand that in you there is no sign of rebellion, but
that you had good cause for a time to be displeased with your captains which
offended you. If it so fall out that ye embrace not in time this wholesome
counsel, yet will I take upon me the person of love owed unto the Empire of
Rome and of friendeship and hearty good will borne unto you, and mark well what
I have to say unto you. Do ye see what ends tyrants and rebels most
commonly have? Ponder I pray you with your selves how ye can compass such
things as ye go about, seeinge (in my opinion) it is impossible, for you to
continewe all together. For how can either the fowls of the aer, or fish
with other food which the seae brings to land be transported unto you
unless ye will shed the blood of Christians in battaill and your selves be
slain to, which is both a great shame and reproach? And what I pray ye will
become of you? Verily you will be scattered here and there and constrained to
lead miserable lives, Immediately after, vengeance will ensue, so that ye shall
never be pardoned. Wherefore give me your hands and let us lovingly consult
together what shall be expedient for us our selves and for the profit of the
common weal, specially seeing we have the feast of our Saviors passion and
of Christ's most holy resurrection as it were in manner assisting and alluringe
us to reconciliation.

CAP. XII.
The soldiers after the oration of Gregory Bishop of Antioch changed their
mind and took again Philippicus to their general captain.

WHen Gregory had pronounced his oration and shed infinite tears, all their
minds upon a sud daine were turned by divine power and inspiration, in so much
they craved license to depart out of the assembly severally for to deliberate
with them selves what was best for the^ to do. This being done not long after
they come again, saying they would yield unto the Bishops suit and request.
And when Gregory nominated Philippicus, whom he was destrous they should
crave to their captain, their answer was, that both they and the wholl army
had solemnly made an oath, they would never do that. Then said he immediately
the Priest has power and authority Math. 16. 1^ John. 20.
to bind and to loose in heaven and in earth and rehearsed unto them the
saying of Christ in the Gospel. When they replied that herein also they
would yield unto him, he fell a pacifienge of God with prayers and
supplications. He distributed unto them the immaculate body of Christ, it was
upon maundy thirsday, the number of them was about a two thousand, he
entertained them all that night, made them couches in the green grass,
returned home the next day after, and decreed they should assemble together
where it pleased them. Wherefore he sent for Philippicus who then abode at
Tarsus in Cilicia, that with all speed he should repair to Constantinople. He
made the Emperor also priuey unto these circumstances, and laid down in his
letters the requests and demaundes of the army as concerning Philippicus.
When Philippicus shortly after came to Antioch the soldiers met him, they
entreated the Christians to be a mean unto him for them and they fell at
Philippicus feet. He gave them the right hand, told them all old iniurye
was forgotten, and immediately they follow him to warefare. Thus was that
broyle taken up.

CAP. XIII.
The winninge of Martyropolis.

SIttas one of the Decurions of Martyropolis, bearinge spite and hatred unto
one of the captains, betrayed the city, and took opportunitye to work this
feate, when the garrison was absente. Wherefore under color of the Romans the
Persians were brought in, and took the city, which lay wonderful commodious
for the Romans: many women that were in the prime of their flourishing years
they kept within the city, all others (a few servants only excepted) they
drove out. Immediately upon this, Philippicus came thither and besieged the
city. And although he wanted necessaries for the siege, yet he encountered with
them, with such things as he had. He cast up certain ditches and ouerthrewe
one of their turrets, yet could not he take the city, because the Persians
watched all night and repaired again such things as were battered to the
ground. When the Romans made many an assault and had the repulse (for the
darts were sore discharged at them from high turrettes, and they them selves
without had more harm, then they could work unto the enemy within) they
raised their siege, removed a little of and there pitched their camp, taking
diligente heed only to this, that no other Persians joined with them that
were in the city. Gregory by the commandment of Mauricius the Emperor
went to the camp and persuaded with them to return to besiege the city. But
they could not prevail, because they wanted engines of war for the winninge
of cities. Therefore the army was sent abroad to winter, leauinge many
garrisons in the castells about, least the Persians came on a sudden and
stepte into the city. The next summer followinge there was great power
gathered together, and a sore battaill fought with the Persians about
Martyropolis. And although Philippicus had the upper hand in that sielde and
many of the Persians together with one of their captains overthrown, yet
there escaped to many of them into Martyropolis, for that was one of their
principal driftes to be sure of taking that city upon them. From that time
the Romans despayred of winninge the city by siege (it was possible that
might would overcome it) they went a seven furlonges of and buylt an other
city over against it upon the top of an hill well fortisied of it self,
there to inuente engines and to assault Martyropolis. This they did in summer,
but in winter they dissolved the army.

CAP. XIIII.
Of captain Comentiolus and the winninge of Ocbas.

COmentiolus borne in Thracia was sent into the East to be captain of the
army in the rowme of Philippicus: who though he had prosperous success
against the Persians, yet had he been overthrown horse and all, had not one
of his guard got up on a packehorse and carried him away out of the field.
The Persians which were left alive, having lost all their captains ran
away and took Nisibis upon them. And because they feared to return unto their
king (for he had told them they should loose their heads unless they brought
their captains safe and sound again) they fell a conspiringe against
Hormissda: Barames also a Persian captain who was newly come with his army
from the war against the Turckes, persuaded them to do no less. In the
mean while Comentiolus besieginge Martyropolis left there the greater part
of his power and went him self with certain chosen soldiers to take Ocbas,
a strong castle upon the further bank over against Martyropolis lienge upon
a steep rock, where he might view the wholl city of Martyropolis. The which
castle he besieged, left nothing unattempted that might seem auailable for
the winninge of it, battered down certain pieces of the walls with Catapeltes
or brakes, entered in that way and took it by force. Whereupon the Persians
despaired thenceforth of keepinge Martyropolis any longer.

CAP. XV.
The murtheringe of Hormisda king of Persia.

WHile the aforesaid stir was in handelinge the Persians took Hormisda the
most wicked and unjust king, and slew him because he had plagued his
subjects not only with extortion, but also with sundry kinds of death.

CAP. XVI.
The flighte of Chosroes the younger unto the Empire of Rome.

AFter the death of Hormisda the Persians crowned Chosroes his son to raygne
over them, against whom Barames took armor with his wholle power. Chosroes
went forth to meet him with no great army, and perceauing that his soldiers
left him and droped away he fled, straight way (as he reported him self after
he had called upon the God of the Christians that his horse would bear him
where he purposed to go) unto Circesium. When he came thither together with
his wife, two young children and certain of the Nobles of Persia which
accompanied him of their own accord: he sent Ambassadors unto Mauricius the
Emperor. He after deliberation and aduisemente taken in that matter, pondering
with him self the mutable race and variable course of man's life, the sudden
change and alteration not only of his state, but of other things in like
sort, accepted of his suit and Embassy, and made Chosroes in steed of a
banished man his gest, in steed of a sorowefull fugitive his louinge son,
and gave him royal presents for to allure him to root his love in his
breast. Neither did Mauricius only send him such bountiful gifts, but the
Empress also unto the wives of Chosroes, and the sons of Mauricius showed
the like humanity unto his sons.

CAP. XVII.
The Emperor sent Gregory and Domitianus to meet Chosroes and to give him
entertainment.

FUrthermore Mauricius sent all his guard and the wholl hoaste of the Romans
with a captain to meet Chosroes and to conducte him whithersoeuer it pleased
him to go. And to the end he might do him the more honor, he sent also
Domitianus his kinsman that was Bishop of Melitina, a man that excelled for
wisdom and policy, very fit both in word and in deed to handle grave
matters and to hear weighty causes. He sent again Gregory which made Chosroes
to have him in admiration for the wise conference he had with him toutching all
other matters for his bountiful presents, and the grave counsel he gave him
concerning his trouble and molestation.

CAP. XVIII.
Chosroes recovered again the kingedome of Persia by the means of the Empire
of Rome.

CHosroes coming to Hierapolis the head city of Euphratesia returned
homewardes. Mauricius understanding thereof, weyinge more the furtherance of
Chosroes then his own fame and renown, help him to a great sum of money
which was not seen before: made him an army of Persians upon his own costs
and charges, furnished Chosroes both with Romans and with Persians, and safe
conduited him out of the Romayne dominions as far as Martyropolis. And first
of all, Sittas the traitor was delivered unto him, next y^ people of
Martyropolis stoned him and last of all they hanged him on the gallows. The
city of Daras was also given up unto him, after that the Persians had privily
stolen away, and after that the Romans alone had foiled Barames in one
battaill and he fled away alone with great ignominye, Chosroes was restored
unto his kingedome.

CAP. XIX.
The holy martyr Golauduch lived about this time.

ABout this time lived Golauduch among us which suffered great tormente and
was piteouslye handeled by the Magicians of Persia, at the last crowned with
Martyrdom after she had wrought many miracles. Stephan the first of that name
Bishop of Hieropolis wrote her life.

CAP. XX. The words w^hos(...) hea^ng of P^a ^ngra^ed in a ^^os and sent unto
Sergius, the Marty^s temple. I^ ought favor of Idolatrye remember that a p^^^an
has written the^. He has not in th^^e ^s not as much as one word of God, yet
by the testimony of his own mouth he had many wives.

The presents which Chosroes king of Persia being an heathen sent unto
Sergius the Martyr.

CHosroes being now restored unto his kingedome sent unto Gregory a cross
curiouslye wrought of gold and precious stone, wherewith he would have the
honor of Sergius the renowned martyr set forth and extolled. Theodora the wife
of Justinian had first dedicated this cross unto him, after that, Chosroes
the elder had taken it thence away (as I have remembered before) together with
sundry other monuments. He sent an other cross where he caused these words to
be engraven in Greek letters. I Chosroes king of kings, the son of Hormisda
have sent this cross. For when we were constrained to fly unto the *
dominions of the Empire of Rome, through the deuelish procurement and false
treachery of the most unfortunate Barames and his (...)
Cabballarij, and by reason of Zadespram the traitor his coming with an army
to Nisibis, for to pull back the Caballarij which took part with the
citizens of Nisibis: we sent Caballarij with a captain as far as Charchas
for to withstand Zadespram and to abate his courage, trusting in holy Sergius,
the most honorable and renowned martyr, for we heard in the first year of our
reign that he was wont to grant such petitions as were made unto him. The
seventh day of January we cried unto him for help and made a vow that if our
Caballarij either slew Zadespram or took him captive, we would send unto his
temple a golden cross garnished with pearls for to set forth his reverend
name, and to be short, about the beginning of February next following the head
of Zadespram was brought unto us. Wherefore having obtained our request
(that no man need to doubt of the circumstance) we have sent to holy Sergius
temple * (...) Happy is he that has his name written in the book of life but
it is ^noughe for a pag^ to have his name written in a platter. This king was
foully de ceaued in the martyr for it is not with the Christians as with the
Magicians in Persia which at their ^ight sacrifice could make his wife
quickelye to conceive. Stater is a ^oyne valuinge 4. grots.
for to honor his reverend name this cross, which we made our selves,
together with the cross which Justinian Emperor of Rome, had sent to the same
temple, yet was taken away and brought hither by Chosroes, king of kings, the
son of Cabades our great graundfather, at what time the Romans and Persians
were at great variance. We found this in our treasory and sent it to holy
Sergius temple. Gregory receauinge these crosses with the consent of
Mauricius the Emperor, carried them with great solemnity into the Martyrs
temple and there laid them up. Shortly after Chosroes sent other gifts unto
this holy temple, namelye amongst others a dishe made of Gold, wherein these
words were written. I Chosroes king of kings the son of Hormisda caused
these things to be written in this dishe not for men to gaze at, neither that
the worthiness of thy reverend name should be known by my words: but partly
for the truth therein contained, and partly for the manifold benefits and
liberality received at thy hands. For I think my self happy that my name is
engraven in thy holy vessels. At my being in Beramias I made humble suit unto
thee holy Sergius that thou would come and help me and that Sira my wife
might conceive. And though Sira were a christian and I a pagan and our law
forbade us to take a christian to our wife, yet for the singular love I bare
unto thee, the law in this woman took no place, and I have not ceas^ed neither
do I ceas^e day and night to love her entierelye among the rest of my
wives. Wherefore O holy Sergius I thought good to beseech thy goodness that
she might be with child. And moreover I made thee a vow and promised if Sira
did conceive, I would send the cross which she wears unto thy most holy
temple. Therefore I verily and Sira pondering this with our selves and
purposing to keep this cross for a memorial of thy name, O holy Sergius,
have thought good in st^ode of the cross to send the price thereof, and
because it exceeds not four thousand and four hundred sta^^rs, we have
augmented it and made it up five thousand. And from the time we made this
petition and determined this with our selves, unto our coming to Rhoson
Chos^on, there were not expired past fourteen days: at what time O holy
Sergius, not that I my self was worthy, but of thine own goodness, thou did
appear unto me in my sleep and toldest me the third time that Sira had
conceived. And I also in the same vision answered thee plainly the third time
tha^ which was convenient and became my person. Wherefore because thou
gra^^test such petitions as are made unto thee, from that day forth Sira felt
not the common disease of women. I of mine own part although I cast doubts
with my self whether I were best to credit thy words or no, for all thou art
a graunter of requests: yet seeing that Sira had not the women's disease, then
was I sure of the vision and that thy words were true. Wherefore without any
more ado I sent this cross together with the price thereof unto thy most
holy temple, and commanded that with the price, one dishe and one cup should
be provided for the celebration of the divine mysteries: that again there
should a cross be made and a ce^sar both of gold to serve the holy table, and
an vnicon open of either side and gilded over: last of all that the rest of the
sum which remained should be put up to minister necessaries for thy holy
house, that thou O holy Sergius wilt help both me and Sira not only in other
things, but specially in this request, and that that which happened unto us
through thy intercession, by thy They that like of this doctrine let them note
that Euagrius calls the author there of Balaam, and for company take Caiphas
he was also such a prophet.
mercy and goodness may take prosperous success and fall both unto me and to
Sira as we wish our selves. To the end both I and Sira and all others
throughout the world may * put their trust in thy power and believe in thee.
These presents of Chosroes seem to utter such things as are agreeable with the
prophecy of Balaam, which no doubt came to pass by the providence of God
that pagans should pronounce godly sentences.

CAP. XXI.
Of Naamanes the Saracen.

ABout that time Naamanes tribune of the people Scenetae, so wicked a person
that he slew men with his own hands for sacrifice to Deuells, came to be
baptized, caused the golden picture of Venus to be melted with fire and turned
to the use of the poor, he became so zealous that he persuaded as many as
belonged unto him to embrace the Christian faith. Gregory after the crosses
were given by Chosroes, was commanded of the Emperor to visit all the
Monasteries called Limeta throughout the wilderness, but specially where the
wicked doctrine of Seuerus raygned: so that he expounded unto them the sincere
and true faith, and converted many towns villages, Monasteries and wholl
nations unto the Church of God.

CAP. XXII.
The death of holy Symeon that dwelled in a pillour.

IN the mean space when most holy Symeon was so daungerouslye sick that
there remained for him no hope of longer life: Gregory being by me certified
thereof, made all the speed he could to be present when Symeon gave up the
Ghost. But he had not his desire. This Symeon for his rare gifts and
excellent virtues passed all the men of his time: he led in a pillour a severe
life even from his tender youth, in so much that he changed his teeth in that
mansion. He was persuaded to live in a pillour upon such an occasion as
follows. Being of tender years, playinge, leapinge and skippinge to and fro
about the tops of hills and greenes as the manner is of children, he lighted
by chance upon a Lybard, took his girdle and tied him about the neck, led
the beast which now had put of his fierce nature by the girdle as if it had
been a bridle, and brought him home to his Monastery. His master who led
his life in a pillour seeinge this, enquired of him what he had in his girdle,
the boy answered it was a catte. His master gatheringe hereby, that he would
prove hereafter a worthy man trained him up to lead his life in a pillour.
In which pillour together with an other also standinge upon the top of an
hill he lived threescore and eyghte years, replenished with all graces from
above: He cast out Deuells, he cured every disease and infirmitye, he saw
things to come as if they had been present. He foretold Gregory that he
should not be present at his death and that he knew full little of the
things which were like to ensue after his death. And when as I also muzed with
my self after the loss of my children and examined what the cause was, why
the Gentiles which had children at will were not visited in like sort: Symeon
although I uttered my secret^es to no man, wrote unto me that I should
refrain from such cogitations, that they were such as offended God.
Furthermore when the wife of my Scribe had her milk after she was delivered
so stop^e in her breasts that there would not a drop come forth and
therefore the infant was like to dye, Symeon took her husband by the hand,
bad him go and lay it on his wives breast. This being done, immediately the
milk came runninge out as if it had been a stream and wet all the woman's
garmente. Unto these that went before we may add this also, how certain
trauelers in whose company Symeon was, left behind them a child about
midnighte: a Lion came and took up the child on his back and brought him to
Symeons Monastery. Symeon bad the servant go forth and take in the child
which the Lion had carried thither. He did many other notable acts, which have
need of an eloquente tongue, leisure convenient, and a peculiar volume, all
which are well known and rife in every man's mouth. There resorted unto him of
all nations not only Romans but also Barbarians and obtained there suits. This
Symeon in steed of meat and drink fed upon certain bows of shrubbes that
grew in the mountain hard by him.

CAP. XXIII.
The death of Gregory Bishop of Antioch.

SHortly after Gregory Bishop of Antioch being sore pained with the gowte
took a certain medicen made of Hermodactylus (for so was it called) the which
a certain physician ministered unto him, and after the drinkinge thereof died
immediatlye. He departed this world when Gregory the successor of Pelagius
was Bishop of Old Rome, John of Constantinople, Eulogius of Alexandria, and
Anastasius of Theopolis who after twenty and three years was restored unto his
Bishopric, and also when John was Bishop of Jerusalem which died shortly
after and Euagtius ends his history Anno Dom. 595.
as yet there is none chosen in his rowme. Here do I mind to cut of and make
an end of writing, to wit, the twelfe year of the raygne of Mauricius Tiberius
Emperor of Rome, leaving such things as follow after for them that are
disposed to pen them for the posterity in time to come. If I have omitted
ought through negligence or lightly run over any matter, let no man blame me
therefore: reme^bringe with him self that I gathered and collected together a
scattered and dispersed history, to the end I might profitt the reader, for
whose sake I took in hand so great and so werysome a labor. I have finished
an other work, comprisinge relations, Epistles, decrees, orations,
disputations with sundry other matters. The relations therein contained are for
the most part in the person of Gregory Bishop of Antioch. For the which I was
preferred unto two honorable offices. Tiberius Constantinus made me Quaestor,
Mauricius Tiberius preferred me to be master of the Rolls, where the
Liuetenants and Magistrates were registered. The relations I compiled duringe his
raygne at what time he brought Theodosius to light, who was both unto him
and to the common weal a preamble or entrance to all kind of felicity.

The end of the sixth book of the Ecclesiastical history of Euagrius
Scholasticus.
THE LIVES, THE ENDS, AND THE MARTYRDOMES OF THE PROPHETS, APOSTLES, AND
SEVENTYE DISCIPLES OF OUR SAVIOVR, WRITTEN IN GREEK by Dorotheus Bishop of
Tyrus above a thousand years ago, and now translated by M. H.



Imprinted at London by Thomas Vautroullier dwelling in the Blackefriers. 1577.

THE LIFE OF DOROTHEVS GATHERED by the Translator.
DOrotheus was a rare and singular man, well seen in the Latin, Greek and
Hebrew tongues. He flourished in the time of Diocletian, Constantinus Magnus,
Consta^tius and Julian the Apostata. Eusebius Pamphilus one that knevve him
very well and heard Eusebius. eccles. hist. li. 7. ca. 31
his gift of utterance, vvryteth thus of him: Dorotheus minister of the Church
of Antioch was a very eloquent and singular man. He applied holy Scripture
diligently, he studied the Hebrevve tongue so that he read with great skill
the holy Scriptures in Hebrevve. This man came of a noble race. He was expert
in the chief discipline of the Grecians, by nature an Eunuche, so disposed
from his natiuitye. For which cause the Emperor for rareness thereof
appropriated him, placing and preferringe him to be magistrate in the city of
Tyrus, and to ouersee the dieing of purple. We heard him our selves expounding
holy Scripture Democh. Instit. Christ. religi.
with great commendation in the Church of God. So far Eusebius. Antonius
Demochares says of him, that he was exiled in the persecution under
Diocletian, and that he returned from banishment after the death of Diocletian
and Licinius, and recovered his Bishopric again, where he continevved unto
the raygne of Julian, about the year of our Lord 365. And because Julian
persecuted not the Christians openly him self, but secretly by his governors
and Magistrates, Dorotheus was feign again to fly unto the city of Odissus,
where (as Petrus de Natalibus vvriteth) the officers of Julian apprehended
Petrus de natalibus lib. 6. de Sanctis.
him and tormented him to death for his testimony of Christ Jesus. There he
died and was crowned Martyr being a hundred and seven year old. An. Dom. 366.
Of his works there is none extant save this treatise containing the lives and
ends of the Prophets, Apostles, and seventy Disciples of our savior
mentioned in the Gospel after Luke, the which he entitled (...), by
translation a compendium or brief tract.

THE TRANSLATOR UNTO THE READER TOVTCHING DOROTHEVS AND THE LIVES HE WROTE OF.
BY this short treatise of DOROTHEVS (Christian reader) we may take occasion to
behold the providence of God over his Church, scattered far and nigh over
the face of the earth, and to praise him therefore: in so much that of his
great care and entire love, the inheritors of the kingdom of heaven, his
chosen people, the Saints of God whose names were written in the book of
life, were never left desolate without guides and teachers. Adam in Paradise
heard the voice of God Genes. 3.
himself, there followed him such as called upon the name of God, erected
divine worship, and taught their posterity the same, namely, Abel, Seth, Enos,
Cainan, Malalael, Genes. 4. 5. 2. Pet. 2.
Iared, Enoch, Mathusalem, Lamech, and Noe, whom Peter calls the eight
person after Seth the son of Adam, and a preacher of righteousness. When as
the old world and the first age numbered from Adam to Noe, I mean as many as
lived in his Genes. 7.
time were drowned for the sins and iniquities of the whole world, yet saved
he eight persons, to reveal his will unto all nations, to uphold his Church to
multiply and to 1. Pet. 3.
increase the world. In the second age of the world, after Noe there lived Sem,
Arphaxad, Genes. 11. Romans 4. Genes. 21. 25, 35. 47.
Sale, Heber, Phaleg, Reu, Saruch, Nachor, Their, and Abraham, unto whom God
rekoned faith (as S. Paul says) for righteousness. In the third age of the
world after Abraham lived Isaac, Jacob, otherwise called Israel, with the
twelve patriarchs, Ruben, Simeon, Leui, Judah, Zabulon, Issachar, Dan, Gad,
Aser, Nepthali, Joseph, and Benjamin. Threescore and five years after the
death of Joseph, Moses was borne. He governed Israel, he guided the Exodus 4.
Exodus 20. Iudic. 3. 8. 9. 10, 12. 16. Act. 13. 3. Reg. 2. 11. 6. 14. 12. 20. 4.
Reg. 8. 11. 12. 14. 15. 16. 18. 21. 22. 23. 24.
people, God gave him three signs from heaven to confirm his doctrine, and to
assure him of his vocation* he received the ten commandments, and the law of
God in mount Sina and delivered it unto the people. him succeeded Iosue, after
Iosue captains and Judges, namely Othoniel, Aod, Debora, and Barach, Gedeon,
Abimelech, Thola, Iair, Iepthe, Abesan, AElon, Abdon, Samson, Heli the priest,
and Samuel the prophet judged Israel. After these came in the kings good and
bad, Saul, David, etc. In the fourth age of the world there reigned after
king David, Solomon over Israel, over Judah Roboam, Abia, Asa, Iosaphat, Ioram,
Ochozias, Athalia, Ioas, Amasias, Azarias, Ioathan, Achaz, Ezechias, Manasses,
Amon, Josias, Ioachaz, Ioacim, Iechonias, Sedechias, under whom the captivity
befell, both city and temple were destroyed, and the people led into Babylon.
Yet during the seventy years of their captivity, there wanted not such as
taught them, such as prophesied unto them of their deliverance, 1. Esdr. 5. 1.
Esdr. 2.
and comforted them in their misery. In the fifth age of the world after the
captiuitye the Israelites were governed by Zorobabel, Resa, Ioanna, Judas,
Josephus, Abner, Semei, Mattathias, Aser, Maath, Nagid Arphaxad, Agar, Heli,
Masbot, Naum, Amos, Sirach, Mattathias, Siloa, Joseph, Arses, Ianneus,
Hircanus, Judas Machabaeus, Ionathas, Simon, Ionathas, Johannes Hircanus,
Aristobulus, Alexander, Hircanus, Antigonus, Aristobulus, and Herod the
Aliene, in whose time Christ Jesus was borne in the flesh. These are the
successions of Magistrates and Governors of all sorts, as well of the wicked
to chastise, as of the godly to cherishe, whom God appointed to govern his
people, to uphold the truth, to extol virtue, to root out vice, and to
praise his holy name. From Aaron unto the birth of Christ there were priests
ordained to offer sacrifice unto God, to pray for the sins of the people, and
to preach the word of truth. Whose names as I read in the Ecclesiastical
history of Nicephorus are these. Aaron, Eleazer, Nicephor. Eccl. hist. lib. 1.
phinees, Eliezer, Bochchi, Ozi, Heli, Achitob, Abimelech, Abiathar, Sadoc,
Achimaas, Azarias, Ioram, Iodas, Axioran, Sadeus, Phadaeus, Iculus, Ioatha^,
Vrias, Neri, Ioas, Selam, Helchias, Sareas, Iosedech, Jesus, Ioachim, Eliasib,
Ioachaz, Ioannes, Iaddaeus, Onias, Simo^, Eleazar, Manasses, Onias, Simon,
Onias, Jesus, Onias, Alcimus, Onias, the son of Onias, Judas Machabaeus,
Ionathas his brother, Simon his brother, Johannes Hircanus, Aristobulus,
Iannaeas, Alexander, Hircanus, Antigonus, Anaelus, Aristobulus, Anaelus, Jesus,
and Simon, in whose time Christ Jesus was borne. From the birth of Christ (as
it is to be seen in the Chronographie following) until the destruction of
Jerusalem under Titus, there were these high priests: Matthias, Josephus,
Ioazarus, Eleazar, Jesus sea, Ananus, otherwise Annas, Ismael, Eleazar, Simon,
Caiphas, Ionathas, Theophilus, Simon, Ionathas, Matthias, Elioneus, Joseph,
Ananias, Ionathas, Ismael, Josephus, Ananus, Jesus Dannaeus, Jesus the son of
Gamaliel, Matthias, and Phanes, in whose time the city of Jerusalem was taken,
the temple set on fire, and the high priests ceased. There were also from the
beginning of the world unto the birth of Christ, prophets, foreshewing (as
Dorotheus writes) the promises of God made unto the fathers, wherein he
promised to bless all nations in the seed of Abraham, through the salvation
that was to come by our Savior Jesus Christ. Josephus in his Judicial
Antiquities, writes that Iosph. ant. Iud. lib. 1. cap. 4. Jude Epist
Adam prophesied and foretold his sons, the world should be twice
destroyed: first by water, afterward with fire. Jude in his Epistle speaks
of Enoch, the seventh from Adam, that he prophesied, saying: behold the Lord
shall come with thousands of Saints, to give judgment against all men, and to
rebuke all that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly deeds which they
have lewdly committed, and of all their cruel speakinges which ungodly
sinners have spoken against him. Jacob prophesied that his posterity should
be delivered out of Egypt: of the coming Genesis 48. 49
of Christ, that the scepter should not depart from Judah, and a lawgeuer from
between his feet until Siloh, that is, the Messiah came Joseph foretold
likewise the children of Israel of their deliverance out of Egypt, saying: I
die, and God will surely visit you, Genesis 50.
and bring you out of this land, unto the land which he swear unto Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob. God will not fail but visit you, and ye shall carry my
bones hence. Moses the great worshipper of the high God, prophesied of the
creation of the world, and of such things as were done unto his time, the
space of two thousand years before he was borne, again of Christ he said
(as Peter has alleged him in the Acts of the Apostles) A Prophet shall the
Lord your God raise up unto you of Act. 3.
your brethren like unto me, him shall ye hear in all things, whatsoever he
shall say unto you. Samuel was both a judge over Israel, a priest and a
prophet. David and Solomon also is said to have been endued with the spirit
of prophecy, though Dorotheus be of the contrary opinion. Both old and late
writers do think no less then that he was a prophet. Antoninus has a tracte
entitled, De prophetijs David and Solomonis, Anton. Chronic. ^art. 1. tit. 3,
cap. 4.
of the prophecies of David and Solomon. There prophesied moreover as we find
in holy scripture. Nathan, Gad, Ahias, Asaph, Idithum, Addo, Semeia, Ioath,
Oded, Azarias, Hanani, Iehu, Iehaziel, Eliezer, Elias, Zacharias, Elissaeus,
Osee, Abdias, Michaeas, Amos, Esaias, Joel, Jonas, Sophonias, Jeremy, Hulda,
Naum, Abacuk, Ezechiel, Daniel, Baruch, Vrias, Aggaeus, Zacharias, Malachias,
and John the Baptist. Whose lives this author has briefly run over. These
prophets in some places of holy scripture are termed Seers, in some other
places the men of God, again in other places 3. Reg. 18.
the servants of the most high God. In the time of King Acab, Obadias the
governor of his house, one that feared God, hid an hundred prophets in caves,
yet their names are not known. of all the prophets generally, Peter the Apostle
writes in this sort: It is of 1. Pet. 1.
the salvation of your souls that the prophets have enquired and searched,
which prophesied of the grace that should come unto you: searching when or at
what time the spirit of Christ which was in them should signify, which
spirit testified before the passions that should happen unto Christ and the
glory that should follow after. unto which prophets, it was also declared
that not unto them selves but unto us, they should minister the things which
are now showed unto you of them. Such was the Heb. 1.
goodness of God toward mankind, that in times past (as S. Paul says) he
spoke at sundry times, and in diverse sorts unto the fathers by prophets, also
by the ministry of Angels sent forth for their sakes which shall be heirs of
salvation. In these later days being the sixth age of the world beginning at
Christ, and continewinge unto the day of judgment, that is unto the seventh
age, and the Sabbath of rest, we have had the twelve Apostles, Peter, Andrew,
James, John, Philip, Bartholomevve, Mathevve, Mat. 10. Ast. 1. Act. 9.
Thomas, James, the son of Alphaeus, Jude, Simon, and Matthias, which was
chosen in the rowme of Judas the traitor. Paul is also termed an Apostle, and
called to the function by our savior him self, cryinge unto him from heaven
after his ascension. We have also the four Evangelists, Mathevve, Mark,
Luke, and John. We have moreover here laid down by Dorotheus, the catalogue
of the seventy disciples which our Savior ordained in the Gospel, and
appointed to go by two and two into every city and place where he him self
should come. The first after Dorotheus, is James the brother Eusebius. ecc^ hist.
lib. 2. cap. 1.
of the Lord called Iustus, and the first Bishop of Jerusalem: yet Petrus de
natalibus, Volaterran, and Demochares, all which three wrote the catalogue of
these disciples do name no such one. Eusebius, Clemens Alexandrinus, and Paul
himself do call him an Apostle, and no disciple. The 2. is Timothee, whom
the three aforesaid writers do not number. The 3. Titus. The 4. Barnabas, so
does Clemens Alexandrinus, and Eusebius call him: this is that Barnabas which
in the Acts of the Apostles (as Antoninus Anton. chro. par. tir. 5. cap* 18.
Part. 1. t^ 6. cap. 11*
writes) was otherwise called Ioses, and having land, sold it, and laid the
price down at the Apostles feet. The 5. Ananias. The 6. Stephan. The 7.
Philip, Bishop of Tralleis in Asia. Volaterran says he was Bishop in Thracia,
Demochares Petrus de natalibus, do say he was Bishop in Thracia, afterward
in Scythia. Antoninus says he dyed at Caesarea. The 8. Prochorus, whom
Volaterran calls Proculus. The 9. Nicanor. The 10. Simon Bishop of Bostra in
Arabia, Demochares, Volaterran, and Petrus de natalibus, do say he was Bishop
of Tire and Sidon. The 11. Nicolas, Bishop of Sapria, yet say the aforesaid
three autors it was Samaria. The 12. Parmenas. The 13. Cleopas. The 14. Silas.
The 15. Siluanus. The 16. Crescens, bishop of Chalcedonia in France Volaterran
calls him Crisces, Bishop of Chalcedonia. Demochares, and Petrus de
natalibus, do call him Chrysches, Bishop of Chalcedonia. S. Paul says he
sent this Crescens into Galatia, Eusebius says the Apostle sent him into
France, whereby it appears by some men's conjectures, that the Epistle unto
the Galatians was written by Eusebius. li^ 3. cap. 4*
S. Paul unto the French men. The 17. Epaenetus, yet Volaterran has none
such. The 18. Andronicus. The 19. Amplias, Bishop of Odissa. Demochares and
Petrus de natalibus, do call him Ampliatus, and Bishop of Edissa, Volaterran
says of Edessa. The 20. Vrbanus. The 21. Stachys, the aforesaid autors do
call him Stateus. The 22. Apelles, Bishop of Smyrna. Volaterran says of
Heraclea, Demochares and Petrus de natalibus do say it was of Eradia. The 23.
Aristobulus Bishop of Brettania, Volaterran says Betania, Demochares and
Petrus de natalibus do say it was Bethania. The 24. Narcissus, Bishop of
Patrae, Demochares and Petrus de natalibus do call him Tarcissus Bishop of
Athens, and Volaterran says he was Bishop of Athens. The 25. Herodion,
Volaterran has none such. The 26. Rufus. The 27. Asyncritus. The 28. Plegon.
The 29. Hermes, Bishop of Dalmatia, Volaterran Demochares, and Petrus de
natalibus do say he was Bishop of Philipolis. The 30. Hermas, but the other
writers have none such. The 31. Patrobas* Bishop of Nepotiopolis, Demochares
and Petrus de natalibus do say of the nation Peli. The 32. Agabus. The
Ambrose in Epist. ad Romans Origin in Epist. ad Romans
33. Linus. The 34. Gaius, Byshope of Ephesus after Timothee, yet Origin says
he was Bishop of Thessalonica. The 35. Philologus. The 36. Olympas, the
asoresayde three autors have none such. Ambrose takes this Olympas for the
sister of Nereus, but Origin does not so. The 37. Rodion, the other writers
remember none of that name. The 38. Jason. The 39. Sosipater bishop of Iconium,
Origin takes him to be that Sopater of Berroea, mentioned in the Acts of the
Apostles. The 40. Lucius whom Orige^ takes to be Luke. The 41. Tertius bishop
of Iconium, yet Demochares and Petrus de natalibus do say he was b. of
Meiadum, Volaterran has none such. The 42. Erastus bishop of Paneas, whom
Volaterran calls Erastes, b. of Meiadum, but Demochares and Petrus de
natalibus, have none such. The 43. Phigellus whom Volaterran calls Philetus
and Philegus. The 44. Hermogenes. The 45. Demas. The 46. Quartus. The 47.
Apollos, b. of Caesarea yet Petrus de natalibus says it was of Connia. The 48.
Cephas, who as Dorotheus gesseth was he whom Paul reprehended at Antioch, but
it is a fable as it is to be seen in the censure laid down in Eusebius page
15. 16. the aforesaid latin writers have none such among the disciples. The
49. Sosthenes. The 50. Epaphroditus b. of Adriana, as Demochares says of
Andriaca. The 51. Caesar. The 52. Marcus the cousin of Barnabas. The 53. Joseph.
The 54. Artemas whom Volaterran calls Antomas. The 55. Clemens. The 56.
Onesiphorus, or Onesimus, yet by the words of Paul they should not be one. The
57. Tychicus b. of Chalcedo^ in Bithynia or as the former autors do write, of
Colophonia. The 58. Carpus Bishop of Berhoea, Petrus de natalibus says of
Beronia, and Volaterran says of Cheronea. The 59. Euodius. The 60. Philemon.
The 61. Zenas. The 62. Aquila, the aforesaid Latin writers do remember none
such. The 63. Priscas, whom the Latins do call Priscus. The 64. Iunias,
Origin and Ambrose do call him Iulias. The 65. Marcus otherwise called John.
The 66. Aristarchus. The 67. Pudas or Pudens. The 68. Trophimus. The 69. Mark
the Euangeliste, Act. 13. 15 ^8. 19. 20. ^1. ^. Cor. 16. Philip. 4. Coloss. 1.
4. ^. Tim. 1. ^. Tim. 4. Epist. ad ^^ilem.
and the 70. Luke the Euangeliste. Besides these 70. I find others also in
holy Scripture worthy the notinge, namelye, Symeon Niger. Manahen, Jude,
otherwise called Barsabas, Crispus, Alexander, one that behaved him self
very stoutlye at Ephesus, Secundus, Mnason of Cyprus an old Disciple,
Mercurius, Nereus, Fortunatus, Achaicus, Syntiches, Epaphras, Nymphas,
Archippus, Eubolus, the Eunuche Baptized of Philippe in the Acts whom
Eusebius calls a Disciple, with others. Other vvryters as Vincentius, and
Antoninus have found out more: namelye Sauinianus, Potentianus, Altinus, Cis,
Maximinus, Johannes Senior, Aristion, Zozimus, Euphrates, Martialis, Sidonius,
Lazarus, Vrsinus, Iulianus, and no maruayle, for Sayncte Paul witnesses that
^* Cor. 15.
Christ was seen after his resurrection of more then five hundred brethren.
These be they whom God raised up to plant the principles of his Gospel, and
the sound of their feet was heard throughout the world. these be they which
fed with Angels, and became themselves food for wild beasts, they spared
not their lives unto the death, they quenched the heat of fire, they turned
the edge of the sword, they stopped the mouths of furious beasts, they
confounded the tyrants, and foyledde the ennemies of the truth. I may say of
them, as Cyprian speaks of the true Christians and Martyrs, occidi poterant,
sed vinci non poterant. Well they might be slain, but it was impossible to
overcome them. And yet when the ennemie triumphs, that at lest wise he
seems to have brought his purpose about, we may comfort our selves with this
saying: Sanguis martyrum, semen Ecclesiae, the blood of the Martyrs is the
seed of the Church. Christ him self foretold that whosoever would be his
disciple, must take up his cross and follow him. These Prophets and these
Apostles, and these Disciples have done no less. Abel was murdered by Cain.
The children of Israel were oppressed under Pharao. Elias was persecuted by
Iezabel. The Prophet Ioath was threatened by Jeroboam, and slain of a Lion.
Zachary the son of Iehoida was stoned to death. Micheas was thrown down,
and his neck broken. Amos was smitten with a clubbe on the temples of the
head, and so brained. Esaias was sawed asunder in two parts with a wodden
saw. Jonas was in the whales belly, yet having escaped that danger, was he
not without misery. Jeremy was persecuted oftentimes, imprisoned very sore,
thrown into the deep dungeon where he stood in mire unto the ears, at
length stoned to death in Egypt. Ezechiel was slain at Babylon by the Duke of
the people. Daniel was thrown among the hungry Lions, yet God preserved him.
The three children were thrown into the fiery furnace, but the fire did them
no harm. Baruch was feign to fly away to save his life from king Ioachas
hands. The Prophet Vrias was slain with the sword by king Ioacim. John the
Baptist was beheaded of Herod the Tetrarche. Steven was stoned to death. James
was beheaded by Herod Agrippa. Peter was crucified at Rome under Nero, with
his head downewardes. Paul was likewise beheaded at Rome under Nero. Andrew
was crucified by AEgeas king of Edessa, at Pataras a City in Achaia. James
Alphaeus, that was Bishop of Jerusalem, was thrown down from an high, and
brained with a fullers clubbe. Thomas was slain at Calamina, a City in India:
the Painims ran him through with a dart, the which some do call a spear or
iauelin. Philip was crucified at Hierapolis in Asia. Bartolomevv was flaine
alive in India: his skin pulled over his ears, and after all, beheaded.
Matthew was run through with a naked sword in AEthiopia. Simon was
crucified. Jude was slain. John was scurged, and often persecuted, it is
said that Domitian the Emperor caused him to be thrown into a tun of hot
skalding oil, yet took no harm. Matthias was knocked on the head with an
axe, and immediately beheaded. Mark the Evangelist had a rope tied about his
neck, and by that drawn through the street of Alexandria, that his flesh
was rent in pieces, the stones colored with blud, and in the end he was
burned to ashes. Barnabas had a rope about his neck, and there with pulled to
the stake and burned. This is to bear the cross of our Savior, this is to
drink of one cup with Christ, this is it which S. Paul says: Whosoever
lives godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution. for through many
tribulations we have to enter into the kingdom of heaven. This present
treatise of Dorotheus has moved me thus to write, and the matter it self is
so copious, that I can hardly hold my pen, yet I hope the reading of these
brief stories vvil not seem tedious unto any. As for the lives following, I
would have thee (gentle reader) to know that where Dorotheus seemed imperfect,
and to have ouerskipped certain lives worthy the noting and the knowledge of
the posterity, I have either borrowed the same of some other ancient vvryter,
or gathered it my self out of holy scripture. This is the mark to discern
the one from the other. Where anyone life is altogether of Roman letters, the
same is none of Dorotheus. If thou think I have done well, give the praise
to God, if in thine opinion it seem otherwise, suspende thy sentence, and be
not singular in reprehending that, which peradventure after aduisement taken,
may friendly be interpreted. Farevvell.

DOROTHEVS, OF THE PROPHETS, APOSTLES AND SEVENTIE DISCIPLES.
Samuel.
SAMVEL was both a Prophet, a Priest, and a judge over Israel. He lived Samuel
lived about the year of the world* 2940. before Christ was borne 1030. years.
1. Reg. 1. 2. 3. 7. 8. 9. 10 13. 15. 16. 25.
in the days of Heli, Saul and David. His father was called Elkana, his
mother Henna. she was of a long time barren, and praying unto God, made a vow
that if she bare a man child, she would dedicate him to the Lord all the
days of his life. She conceived, bare a son, and called his name Samuel, who
being a child was girded with a linen Ephod, and ministered unto the Lord. All
Israel knew him for the true Prophet of God, he rebuked the sins of the
people, he exhorted them to turn unto the Lord, he told Heli the high Priest,
that God would plague his house. When the people cried unto him for a king, he
used all means to persuade them to the contrary, and seeing they would not be
answered, he took Saul, and anointed him king to reign over them. This Saul
was a wicked king, and because of his impiety the Lord sent Samuel unto him,
for to tell him that his reign should not last long, but Samuel was sorrowful,
and mourned so long over Saul, until the Lord was angry with him for it.
Afterward God sent him to anoint David king over Israel. In the end this
Samuel waxed old, and died in the time of David king of Israel, and was buried
at Rama.

Nathan.
NAthan was of Gabaon, in the time of king David's reign. He instructed this
king in the law of the Lord, and foresaw that David would offend with
Beersabea. when he made speed to admonish the king, Belial staid him. for as
he went, he found by the way a dead horse all bare, and because of that,
continewed there a while. This Nathan died, and was buried in Gabaon his own
land.

Epiphanius Bishop of Cyprus, who lived Anno Dom. 401. writes thus of Nathan.
THe Prophet Nathan, of the house of Thock born He lived Anno mundi 3009. before
Christ was borne. 960. years. 2. Reg. 7. 12. 3. Reg. 1. 1. Paral. 17. Eccles.
47.
in Gabath a City of Galilee, lived in the time of David, and taught him the
law of the Lord. he foresaw that David was too far in love with Bersabea,
and therefore immediately left Gabath, and got him toward Jerusalem, for to
stay the king from committing so heinous an offense. And behold Beliar stopped
him. for when he found him dead, and lying all bare on the high way, he stayed
as long as he was a buryinge of him, lest the carcass of man should
irreverently be torn in pieces of brute beasts and rauenously devoured. In the
same night understood Nathan that David had committed that horrible offense,
wherefore he mourned out of measure, and went back again to Gabath with great
lamentation. When Vrias, the husband of Bersabea, was slain by the
procurement of David, the Lord sent Nathan unto him, that he should rebuke him
sharply for his offense. Then at length David remembering him self, was
astonished and trembled for fear of the Lord, because he perceived plainly that
the Lord was highly displeased with him for his adultery. David knew moreover
that the Prophet Nathan was inspired with the holy Ghost, he honored the man
and reverenced his person as the true messenger of God. This Nathan became
old, and died, and was buried at Gabath his own land.

Gad.
THe Prophet Gad lived in the days of king David, and told him what he should
do when 1. Reg* 22. 2. Reg. 24. l. 21.
he fled from the face of Saul. After David had numbered the people, he
brought a message unto him from the Lord, and badde him choose of three plagues.
Whether he would have seven years hunger, or flee before the ennemie three
months, or endure three days pestilence.

Ahias.
THis Ahias was of Silon, 3. Reg. 11. 14.
where the tabernacle out of the City of Heli was. He died, was buried nighe
the Oak in Silon. He is called also Adonias.

Epiphanius writes thus of Ahias.
AHias the Selonite, born in Selom, of the tribe of Judah, where the old
tabernacle of the Arc, out of Armathen, the town of Heli the Priest was to be
seen. This is that Prophet which prophesied of Solomon the son of David,
that he would fall from the Lord. He rebuked Jeroboam, saying, that when he
came to be king, he would deal unfaithfully with the Lord. He saw in a
vision a yoke of oxen destroying the people, and assaulting the priests. He
prophesied unto Solomon, that women would withdraw his mind from the Lord.
This Ahias became so old that his sight was dim, he died not far from the
Oak in Silo, and there was buried.

Asaph.
ASaph was a fear, that is a Prophet in the time of David. He appointed him
chief of those 1. Par. 16. 2. Par. 29. 35.
that praised the Lord in Psalms.

Idithum.
IDithum was one of king David's Prophets, and appointed by him to prophecy
with harpes, 1. Par. 25. 2. Par. 35.
psalteries and cymbals.

Addo.
ADdo, of some called Iddo, was a prophet in the time of Solomon, Roboam, and
his son Abia. 2. Par. 9. 12. 13 He lived in the year of the world. 3069. he
died before Christ about 900. years. 3. Reg. 12. 2. Par. 11. 12.
The doings of Solomon are said to be written in his visions. he is said to
have written the genealogy of Roboam. The manners and sayings of Abia the son
of Roboam, are said to be written in the story of the prophet Iddo, which is
not extant.

Semeia.
SEmeia prophesied in the days of Roboam king of Judah. and when Roboam would
have fought with Jeroboam, the word of God came unto Semeia, saying: speak
unto Roboam the son of Solomon, king of Judah, and unto all the house of Judah
and Benjamin, and to the remnaunt of the people, ye shall not ^ight against
your brethern. etc. When Roboam forsook the law of the Lord, Semeia was sent
unto him with this message: Thus says the Lord, ye have left me, and
therefore have I also left you in the hands of Sesac king of Egypt.

Ioath.
THis Ioath was of 3. Reg. 13.
y^ land of Samaria. A Lion smote him y^ he died, and was buried in Bethel,
nighe y^ false prophet which deceived him.

Epiphanius writes thus of Ioath, whom he calls Ioam.
THe Prophet Ioam was of Samaria, a Lion met him by the way, and slew him.
This is he that reprehended Jeroboam for the golden calves he erected, that
took away also that wicked oblation and sacrifice. When Jeroboam stretched
forth his hand against him, his hand was withered. Immediately after, an old
prophet deceived this Ioam: for when he had constrained him to eat bread, and
to drink water otherwise then the Lord had commanded Ioam, a Lion met him and
killed him, without any harm done to his ass. He was buried in Bether, hard
by this old false prophet. When that shortly after this false prophet died,
he requested of the priests he might be buried where Ioam was laid, because he
had deceived him, and that either of them was to receive at the resurrection,
according unto their doings. Wherefore they were both laid in one sepulcher.

Oded.
ODed the prophet, and father of Azarias the prophet, lived very long unto the
time of Achas 2. Par. 15.
king of Judah. his abiding was in Samaria. when the host of the king of Israel
had taken great spoil, and made great slaughter of the tribe of Judah, Oded the
prophet went forth before the host that came to Samaria, and said unto them.
Behold, because the Lord God of your fathers 2. Par. 28.
is wroth with Judah, he has delivered them into your hand, and ye have slain
them with cruelty that reaches up to heaven. And now ye purpose to keep
under the children of Judah and Jerusalem, and to make them bondmen and
bondwomen: and do ye not lade your selves with sin in the sight of the Lord
your God? now hear me therefore, and deliver the captives again, which ye
have taken of your brethren, for else shall the great wrath of God be upon you.

Azarias.
THis Azarias was of Synatha and put away from Israel the captivity of Judah. he
died and was buried in his own country.

Epiphanius writes thus of Azarias.
AZarias the prophet was of the house and lineage of Symphata. He lived in the
time of Ala king of Judah. 2. paralip. 15.
this is he that took away by his prayers the captivity that was threatened in
Jerusalem to light upon Judah. he prophesied somewhat of the coming of the
Lord. he rested in the Lord in his own country, where he was also buried.

Hanani.
THe prophet Hanani prophesied in the days of Asa, king of Judah. when Asa for
fear of Baasa 2. Paralip. 16.
king of Israel joined in league with Benhadab king of Syria, Hanani the
prophet came to Asa and said unto him. because thou have trusted in the king of
Syria, and not rather put thy trust in the Lord thy God. therefore is the host
of the king of Syria escaped out of thine hand, had not the Aethiopians and
Lubin an exceeding great host with many chariots and horsemen? and yet because
thou did trust in the Lord, he delivered them into thine hand. for the eyes
of the Lord behold all the earth, to strengthen them that are of perfect heart
toward him: herein thou have done folishly, and therefore from henceforth thou
shall have war. and so Asa was wroth with the prophet, and clapped him in prison,
for he was displeased with him because of his prophecy.

Iehu.
IEhu the son of Hanani the prophet, lived in the days of Iosaphat king of
Judah. he prophesied against 3. Reg. 16* 2. Par lip. 1^ 20. He lived Anno mundi.
3134 before Christ about 840* years.
Baasa king of Israel, that god would root him out with all his posterity, for
murdering of Nadab the son of Jeroboam. when Iosaphat took part with Achab
king of Israel against the king of Syria. Iehu went forth to meet him and
said unto him. would thou help the ungodly and love them that hate the
Lord? therefore is wrath come down upon thee from before the Lord. nevertheless
there are some good acts found in thee, in that thou have hewn down the
groves out of the land, and have prepared thine heart to seek God. this Iehu is
said to have noted the acts of Iosaphat in the book of the kings of Judah.

Iehaziel.
IEhaziel prophesied in the days of Iosaphat king of Judah. when all Judah stood
in great fear of 2. Paralip. ^^
the host and multitude of enemies that came against them, the spirit of the
Lord came upon Iehaziel in the mids of the congregation, and he said: hearken
al Judah and ye inhabitors of Jerusalem, and thou king Iosaphat, thus says the
Lord unto you. be not afraid, nor faint hearted by reason of this great
multitude: for the battle is not yours but Gods. to morrow go ye'downe against
them, behold they come up by the clift of Ziz, and ye shall find them at the
end of the brook before the wilderness of Ieruel, ye shall not need to fight in
this battle, but step forth and stand, and behold the help of the Lord which
is with you. fear not, nor let your hearts fail you, O ye of Judah and of
Jerusalem, to morrow go out against them for the Lord will be with you. when
they came to the enemies they found them all dead karkasses.

Eliezer.
ELiezer prophesied under Iosaphat king of Judah. After that Iosaphat joined him
self with Ahazia 2. Paralip. 20.
king of Israel, whose mind was to do wickedly and together with him to
provide a Navy to sail into Tarsis: Eliezer prophesied against Iosaphat
saying. because thou have joined thy self with Ahazia, the Lord has broken
thy works. And the ships were broken, that they were not able to go to
Tarsis.

Elias.
THis Elias was the first man yt showed men the way to heaven, he was the first
man yt showed the Elias lived Anno mundi 31^^. and was translated before Christ
about 850. years.
way to be one for men and angels. He dwelling sometimes upon earth entered also
into the heavens, being mortal. herein the world had his conversation with
immortal creatures, he which walked upon earth, lives now like a spirit with
the angels in heaven: this is he y^ gave his spirit to rest duble upon his
disciple Elisseus, this is he though he continue a man, yet waxes he not old,
this is he that is reserved for a captain of war against Antichrist, this is
he that will withstand him and rebuke his pride and falsehood, this is he that
in the end of the world will turn al men from his lying and deceit unto God,
this is he yt received the gift of God to be the forerunner of the second and
glorious coming of the Lord. although his service was among the basest sort,
yet is he now in company with the angels. he was a Thesbit of Arrhabia, of the
tribe of Aaron, his dwelling was in Galaad. for Thesbis was an habitation
dedicated unto priests. before his mother was delivered of him, his father saw
in a vision the angels saluting of him all in white, wrapping him with flames
of fire as it were swathing bands, and nourishing him with fire, as it had
been usual food or pappe. To Jerusalem he went and told his vision, answer
was made he should not fear his dream at all, for it would come to pass
that* the child his wife was great of, should dwell in great light, that what
so ever he said should be of great force, and that he should judge Israel with
sword and fire.

Zachary the son of Iehoida.
Zachary the son of Iehoida, Prophesied in the time of Ioas king of Judah.
when the tribe of 2. Paral. 24.
Judah served groves and Idolles, the wrath of God came upon them for their
trespasses. He sent Prophets unto them to bring them again unto the Lord, but
they would not hear. The spirit of God came upon Zacharia, the son of
Iehoida the Priest, and he said unto them. Thus says God, why transgress ye
the commaundeme^ts of the Lord, that ye can not prosper? because ye have
forsaken the Lord, he has also forsaken you. and they conspired against him,
and stoned him with stones at the commandment of the king, even in the court
of the house of the Lord.

Elissaeus.
ELissaeus was of Abelbuel, the land of Rubim. And because of him there came a
strange thing Eliss^us died about. 750. years before Christ was borne.
to pass. What time he was borne in Gargalis, the golden cow in Selom
bellowed so loud y^ she was heard at Jerusalem. Hereupon a certain Prophet said:
there is borne in Jerusalem a prophet, which shall overthrow their carved
Images and molten Idols. He died and was buried in Samaria.

Osee.
OSee the Prophet, spoke by divine inspiration of our Lord Christ in this sort.
In their adversity He lived Anno mundi 3286 and died before Christ about. 630.
years. Osee. cap 6. 1. Cor. 15.
they shall early seek me, saying. Come, let us turn again unto the Lord,
for he has smitten us, and he shall heal us, he has wounded us, and he
shall bind us up again. After two days shall he quicken us in the third
day, he shall raise us up, and then shall we have understanding. etc. It was by
occasion of this Prophecy that S. Paul said to the Corinthians. I have
delivered unto you first of all that which received, how that Christ died for
our sins agreeing to the scriptures. and that he was buried, and that he rose
again according unto the Scriptures. For this it is that the Prophet says
here, and the third day he shall raise us up. there can no more be found in
any other place of the third day throughout the old Testament. Again this
Prophet writes that which may be applied unto our Lord Christ, my flesh is of
the^* Again. Ephraim compassed me about with lies, and the house of Israel
with deceit, but Jude Osee. 11.
yet rules with God, and is faithful with the saints. Because the Lord
Christ is said to have come of this tribe, therefore says he that this tribe
of Judah is faithful with the saints. Again in the same Prophet. I will
redeem them from the power of the grave, and deliver them Osee. 13. 1. Cor. 15.
from death. o death where is thy victory, o hell where is thy sting. S. Paul
reasoning of the resurrection, alleged this Prophecy. This Osee was of
Belemoth, of the tribe of Isachar, and was buried in peace in his own country.

Abdias.
THe grace of God gave unto this Prophet power and knowledge to speak of the
mystery of Christ. for thus he says. The day of the Lord is near upon all
the Heathen. This Prophecy seems as if it had been spoken against the
Scythians, that is, against Gog and Magog, yet is it more certain and more
properly applied to the Lord Christ. a little after he says. Upon mount Sion
there shall be deliverance. This Abdias was of Sychem, and the town
Bethacharam, he was the disciple of Elias, and having endured great vexation
for his sake, yet was he preserved. He was the third of the fifty sons of
the prophets whom Elias pardoned. He went unto Ocho^^as. and afterward left
his kings service, and gave him self to the gift of Prophecy. He dyed and was
buried with his fathers.

Micheas.
MIcheas was also endued from above, that he Prophesied of the coming of our
Lord Christ in this sort. And thou Bethlem Ephrata, art not the lest among the
thousands of Judah. Out of Mich. cap. 5.
thee shall he come forth unto me which shall be the governor in Israel, whose
outgoing has been from the beginning, and from everlasting. This was the
Prophecy which the high priests and scribes of the Jews brought forth, when
as after Herod had demanded of them where Christ should be borne, they said:
In Bethlehem. Hereupon Herod sent the wise men into Bethlehem. Again Math. 2.
Mich. 7.
says the Prophet. He shall turn again and be merciful unto us, he shall
put down our wickednesses, and cast all our sins into the bottom of the sea.
He will perform to Jacob the truth, and mercy to Abraham, as he swore unto our
fathers in old time. This Micheas was of Marathi* of the tribe of Ephraim, and
after he had much ado with Achab, Ioram his son threw him down for to break
his neck, because he had rebuked him for the sins of his fathers. He was
buried in his own land, in the common burial in Ephraim.

Amos.
AMos was the father of the prophet Esaias, God gave him of his spirit to
prophecy of Christ's Amos. 4. Cap. 9.
coming in this sort. For behold I frame the thunder, and create the wind,
revealing my Christ among men. Again, In that day will I raise up the tabernacle
of David that is fallen down, and close up the breaches thereof, and I will raise
up his ruins, and I will build it as in the days of old. that they may seek
the Lord which are the remnant of men, and all the heathen upon whom my name is
called, says the Lord which does this. James made mention of this Prophecy in
the Act. 15.
Acts of the Apostles. This Amos was of Thecna. Armasias king of Judah
persecuted him very often chastized him many times, at length the son of
Amasias took him with a clubbe on the temples of the head, and killed him.
while as yet he drew breath after his wound, they brought him to his own
country, and within two days after he died, and was there also buried.

Esaias.
THis great Prophet Esaias, the son of Amos foresaw in a figure the mystery of
Christ when Esaias was before the incarnation of Christ about 600. years. Esaias. 6.
he saw the Lord sitting upon an high and glorious seat, where (says he)
the Seraphines stood about him, whereof one had six wings, and an other
had six wings, wherewith they covered their faces, and cried one to the
other in this manner. Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts, the whole earth
is full of his glory. Then was there one of the Seraphins sent, which took of
the altar an hot cole with the tongs, and touched his lips, saying: this
takes away thine unrighteousness. He was so fully instructed by the vision he
saw, and persuaded of the type and figure, that he foreshewed the mystery of
Christ. Again, he was so endued with grace from above, that he prophesied of
the mystery of Christ's passion in this sort. He was led as a sheep to be
Esaias. 53.
slain, yet was he as still as a Lamb before the sherer, and opened not his
mouth. The Eunuche of Ethiopia, reading this Prophecy, requested Philip to
expound it unto him, who immediately declared Act. 8.
that the Prophet had said this most truly of Christ our Lord. again he
says. He is such a man as has good experience of sorrows and infirmities.
And again. He did none evil, neither was there guile found in his mouth, yet
the Lord will cleanse him of his wound, and show light unto him. Again. Thus
says the Lord: Behold I lay in Sion for a foundation a stone, even a tried
Esaias. 28. 1. Pet. 2. Esaias. 61. Luke. 4.
stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation. and who so believes on him
shall not be confounded. Again. The spirit of the Lord is upon me, therefore
has he anointed me. etc. When the Lord readd this in the synagogue on the
Sabbath, he said. Verily I say unto you, this day is this scripture fulfilled
in your ears. This Esaias was of Jerusalem. He died at Jerusalem under king
Manasses, being sawed a sunder in two parts, and was buried under the Oak,
nighe the The martyr dom of Esaias.
well of Rogel, hard by the place where the waters ran which king Ezechias
dammed up. It was by this Prophet that God wrought the monument, and memorial
of the place called Siloam, for when breath failed him before death came, he
called for a little water to drink, which was immediately sent unto him out of
this brook, and therefore the place is called Siloam, which is by
interpretation as much to say as sent. In y^ time of Ezechias before this lake
or pond was made, there came When the Jews came for water, it ran, when
their ennemies were a thirst, and sought it, it would not run. The prayers
of Esaias while he lived, were available before and after his death.
out a little water at y^ prayer of Esaias. for the people were then in the plain
countries of y^ Moabites, who were aliens. and left y^ city perished through
want of water (for the enemies enquired where they might drink, the City
being beset, they besieged also the brook Siloam which was dry unto them)
there came forth water when the Jews prayed together with Esaias. Therefore it
runs continewally after a secret sort unto this day for to reveal this
great miracle. And because this was done by Esaias, the Jews for memorial
thereof, buried him with great care and honor nigh Siloam, that by his holy
prayers they might in like sort enjoy the benefit of this water after his
departure out of this world. for he had an answer from above to do as he
did. His sepulcher is nighe where the kings are buried, behind the burial of
the Jews, toward the Southe. Solomon builded the tumbe of David unto the
East of mount Sin^, having an entrance to go in from the way which comes out
of Gabaon, out of the City about a twenty furlongs. He made it so crooked and
so awrie, that it can hardly be perceived, so that many Priests, and in manner
the whole nation of the Jews could not unto this day find the way that goes
in. King Solomon had laid up there, gold that came out of Aethiopia and
spice. And because Ezechias showed and dishonored the bones of his fathers,
therefore God badde him assure him self it would come to pass that his seed
should serve his ennemies, and he made him baren and frutelesse from that day
forth.

Joel.
GOd gave of his spirit unto the Prophet Joel, that he foreshewed the mystery
of Christ. For Joel. 2.
he says. And it shall be in the last days says the Lord. Of my spirit I
will pour out upon all flesh: your sons and your daughters shall prophecy:
your young nien shall see visions, and your old men shall dream dreams. On my
servants and on my handmaide^s I will pour out of my spirit in those days,
and they shall prophecy. I will show wonders in heaven above, and tokens in the
earth beneath, blood and fire, and the vapor of smoke: the sun shall be turned
into darkness, and the Moon into blood, before that great and notable day of
the Lord come. And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call upon the
name of the Lord shall be saved. S. Peter rehearsed this Prophecy in the Acts of
the Apostles, that it was even then fulfilled when as the holy Act. 2.
Ghost came down from heaven and rested upon the Apostles on the day of
Pentecost. This Joel was a neighbor unto the city Bethomeron in Rubim, where
he died, and was also buried in peace.

Jonas.
Jonas has not barely in word, but truly in deed foreshewed the mystery of
our saviors resurrection. For Christ says in the gospel: Even as Jonas was
three days and three nights in the belly of the whale, so shall the son of
man be three days and three nights in the bowelles of the earth. Even as the
whale cast up Jonas vncorrupt, so has the sepulcher restored the Lord to the
better life. This Jonas was of Cariathmaus, nigh Azotus, a City lying on the
sea coaste toward the Gentiles. After he came out of the whales belly, and
taken his way to the City of Niniue, he tarried not in that land, but took
his mother, and so^orned in Assure a foraine soil. He thought with him self,
by this means I shall take away the infamy which I have purchased unto my
self by prophesying falsely against the City of Niniue. Elias having
propheried in those The widow of Sa^ep^a was the mother of Jonas and he him
self was the child that Elias raised from death to life, so says Epiphanius.
days against the house of Achaab, and called for famine to light upon the
earth, fledd away, and being come to a widow which had a child, he tarried
there (for he could not abide among the uncircumcised) and blessed her. When
Jonas died, God raised him to lif by Elias, for he would have him then know
that he could not fly from the hand and power of God. After the famine was
ended, Jonas left that country, and got him to the land of Judah, and when
his mother died by the way, he buried her by mount Libanus. He died also him
self in Saar, and was buried in the cave of Cenzeum, who had been made judge
over one tribe in his country, what time the land wanted a Prince. This
Prophet gave strange tokens unto Jerusalem and the whole land. to wit, a
stone crying very lamentably that the end was at hand. that when Jerusalem
were trodden and frequented of all nations, then the City should be destroyed.

Sophonias.
SOphonie was also thought worthy to prophecy of y^ Lord Jesus Christ. For
thus he says: the lord Sophon. 2.
shall be terrible unto them, and destroy all the gods in the land, and all the
isles of the heathen shall worship him every man in his place. And again. I will
cleanse the lips of the people that they may Sophon. 3.
every one call upon the name of the Lord, and serve him under one yoke. from
beyond the rivers of Aethiopia will I take my dispersed, and they shall bring
me an offering. And again. Rejoice O daughter Sion, be joyful o Israel,
rejoice and be glad from thy whole heart o daughter Jerusalem, for the Lord
has wiped away thy unrighteousness, he has redeemed thee from the hand of thine
enemies, the Lord him self will reign in the midst of thee, so that thou
shall no more see any mischief befall unto thee. These things do properly
appertain unto the Lord Jesus Christ. This Sophonias was of the tribe of
Simeon, and the land Sabarthatha. He prophesied of the City, the end of
Israel, and confusion of the wicked. He died and was buried in his own land.

Jeremy.
Jeremy received grace from above, to prophecy of the mystery of Christ. For
he says. And Jeremy was before the incarnation about. 510. years. Math. 27.
they took thirty pieces of silver, the price of him that was valewed, whom
they bought of the children of Israel, and gave them for the potters field as
the Lord appointed me. Matthew remembered this prophecy in the gospel, as then
fulfilled in the passion of Christ. Again says the same prophet. Behold, the
days will come says the Lord, and I will make a new covenant with the house
of Israel, and the house of Judah, not such a covenant as I made with their
fathers, what time I brought them with a mighty arm out of Egypt. For they
kept not my covenant, and therefore I have despised the^ says the Lord, but
this is the covenant which I will make with the house of Israel. After those
days says the Lord, I will set my laws in their minds, and I will write
them in their hearts, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people
neither shall every one then teach his brother, or his neighbor saying: know
the Lord. for every one shall know him from the lowest to the highest. because
I will have mercy on their iniquities and their sins will I remember no
more. S. Paul writing to the Romans put them in remembrance of this The
martyrdom of Jeremy, he was very often persecuted by Ioachas the son of
Josias, and imprisoned by Sedechias before his going into Egypt. Ierem. 36. 37
38. Dorotheus talked with some of the posterity ^ Antigonus. A propheci^ of
the birth of Christ, ^ the overthrow of a Idols. A custom i^ A Egypt to
worship a virgin and an infant. This Arc was a cosse^ made by M^ses in the
d^sert. 5. cubi in length 3. in bread^ therein we^ put the table of the old
law, the ro^ of Moses part of Ma^na. 2. Paralip. 3* 4. Reg. 22.
prophecy. This Jeremy was of Anathoth, the people stoned him at Taphnis in
Egypt, and so he dyed and lies buried there where Pharaos palace stood. The
Egyptians being greatly benefited by him, did him that honor. For he had
prayed for them when certain Adders and beasts that were bred in the water
molested them sore, such as the Egyptians called Menephoth, and the Grecians,
Crocodils. And at this day also the faithful thereabouts do pray in that
place, and take up duste from thence for to cure such as are hurt of those
beasts. Many of them also do use therewyth to chase away these venomous
creatures into other waters. We our selves have learned of some that were of
the line of Antigonus and Ptolomaeus, ancient and elderlye men, that Alexander
king of Macedonia, coming unto that place where the Prophet was buried, and
hearing of the mysteries thereof, translated his tumbe and relics into
Alexandria, placed them there with great pomp and glory on every side, and so
that kind of serpent was banished that land also, and that water in like sort.
thus were the serpents whom they call Argolai, that is Lisards put away, being
brought out of Peloponnesus, so that the people there are called Argolai, that
is lasy loubers. their speech is nice and fine, but altogether unfortunate.
This Jeremy gave the priests in Egypt, warning that their Idols must be broken
and thrown to the ground by a savior, that was a babe that should be borne
of a virgin and laid in a Manger. And therefore at this day they set a
virgin in bed, and an infant in a Manger, and adore them. And when as of old,
king Prolomaeus demanded of them why they did so, their answer was that
their ancestors had delivered them that mystery, and received it of the holy
prophet. before the temple was taken this prophet took out the Arc of
covenant and all that was laid up therein, and hid it in a certain rock, saying
unto such as were present. The Lord from Sinai is gone up into heaven, and
again the lawgeuer shall come out of Sion with great power, and the sign of
his coming shall be unto you when all nations shall honor a tree. he said
moreover, no man shall take away that Arc except Aaron, and no man shall see
the tables laid up therein, be he priest or be he Prophet, except Moses the
chosen of God. And at the resurrection the Arc shall first rise and come
forth out of the rock, and it shall be laid on mount Sina, and thither unto
it will all the Saints assemble together lookinge for the Lord, and flying
from the enemy which would have destroyed them coming unto this rock. he
sealed up this Arc with his finger writing thereon the name of God, the form
of it was like the ingrauing of iron, and a light cloud over shadowed and
covered the name of God, neither knew any man this place, neither could any man
read the sealinge unto this day, neither shall unto the end. This rock is in
the desert where y^ Arc was made at the first, between two mountains where
Moses and Aaron lie buried. And in the night time a cloud much like fire
covers this place even as it did of old. The glory of God can never be away
from the name of God. Therefore God gave unto Jeremy the grace that he should
finish his mystery, and become companion with Moses and Aaron who are joined
together unto this day. For Jeremy came of the line of the priests.

Hulda.
HVLDA a prophetess, the wife of Sallum dwelled in Jerusalem in the time of
Josias. The king sent Helkia the priest with many others unto her for to
understand what the will of the Lord was toutchinge their doings. she answered
in this sort. Thus says the Lord God of Israel, tell ye the man that sent you
unto me. Even thus says the Lord, behold I will bring evil upon this place
and upon the inhabiters thereof, even all the curses that are written in the
book which they have read before the king of Judah: because they have forsaken
me and have offered unto other gods to anger me with, all manner works of
their hands: therefore is my wrath set on fire against this place and shall not
be quenched. And as for the king of Judah which sent you to enquire of the Lord,
so shall ye say unto him. thus says the Lord God of Israel, concerning the
words which thou have heard, because thine heart did melt, and thou did
humble thy self before God when thou heardest his words against this place,
and against the inhabiters, and humbledst thy self before me, and cariedst thy
clothes and did weep before me: I have heard it also says the lord. behold I
will take thee to thy fathers, and thou shall be put in thy grave in peace, and
thine eyes shall not see all the mischief that I will bring upon this place,
and upon the inhabiters of the same.

Naum.
GOd endued Naum with his spirit that he prophesied of the resurrection of our
Lord Christ. Keep thy festival days O Judah, pay thy vows unto the Lord,
for the wicked shall pass no more through thee, the wicked is utterly cut of,
he that rid thee out of trouble, rises up, breathing in thy face. This Naum
was of El^esis. over Bethabara and of the tribe of Symeon. After Jonas he
prophesied straungely of Niniue, that they should all be destroyed by sweet
waters and fire under ground, which came so to pass. for the meare or lake
which compasses the city, at a certain earthquake, drowned and destroyed all,
and fire that came out of the desert consumed the upper part of the city. This
Naum died in peace, and was buried in his own land.

Abacuk.
Abacuk. 1. Act. 13. An Angel took Abacuk by the he^^e of the head as he had
meat and ^ottag^ in his hand, and carried him into Babylon where Daniel the
prophet was in the dungeon among Lions: after he had sed and relieved Daniel,
the Angel ca^^ed him home the same day. Dan. 14.
THe spirit of God came upon Abacuk that he prophesied of the resurrection of
Christ, his words are these. Behold ye despisers, and wonder, and perish
ye* for I do a work in your days, a work which ye shall not believe though
a man declare it you. S. Paul applied this prophecy very well at Antioch in
Pisidia, to have been spoken of the resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ. This
Abacuk was of the tribe of Simeon, and the land Bithicuchar. he foresaw the
taking of Jerusalem before the captivity, and therefore lamented greatly. And
when Nabuchodonosor came up against Jerusalem, he fled into Ostracina, and
dwelled in ye land of the Ismaelites. when as such captives as were in Chaldaea
returned again, and such as were left in Jerusalem went down to Egypt, he
dwelled in his own land. And when on a certain time he ministered food unto y^
reapers of his land, and took po^tage* he prophesied unto his servants saying*
I will go into a far country but I will return quickly again. ^f ye see yt I
tarry to long, give you unto ye reapers their mea^. when he had been in Babylon
and given y^ prophet Daniel his dinner, immediately he was by the reapers as
they sat at meat, neither made he them privy to any thing yt was done. he
knew y^ the people would shortly return out of Babylon* and two years before
their return he dyed and was buried in his own land he prophesied also of the
destruction of the temple, that a nation should come out of the west and
destroy it. then (says he) the Cipres silk robe of the inner temple shall be
set abroad and the pinacles of the two pillours shall be taken away, and no man
shall know where they shall be laid. they shall be carried by an Angel into the
desert, where the Arc of covenant went at the first. And about the end the
Lord shall be known in them, and he will lighten them that sit in darkness, and
suffered persecution of the serpent as he did from the beginning.

Ezechiel.
THis Ezechiel prophesied in Babylon and was endued with grace from above, to
prophecy of the Ezechiel was ^^ore the in^ion about 500. years.
mystery of Christ. for he says* I will deliver them out of all their trouble
and iniquities, and I will cleanse them, and they shall be my people and I will be
their God* As formy se ruant* David he shall be a prince in the midst of them*
and there shall be one sheperde over them all. for they will walk in my
commandments And again. These waters flowe^ out into the sea, toward the
east, and run down into Arabia, and come into the sea coming thither, the
water Ezech. 47.
shall be wholesome. yea it will come to pass that all which live and move where
this river comes The martyrdom of ^^^^c^^^l.
shall be preserved. This Ezechiel was of the country Sarira and the line of
priests* he dyed in Chaldaea in the time of the captivity, after he had
prophesied very much unto the inhabitants of Iudaea, the Duke of the people of
Israel slew him at Babylon, because he reproved him of I^^latrye, and the
people buried him in the field Maur, in the sepulcher of Sem and Arphaxad, the
progenitors of Abraham. that monument is a duble cave. for Abraham built in
Chebron a sepulcher unto Sara after that fashion. It is called duble, because
it is made of turninges and windinges, standinge upon the plain ground, yet
hanginge in a certain rock. He gave the people a strange token, that they
should note when y^ river Chobat dried up, then persuade themselves that the
hook or sieth of destruction was at hand, even to the bounds of the earth,
again when it ouerflowed the city of Jerusalem, y^ their return was at hand.
for the holy Prophet dwelled at that river. and thither it was that many
resorted unto him. It fell out that when there was a great multitude of people
about him, y^ Chaldaeans stood in great fears of y^ Hebrews lest they molested
the^, and when they set upon them for to slay the^, the prophet caused the
water of ye river to divide itself, and to give them passage to fly unto the
further bank, and that as many of the Chaldaeans as putsued after them y^ fled
should be drowned. The same prophet prayed unto God in the time of scarsity and
dearth, and in so doing procured unto the people great store of fish, and
again when many of them died he en reated the Lord for them, that they were
restored to life. when the people was in manner destroyed, he wrought such
wonderful miracles y^ he discouraged their enemies, and that God smote them
from above. when the people said unto him, we perish, there remains no hope
for us, he Ezech. 38.
persuaded them by prophesying of dead bones that there was comfort enough left
for Israel, both for the present, and for the time to come. This Prophet Judged
Israel, and showed what should become both of Jerusalem and the Temple. He was
taken from Babylon that he came to Jerusalem He was carried to Jerusalem in a
vision.
the same hour to rebuke such as believed not in God. This Prophet saw even
as Moses did before him, the figure of the Temple, the Wall, and what was
thereabout, and the gate through the which the Lord was to enter in, and toe
go out, and that it would come to pass that the same gate would be shut,
and that all nations should put their trust in the Lord. In Babylon he judged
the tribe of Dan, and of Gad, because they wrought wickedness in the sight of
the Lord, in persecuting them that kept the ^awe, and he gave them a terrible
token, for Adders destroyed their children, and all their cattle for their
sin and iniquitye. He prophesied also that for their sakes the people should
not return unto their own country, but should remain in Media until they
had repented them. One of these was he that slew this Prophet.

Daniel.
THe prophet Daniel prophesied in Babylon, and was accepted of, as one that was
fit to prophecy Daniel lived before the incarnation of Christ about 500. years.
Daniel. 9.
of Christ. Know therefore and understand (says he) that from the going forth
of the commandment to bring again the people, and to build Jerusalem unto
Messiah the prince, there shall be seven weeks and threescore and two weeks etc.
Again in an other place. There was a s^one cut without hands, and the stone
smote the image, it became also a great mountain and filled the whole earth.
Again. And behold, there came one in the clouds of heaven like the son of
man which went unto the ancient of days, and unto him there was given
honor and power, with other things that there are laid down. This Daniel was
of the tribe of Judah, a noble man borne, being a young child he was led into
captivity out of Iudaea, into the land of the Chaldees: he was in the upper
Betheron, and so chas^ ^ man that the Jews thought he had been gelded. he
bewailed very much both the people and the holy city Jerusalem. He brought
him self very Iowe, and weak by fasting and abstayninge from delicate
food, feeding upon the fruit of the earth. In form of body he was dry and
leave, but in the favor of God he was moist and of good likinge. At the
request of Balthazar the kings son, this prophet prayed very much for king
Nabuchodonosor, who was transformed into the figure of a monstrous beast, that
his father should not be cast away. In the fore parts, and the head he was
like an Ox, the hinder parts with the feet resembled the Lion, his hears
were as Egles feathers, and his nails like birds (...)* It was revealed unto
this holy man that the King for his brutishe sensualitye and stifneckednesse*
should be transformed into a beast. That is to say, he should be made
subject unto Belial like an Ox under yoke, and resemble a Lion for his
raueninge, tyranny and crueltye. These are the propertyes of Potentates in
their youth, until at length they are become brute beasts, ravening, slaying,
practicing tyrauny and all kind of impie^y, and in the end they receive of the
just judgment of God, the reward of their wickedness. The spirit of God gave
this holy man to understand that like an Ox he would ^eede upon hay which was
his food. Wherefore Nabuchodonosor after he had digested this meat, he
recovered the sense and understanding of Daniel. 5.
man, he wept, he made supplication unto the Lord day and night, he prayed unto
ye Lord forty times. And being come unto him self, yet forgate he that he had
been made a man. The use of his tongue was taken away that he could not speak,
and understanding of that, immediately he fell a mourning. His eyes by reason of
his continual lamentation gave forth a dead look. Many went out of ye city to
see him, yet only Daniel would not go. for all* y^ while he was so transformed
Daniel ceased not to pray for him his saying was, he will become a man again,
and the^ will I see him, but they gave no credit unto his words. Daniel by
praying unto y^ most highest brought to pass yt the seven years who^ he called
seven times, were turned into seven months, and that ye mystery of ye seven
times should in the^ be finished. within y^ space of^enen m^^eths he was
restored unto him self, ye six years yt were behind, and the five months he
prostrated him self before the Lord, confessing his sins, and iniquity. And
when he had obtained remission of sin, he gave his kingdom unto ye prophet,
he eat neither bread neither flesh, nor dronk wine, but confessed his sins
unto ye lord. For Daniel had commanded him to feed upon pulse and herbs, and
so to please ye Lord* wherefore he called Daniel Balthazar and would have made
him cahere with his sons* but as toutching the kingdom, the holy prophet would
none of it, his answer was, be favorable unto me O Lord, that I forsake not
the inheritance of my fathers, and become heir unto the uncircumcised. He
wrought many strange wonders in the presence of the other kings of Persia
which are not written. Daniel dyed in Chaldaea, and was Epiphanius writes of
this prophecy without any great difference between Dorotheus and him. Ierem.
36. 45. Baruch. 1.
honorably buried alone in a princely sepulcher. he gave a terrible token as
toutchinge the mountains over Babylon saying. When ye see them smoke of the
North side, the destruction of Babylon is at hand. When ye see them burn, then
the whole world is nigh to an end. If out of these mountains in time of
calamity, there shall flow out water, then the people shall return into
their own land, if blood do run out, there will be great slaughter
throughout the world. After all, this holy man of God rested in peace.

Baruch.
BAruch lived in the time of the prophet Jeremy, he was his scribe. he wrote
out of Ieremies mouth and read it before Ioachas the son of Josias king of
Judah, and after he had read it he was feign to fly away and hide him self
together with Jeremy, for the book was burned. It appears after this ^light
he was very timorous, God sent Ieremye to reprove him for it. Being led
captive into Babylon, when Ieremye went down to Egypt he wrote that book
which bears his name, the which was sent from thence to Jerusalem to be read
in the temple upon high days.

Vrias.
VRias was of Cariath-iarim, the son of Semei, he prophesied against the
city of Jerusalem, Ierem. 26.
and the whole land of ludaea even as Ieremye did. Ioacim the son of Josias
king of Judah sought to kill him therefore. Vrias hearing of it was very much
affraide, fled away, and got him into Egypt. but king Ioacim sent me^ after
Vrias which brought him out of Egypt, so that in the end king Ioacim smote
Vrias with the sword and killed him and threw his carcass where the common
sort of people were buried.

Aggaeus.
Ioh. 6. Epiphanius says, he first at that time song Alelu^^ and Amen. the
which was afterward retained in the church being the hymn of Aggaeus and
Zachary. Zachar. 9. 13.
AGgaeus was endued with grace from above to prophecy of the Lord Christ, and
under the person of Zorobabel he spoke that which agrees with the Lord Christ,
that is to say: I will make thee as a signe^, for I have chosen thee says the
Lord of hosts. even as John the Evangelist speaking of the son of man says:
for him has God sealed. This Aggaeus being a young man came from Babylon to
Jerusalem, and prophesied very plainly of the return of the people, and as
toutching the temple, he saw with his eyes the buylding again of it. he dyed
and was buried nigh the sepulchers of the priests, with the accustomed honor
done at the burial of priests.

Zacharias.
THe spirit of God came upon Zachary y^ he prophesied of the coming of Christ.
for he says. Rejoice thou greatly O daughter Sion, be glad O daughter
Jerusalem, for lo, thy king comes unto thee even the righteous and savior,
lowly and simple is he, riding upon an Ass, and upon the foale of an Ass.
Literally he spoke this prophecy of Zorobabel* but ye truth of it in the end
took place in ye Lord Jesus Christ. Again he writes. And I will say unto him,
how came these wounds in thine hands? he shall answer, thus was I wounded in
the house of mine own friends. And a little after, I will smite the sheperd and
the sheep will be scattered abroad. The Lord him self was Math. 26.
mindful of this prophecy about the time of his passion, alleging it and
applying it to him self when he should be betrayed. This Zachary being very
aged came out of Chaldaea, and there prophesied unto ye people of many things,
and for confirmation thereof wrought strange things, he executed also at
Jerusalem the priestly function, he blessed Salathiel, and his son, and
called him Zorobabel. he gave by his prayer and service which he made at
Jerusalem, unto y^ Persians under Cyrus, the victory, he prophesied of him and
blessed him exceedingly. As toutching his prophetical visions he saw the^ at
Jerusalem. he entreated of the end of y^ Gentiles, of the temple, of idleness, of
prophets and priests, and of a double judgment. he dyed being a very old man,
and was buried nigh Eleutheropolis, a forty furlongs of in the field Noeman.
but in the time of Ephidus the bishop he was revealed to be Malachie was before
the incarnation of Christ about 412. ^eares. Malachie. 1. Malach. 3. Math 11.
^uc. 7.
that Zachary the son of B^rachie, whom Esaias spoke of, the land where he
lies is called Betharia out of Jerusalem a hundred and fifty furlongs.

Malachias.
MAlachie even as the rest have done, prophesied of our Lord Jesus Christ, for
thus he says. From the rising of the son unto the going down of the same, my
name is great among the Gentiles, and in every place incense shall be offered to
my name and a pure offringe. for my name is great among the very heathen says
the Lord of hosts. And again he says. Behold I will send my messenger, and
he shall prepare the way before thee. John Baptist and our savior also applied
this Prophecye unto him self. Again says the same Prophet. Unto you that
fear my name shall the son of righteousness arise and health shall be under his
wings and ye shall go forth Malach. 4.
like farte calves. Ye shall tread down the ungodly for they shall be duste
under the soles of your feet, in that day that I shall do this says the
Lord of hosts. And behold I will send you Elias the Thesbite before the
coming of the great and glorious day of the Lord. Even as the Lord spoke
of John unto the Jews. And if ye will receive it, this is Elias which Matthew.
12.
was for to come. This Malachie was borne in Supha after the return of the
people out of Babylon. Being a very young man, he took wonderful strange
and divine food to nurishe him, he led a godly life. And because all the
people reverenced him, as an holy man and Saint of God, they called him
Malachias which is by interpretation, an Angel. He was a well favored and
bewtifull young man. What so ever he prophesied of, the Angel of the Lord was
seen then to instruct him* even as it came to pass in the days of old when
there was no Prince as it is written in the book of Judges. He died in the
prime of his flourishing years and was laid to his fathers in his own field.

John Baptist out of Epiphanius.
John Baptist the son of Zachary and Elizabeth, was of the tribe of Leui.
This is he that showed us the lamb of God, the son of the father which
takes away the sins of the world, by poyntinge at him with the finger. This
is he that showed mortal men the way and set the doors of the kingedome of
heaven wide open. There was never any that was borne of a woman greater then
John the Baptist. He died being beheaded by Herod the tyrante for Herodias
the wife of his brother Philip.

The censure Dorothe us gives of the Prophets and their works.
Among these Prophets some wrote, and some have not written, There are twelve
of them called the less, Osee, Amos, Micheas, Joel, Abdias, Jonas, Naum;
Abacuk, Sophonias, Agga^^s, Zacharias and Malachias. There are also four
called the great Prophets, Esaias, Jeremy, Ezechiel, and Daniel. All the
Prophets prophesied unto the jews, and admonished them of the promises of
God made unto the fathers, wherein he promised to bless all nations in the
seed of Abraham through the salvation that was to come by our Lord Jesus
Christ: again how he with a mighty and out stretched arm brought them out
of their bondage in Egypt and gave them the land of promise: Last of all how
they were led captives into Babylon by Nabuchodonozor and thence brought back
again with honor. Moreover how they were afflicted by Antiochus and the
nations found about them, yet for all that, by the providence of God they
proved conquerours in the end. And to shut up the wholl in few words,
hold he should come according unto the promises which went before of him,
that was looked for and promised of the seed of Abraham to be the Savior of
the wholl world. And this was the common drifte of all the Prophets. Of
which number some wrote books namelye David, who compiled the book of
Psalms. And Daniel who was The boo^ of Psalmo* Daniel. The Scrib^^ as Baruch
such other wrote the books of the Prophets.
commanded in the time of captivity, to write such things as were revealed
unto him by visions, with certain others also. As for the rest they wrote not
their own Prophecyes, but the Scribes which were in the temple wrote every
Prophets sayings, as it were with supputation of the days. And when so ever
any Prophet was sent of God to entreat either of the captivity of
Jerusalem, or of Samaria, or of other places, either of their return or of
Antiochus, or of the borderinge nations, or else of Christ him self, look
what he prophesied every day the same was written seuerallye as the Prophet
uttered it. He preached of some certain matter, and again when as at an other
time he prophesied of an other thing it was again written. And such things
as were spoken followed after the chapiters that went before and had their
titles laid down in the beginings, and thus the wholl and perfect book was
made of the diverse and sundry sermons of that Prophet. By this means it
comes to pass that we find in the books of the Prophets the chapter noted
and applied either unto the captivity in Babylon or else unto the return
thence, and anon again an other chapter either toutching Christ, or
concerning some other matter, immediately again of a^ other thing and by and
by afterward of the former watter. And to speak the wholl in one A^o^e for
t^ readinge ^ the Prophets. 4. books of the kings. Pe^tateuchus
word, unless a man will read them with good aduisemente and grave
judgment, he will think them confusely placed and out of order. They wrote
not one lie the Prophets works in this order by pieces in the temple, but
also the books of the kings. Namelye such things as were from the days of
Saul unto his raygne, and in the time of David, what happened under Saul unto
the raygne of David, and thus they wrote the several acts of every king at
several times, even as the Chronicles are laid down in the raygne of the
kings and so of the contrary. Moses wrote the five books called
Pentateuchus, to wit the history of Iosue. Judges. Ruth. Proverbs.
Canticles. Ecclesiastes.
the things that were done before his time from the beginning of the world,
what happened in his time, and what should come to pass after his days.
Jesus Naue wrote his own book. The books of y^ Judges were written in the
temple that is to say in the tabernacle. Even so was Ruth. Solomon him self
wrote his own Proverbs the Canticle of Canticles and the book of the
preacher called Ecclesiastes. For when he had received of God the gift of
wisdom, he exhorted all men to live wisely in this world. An error.
He had not the gift of prophecy. We have rehearsed before such as were
inspired from above to prophecye of Christ.

Of the twelve Apostles and Evangelists.
1. Simon Peter.
THe first is Simon Peter the chief of the Apostles. He as we are given to
understand by his Epistles preached the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ in
Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Bithynia and in the end preached at Rome, where
afterward he was crucified the third ^e that be^eaded ^a^nes is called ^erod
Agrippa. Act. 12.
Calends of July under Nero the Emperor with his head downwards (for that
was his desire) and there also buried.

2. Andrewe.
ANdrewe the brother of Simon Peter as our elders have delivered unto us,
preached the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ unto the Scythians, Sogdians,
Sacians, and in the middle Sebastopolis inhabited of wild Aethiopians. He was
crucified by Aegeas king of the Edessaeans and buried ^ohn being (...) Asia
w^o^ ^is revelation (...) it appears by the ^ cap.
at Patris a city in Achaia.

3. James the son of Zebedaeus.
James the son of Zebedie a fisherman preached the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ unto the twelve dispersed tribes. He was slain with the sword by
Herod the retrache of the Jews in Iudaea, where he is also buried.

4. John. ^^ writes ^useb. lib. 3. ^^p. 16.

John the brother of James who was also an Euangeliste, whom the Lord loved,
preached the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ in Asia. The Emperor* Traian
exiled him into the Isle Patmos for the word of God, where he wrote also his
Gospel the which afterward be published at Ephesus by Gaius his hoaste and
Deacon of whom Paul the Apostle writing to the Romans has testified saying:
Gaius mine host and of the wholl Church saluteth you. After the death of
Traian he returned out of the Isle Patmos and remained at Ephesus until he had
lived a hundred and twenty years. Which being expired, he living as yet (y^
Lord would so have it) buried him self. There are some which write that he was
not banished into y^ Isle Patmos under Traian, but in the time of Domitian the
son of Vespasian.

5. Philip.
PHilip of the city Bethsalda preached the Gospel in Phrygia, he was honorably
buried at Hierapolis with his daughters.

6. Bartholomewe.
BArtholomewe preached the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ unto the Indians,
and delivered unto them the Gospel of Mathewe. He rested and was buried in
Albania a city of Armenia ^on prea^ed to the ^pores. ^here he ^ached is ^e
called ^barie.
the great.

7. Thomas.
THomas as it has been delivered unto us, preached the Gospel of our Savior
Christ Jesus unto the Parthians, Medes and Persians. He preached also unto the
Caramans, Hircans, Bactrians and Magicians. He rested at Calamina a city in
India being slain with a darte, which they call a spear or iauelin where he
was also honorably buried.

8. Mathewe.
MAthewe the Evangelist wrote the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ in the
Hebrewe tongue and delivered it unto James the brother of the Lord according
unto the flesh, who was Bishop of Jerusalem. He dyed at Hierapolis in Parthia
where he was also honorably buried.

9. Simon Zelotes.
SImon Zelotes preached Christ throughout Mauritania and Aphricke the less. At
length he was Simon preached to the Moors. Where he preached is now called
Barbary.
crucified at Brettania, slain and buried.

10. Jude the brother of James.
IVdas the brother of James called also Thaddaeus and Lebbaeus preached unto
the Edessaeans and throughout all Mesopotamia. He was slain in Berytus in the
time of Agbarus king of Edessa and buried very honorably.

11. Simon Judas otherwise James the son of Alphaeus.
SImon syrnamed Judas who succeeded James in the Byshopricke of Jerusalem (I
take him to be Here Dorotheus is deceived: for this Apostle him self was James
Alphaeus bishop of Jerusalem.
James the son of Alphaeus) was crucified under Traian and slain in
Ostracina in Egypt when he had lived a hundred and two years.

12. Mathias.
MAthias being one of the seuentye Disciples was afterward numbered with the
eleven Apostles in y^ rowme of Judas the traitor. He preached the Gospel in
Aethiopia about y^ haven called Hyssus and the river Phasis unto barbarous
nations and rauenours of flesh. He died at Sebastopolis where he was also
buried nigh the temple of Sol.

Paul.
PAul being called of the Lord Jesus Christ him self after his assumption and
numbered in the Catalogue of the Apostles began to preach the Gospel from
Jerusalem and went on still unto Illyricum, Italy, and Spain. His Epistles
are extant at this day full of all heavenly wisdom. He was beheaded at Rome
under Nero the third Calendes of July, so died a Martyr and lies there buried
with Peter the Apostle.

Mark the Evangelist.
Mark the Evangelist and the first Bishop of Alexandria, preached the Gospel
unto the people of Alexandria and all the bordering regions from Egypt unto
Pentapolis. In the time of Traia^ he had a cable rope tied about his neck at
Alexandria by the which he was drawn from the place called Bucolus unto the
place called Angels, where he was burned to ashes by the furious Idolatrers in
the month of April and buried at Bucolus.

Luke.
LVke the Euangeliste of the city of Antioch, by profession a Physician wrote
the Gospel as he heard Peter the Apostle preach, and the acts of the
Apostles as Paul delivered unto him. He accompanied the Apostles in their
peregrination, but specially Paul. S. Paul made mention of him wrytinge in a
certain place: Dear Lucas the Physician saluteth you. He died at Ephesus
Coloss. 4.
where he was also buried and after many years together with Andrewe and
Timothee he was translated to Constantinople in the time of Constantius the
son of Constantinus Magnus.

Of the seventy Disciples.
Toutchinge these seventy Disciples I would have thee understand Christian
reader that as Peter de Natalibus writes there were found at Rome two old
copies, both written by Dorotheus as he learned, the one in Greek the other
in Latin, his meaning was to make both Romans and Grecians partakers of
the fruits of his travel, and as the drift of them was one, so the order
diverse, for they vary very much. The editions came to my hands and as I found
them so I mind to publishe them, placinge the translation out of the Greek on
the left hand and out of the Latin on the right hand.

After the Greek edition. After the Latin edition. 1. James. James the
brother of the Lord after the flesh, called also Iustus, was the first Bishop
of Jerusalem, the Jews stoned him there to death and buried him in the temple
nigh the altar. 2. Timothee. Timothee was by Saint Paul placed Bishop of
Ephesus. He preached the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ from Ephesus unto
Illyricum and throughout Hellas in Acha^a where he dyed and was honorably
buried. Act. 16. 3. Titus. Titus was bishop of Creta, he preached the gospel of
Christ there, and in all the country about. in the end he dyed there, and was
reverently buried. Titus was Bishop in Crete, there he preached, and there he
lies buried. 4. Barnabas. Barnabas was a minister of the word together with
Paul. he preached Christ first at Rome, afterward he was made bishop of
Millayne. Barnabas. Act 4. 13. 5. Ananias. Ananias which baptized Paul in the
Acts of the Apostles, was made bishop of Damascus. Ananias who baptized Paul,
was after that Bishop of Damascus. Act. 9. 22. 6. Stephan. Stephan the first
martyr, and one of the seven Deacons, was stoned by the Jews at Jerusalem, as
Luke testifies in the Acts of the Apostles, and so dyed. Stephan was the first
martyr, and the first of the seven Deacons. Act. 6. 7. 7. Philip. Philip who
was also one of the seven Deacons, baptized Simon Magus and the Eunuch, and was
made bishop of Tralleis in Asia. Philip one of the 7. Deacons who baptized
Simo^ and the Eunuch, was Bishop in Thracia, afterward in Scythia. Act. 8. 8
Prochorus. Prochorus one of the seven Deacons, was Bishop of Nicomedia a city
in Bithynia. Prochorus one of the 7. deacons was bishop of Nicomedia in
Bithynia. Act. 6. 9. Nicanor. Nicanor one of the seven Deacons, was martyred in
one day together with his fellow Deacon, and first martyr Stephan, with two
thousand other faithful Christians. Nicanor one of the 7. Deacons suffered the
same day that Stephan the first martyr did, together with two others. Act. 6.
10. Simon. Simon one also of the seven Deacons, was Bishop of Bostra Act. 6.
in Arabia, and there by the heathen burned to ashes. Simon one also of the 7.
Deaco^s was bishop of Tire and Sidon. 11. Nicolas. Nicolas was one of the seven
Deacons, and being made Bishop of Sapria, he followed after strange doctrine,
and fell together with Simon from the faith. Nicolas one of y^ 7. deacons was b.
of Samaria, but he fell and became an heretic. of him spra^g the sect of the
Nicolaits, whom John reprehended in the Revelation. Apocalyp. 2. 12. Parmenas.
Parmenas was one of the Deacons, as he ministered in the rowme of a Deacon, he
dyed in the presence of the Apostles. Parmenas one of the 7. dyed at Nisibis.
Act. 6. 13. Cleopas. Cleopas called also Simon, was the Lords Cosingermaine.
As he accompanied Luke, he saw the Lord after his resurrection from the dead,
and spoke with him, as we read in the Gospel. At length he was the second
Bishop of Jerusalem. Cleopas. Luc 24. Eusebius. eccle. hist. lib 3. cap 11. 19.
29. 14. Silas. Silas was a minister of the word with Paul. he was made Bishop
of Corinth. Silas was bishop of Corinth. Act. 15. 16. 17 15. Siluanus. Siluanus
was also minister of the word together with Paul. he was chosen Bishop of
Thessalonica. Siluanus preached together with Paul, he was bishop of
Thessalonica 2. Cor. 1. 1. These. 1. 2. These. 1. 1. Pet. 5. 16. Crescens.
Crescens whom Saint Paul remembered in his second Epistle unto Timothy, was
Bishop of Chalcedona in France. he preached the Gospel of Christ, and was
there martyred in the time of Traian and buried. Chrysches was Bishop of
Chalcedonia. 2. Tim. 4. 17. Epaenetus. Epaenetus of whom S. Paul made mention
in his Epistle to the Romans was Bishop of Carthage. Epaenetus was bishop of
Carthage. Romans 16. 18. Andronicus. Andronicus whom S. Paul remembered in his
Epistle to the Romans was Bishop of Pannonia. Andronicus Bishop of Pannonia.
Romans 16. 19. Amplias. Amplias whom Paul saluted in his Epistle to the
Romans was Bishop of Odissa. Ampliatus Bishop of Edissa. Romans 16. 20.
Vrbanus. Vrbanus mentioned by Paul, writing to the Romans was Bishop of
Macedonia. Vrbanus Bishop of Macedonia. Romans 16. 21. Stachys. Stachys remembered
of Paul writing to the Romans, the first Bishop of Byzantium, was by Andrewe
the Apostle made Bishop of Argyropolis in Thracia. Stateus (Stachys) was of
Andrew the Apostle made bishop in Argyropolis of Thracia. Romans 16. 22. Apelles.
Apelles mentioned of Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, was Bishop of
Smyrna, before blessed Polycarpus. Apelles was Bishop of Eradia. Ampleius
bishop of Smyrna before Polycarpus. Romans 16. 23. Aristobulus. Aristobulus whom
Paul saluted writing to the Romans, was Bishop of Brettania. Aristobulus
was Bishop of Bethania. Romans 16. 24. Narcissus. Narcissus of whom Paul spoke
in his Epistle to the Romans, was Bishop of Patrae in Achaia. Tarcissus
(Narcissus) was Bishop of Athens. Romans 16. 25. Herodion. Herodion named also by
S. Paul in his Epistle to the Romans was also Bishop of Patrae. Eradius
(Herodio) was Bishop of Patrae. Romans 16. 26. Rufus. Rufus one that is rekoned
by the Apostle among others in the aforesaid Epistle was Bishop of Thebae.
Rufus otherwise called Ruferius, was Bishop of Thebae. Romans 16. 27. Asyncritus.
Asyncritus rehearsed by the Apostle in his Epistle to the Romans was Bishop of
Hircania. Asyncritus Bishop of Hyrcania. Romans 16. 28. Plegon. Plegon whom
Paul remembered when he wrote to the Romans, was made Bishop of Marathon.
Phlegontius (Phlegon) was bishop of Marathon. Romans 16. 29. Hermes. Hermes of
whom mention is made in the Epistle to the Romans was Bishop of Dalmatia.
Hermes was bishop of Philipolis. Romans 16. Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 3. 30. Hermas.
Hermas whom Paul saluted in his Epistle to the Romans, was Bishop of
Philippos. Romans 16. 31. Patrobas. Patrobas of whom Paul made mention, was
Bishop of Nepoliolis. Patrobas was bishop of the nation Peli. Romans 16. 32.
Agabus. Agabus of whom mention is made in the Acts of the Apostles, was endued
^ith the gif^ of prophec^e. Agabus who had the gift of prophecy was one also
of the 70 Disciples. A^^ 11. 21. 33. L^^^s. I ^^^ is remembered of Paul. he was
the first Bishop of Rome after Peter the chief of the Apostles. ^^nus was
Bishop of Rome after Peter. 2. ^^m. 4. 34. G^^us. S. Paul made mention of
Gaius, he was Bishop of Ephesus after Timothee. Caius was Bishop of Ephesus.
Rom 16. (...): ^ 1. ^ ^^. ^. I^^. e^^st 3. Romans 16. 35. Philologus. The Apostle
made mention of Philologus. Andrewe the Apostle made him bishop of Sinopa.
Philologus was by Andrewe made bishop of Sinopis. 36. Olymp^s. P^^^ in a
certain place has remembered Olymp^s. he w^^ ^^headed at Rome together with
Peter the chief of the Apostles, and so dyed a martyr. Liphasius was bound at
Rome with Paul, and beheaded after his martyrdom. Rom 16 37. Rodion. S. Paul
some where made mention of this Rodion, he was also beheaded at Rome together
with Peter. 38. Jason. Jason is remembered in the works of the Apostle, he was
bishop of Tarsus. Jason was bishop of Tharsus. Act. 7. Romans 16. 39. Sosipater.
Sosipater is remembered of the Apostle, he was bishop of ^^n^^^. Sosipater as
says Dorotheus was bishop of Iconium, but Origin in the first Glossa says,
he was bishop of Thes^alonica. Romans 16. 40. Lucius. Lucius is also remembered of
Paul, he was bishop of L^^dic^^ in Syria. Lucius was bishop of Laodicea in
Syria. Act ^^. Rom ^^. 41. Tertius. This Tertius wrote the Epistle of S. Paul
to the Romans. he was the second bishop of Iconium. Tertius who wrote the
Epistle to the Romans as Paul endited it, was Bishop of Meiadum. Rom ^^. 42.
Era^^^s. S. Paul made mention of Erastus in his Epistle to the Romans. (...)
he was steward of the Church of Jerusalem, afterward he was made Bishop of
Paneas. Act (...) Rom 16. ^2. ^^^o^^ 4. 43. Phigellus. S. Paul remembered this
Phigellus as if he had taught false doctrine, and followed after Simon. he was
bishop of Ephesus. Philetus or Phigellus was bishop of Ephesus. ^^. ^^^. 1. 2.
44. Hermogenes. The Apostle made mention of this Hermogenes as one that brought
into the church of God false doctrine, he was bishop of Megara. Hermogenes was
Bishop of Megara. ^2. T^m 1. 45. Demas. Paul wrote of this Demas that he fell
from the faith. for of these three which went next before, he remembered in his
second Epistle to Timothee, that Phigellus and Hermogenes by sowing of strange
doctrine resisted his preaching: that Demas for love of the present world for
sook the truth of the Gospel. This Demas became afterward an Idol priest of
Thessalonica. of these things also wrote John the Apostle. They went (says
he) out from us, but they were not of us. Demas became an Apostata. Coloss 4.
^. Tim 4. Epist. ad phi^m.^. John. 2. 46. Quartus. There is mention made of
this Quartus in the Epistle to the Romans. he was bishop of Berytus. Quartus
was bishop of Berythus. Rom 16.1. Corin. 1. 3. 4. 16. Act. 18. 1^. T^^. 3. It
was Peter the Apostle and not Cephas, as we read in the Epistle to the
Galathians that was rebuked. It appears this copy was corrupted, for in the
other coppie there is no such thing. Philip. 2. 4. Philip. 4. Coloss. 4. 47.
Apollos. S. Paul made mention of Apollos in his first Epistle to the
Corinthians. he was bishop of Caesarea. Apollo was bishop of Connia. 48.
Cephas. This was he whom Paul reprehended at Antioch, of one name with Peter.
he was bishop of Cannia. 49. Sos^henes. S. Paul remembered this Sos^henes. he
was bishop of Colophonia. 1. Corinthians. 1. Act. 18. Sosthenes was bishop of
Colophonia. 50. Epaphroditus. There is mention made in the works of S. Paul of
Epaphroditus. he was bishop of Adriana. Epaphroditus was bishop of Andriaca.
51. Caesar. Caesar also is remembered of Paul. he was bishop of Dyrrhachium.
Caesar was bishop of Dyrrhachium. 52. Marcus. S. Paul made mention of this
Marcus. he was a Cosingermaine of Barnabas, and bishop of Apollonias. Marcus
the Cosingermaine of Barnabas, so called because they came both of two sisters,
as the Glossa says. he was bishop of Apollonias. 53. Joseph. Joseph who also
is called Iustus, and Barsabas of whom Luke wrore in the Acts of the Apostles,
that he was in election with Matthias, was bishop of Eleutheropolis. Joseph
called also Jesus, was bishop of Eleutheropolis. Act. 1. 18. Coloss. 4. 54.
Artemas. Artemas whom Paul also remembered, was bishop of Lystris. Artemas was
bishop of Lystra. Titus. 3. 55. Clemens. Clemens of whom S. Paul said: with
Clemens and the rest of my fellow laborers, was the first of the Gentiles and
Greeks that believed in Christ. he was made bishop of Sardice now called
Triadi^za. Clemens the first that believed of the Gentiles* was first bishop of
Sardice, afterward of Rome. Philip. 4. 56. Onesiphorus. S. Paul remembered
Onesiphorus. he was bishop of Coronia. Onesimus, or Onesiphorus was bishop of
Coronis. 2. Tim. 1. 4. Coloss 4. Epist. ad philem. Act. 20. Ephesians. 6. Coloss.
4. 2. Tim. 4. T^^. 3. 2. Tim. 4. 57. Tychicus. There is mention made by S.
Paul of this Tychicus. he was the first bishop of Chalcedon in Bithynia.
Ticicus (Tychicus) was bishop of Colophonia. 58. Carpus. S. Paul made mention
of this Carpus. he was bishop of Berrhoea a city in Thracia. Carpus was bishop
of Beronia in Thracia. 59. Euodius. Euodius is remembered of Paul. he was the
first bishop of Antioch after Peter the Apostle. Euodius was bishop of Antioch
after Peter. Philip. 4. 60. Philemon. S. Paul wrote an Epistle unto this
Philemon. he was bishop of Gaza. Philemon unto whom Paul wrote a peculiar
Epistle was bishop of Gaza. Epist. ad philem. 61. Zenas. Zenas the Lawier of
whom Paul made mention was bishop of Diospolis. Zenas was bishop of Diospolis.
Tit. 3. Act. 18. 1. Cor. 16. 2. Tim. 4. 62. Aquila. The Apostle has made
mention of this Aquila. he was bishop of Heraclea. 63. Priscas. Priscilla. S.
Paul remembered this Priscas. he was bishop of Colophona. Priscus. 2. Tim. 4.
64. Iunias. The Apostle remembered also this Iunias. he was bishop of Apamia in
Syria. Aristarchus bishop of Apamia. Romans 16. 65* Marcus. Mark who also was
called John, of whom Luke wrote in the Acts of the Apostles, was bishop of
Biblus. Mark called also John, was bishop of Biblus. Act. 13. 15. 2. Tim. 4.
66. Aristarchus. S. Paul has made often mention of this Aristarchus. A
second Aristarchus mentioned in the Epistle to Philemon. Act. 19. 20. 27
Coloss 4. Epist. ad philem. ^. Tim. 4. Act. 20. 21. 2. Tim. 4. 67. Pudas.
Pudens. The Apostle remembered Pudas also. Pudens. 68. Trophinus. Trophimus. S.
Paul likewise made mention of this Trophimus. these three last were partakers
with Paul in all his afflictions, and his daily companions. last of all they
were beheaded together with him at Rome under Nero, and crowned martyrs.
Trophimus. These three were partakers of y^ Apostles persecutions, and beheaded
at Rome after him. 69. Mark the Evangelist. Mark the Evangelist who received
at the mouth of Peter the Gospel as he preached at Rome. 70. Luke the
Evangelist. These two also are numbered in the catalogue of the seventy
Disciples, the Eunuch likewise of Candace Queen of the Aethiopians preached the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ in Arabia Felix. the Isle Taprobana, and
throughout all Erythra. It is reported also he was there gloriously martyred
and buried. that his tumbe is an invincible bulwerke for the faithful,
discomfeiting the wicked Barbarians, and curing diseases unto this day. The
Eunuch.

The end of DOROTHEVS.
Faults escaped in the Printing.
Page 9. line 10. for manner, read man. page 9. in the marge for 3963, read
3970. page 10. live 6. for consepuently, read consequently. page 14. line 17.
for Velerius, read Valcrius. page 14. line 53. for thy, read they. page 17.
line 34. for fortwith, read forthwith. page 22. line 51. the parenthesis should
be after Christ) page 23. line 2. for Olimp^ades, read Olympiades. page 31.
line 17. for thirteeneth* read thirteen. page 56. line 6. for they, read the.
page 94. line 41. for ah, read an. page 103. line 46. for and other, read an
other. page 111. in the marge, for Nazianze^, read Neocaesariens. page 122.
line 26. for darned, read darkened. page 131. in the marge for Gregory
Nazianzen, read Neocaesariens. page 140. line 51. for depart read departed.
page 139 in the marge for Gregory Nazianzen, read Neocaesariens. page 150.
line 11. for frendas, read friends. page 150. line 40. for the and, read and
the. page 159. line 35. for violent, read violently. page 175. line 16. for
permoited, read permitted. page 187. line 53. for alloweded, read allowed. page
189. line 2. for berewed, read bereaved. page 189. line 15. for wih, read with.
page 202. line 2. for beloved God, read beloved of God. page 213. line 18. for
two hundredth eight and twenty, read three hundred and fifth. page 236. line 12.
for cause, read clause. page 240. line 16. for leage, read league. page 242.
line 51. for son, read sun. page 246. line 43. for Mu^son, read Mursa. page
248. line 40. for Is^hyas, read Ischyras. page 256. line 2. for Constantinus,
read Constantius. page 284. line 24. for our, read your. page 303. line 37. for
not, read to. page 383. line 32. for Alexander, read Alexandria. page 411. line
48. for neither, read either. page 427. line 32. for cogeled, read congealed.
The rest which thou find (gentle reader) correct them thy self.

A CRONOGRAPHIE CONTINEVVED FROM THE BIRTH OF CHRIST (WHERE EVSEBIVS, SOCRATES,
EVAGRIVS AND DOROTHEVS BEGIN TO WRITE) UNTO THE TWELF YEAR OF THE raygne of
Mauricius the Emperor being the full time of six hundred wantinge only five
years after Christ, and the purest age: containing the Acts of Christ: the
years of the incarnation: the famous men, with the martyrs and favorers of the
truth in all those times: the raygne of the Emperors: the kings of Iudaea:
the succession of high priests in Jerusalem as long as they lasted: after
them, the succession of Bishops, specially in the most famous Churches, as
Jerusalem, Antioch, Rome Alexandria with others: The Counsels within this time
summoned, and the heretics condemned. All which are faithfully collected
chiefly out of Eusebius, Socrates and Euagrius and where they seem imperfect
out of other ancient writers, by. M. H.



Imprinted at London by Thomas Vautroullier dwelling in the Blackefriers. 1576.

THE PREFACE OF THE AVTOR to the Reader toutching his Chronographie.
SEeing that hitherto (gentle Reader) in the translation of these ancient
Historiographers, Eusebius, Socrates, Euagrius, and Dorotheus, I have employed
great labor and industry, referring the pains to mine own person, and the
profit to the furtherance of thy study and knowledge: I have determined yet
once again to gratify thy loving mind with this Chronographie followinge, a
work which with more ease thou may run over and peruse, and the sooner
commit to memory then the former, though my pains herein were nothing
aslaked, but aequiualent with the other travail. I hope the treatise will be
acceptable, insomuch the English tongue has not at this day extant any
Ecclesiastical Chronographie continewed from so long a time. Well we may have
catalogues of kings, recital of Bishops, pedegrewes of our gentries* with
other private and particular summaries severally handled by sundry men: yet the
general Antiquity, the ioynte contriuing, the relation to the fountain, the
searching of the original out of far and foraigne countries (seeing the
Gospel was not first preached here in England) I find not extant in our
mother tongue. Therefore orderly to proceed as the aforesaid learned vvriters
have laid down their example I will begin with the birth of Christ
pe^ning in the first colume such worthy acts as the Evangelists have recorded
of him during his abode here on earth, afterward the years of his
incarnation. The next Luke 2. 3.
rovvme is an abridgement of the raygne of* the Emperors. Luke the Euangeliste
thought good even in the very entrance of his discourse to lay down the
birth of Christ in the raygne of Augustus the Emperor, and the preaching of
John the baptist to have begone the fifteenth year of Tiberius Caesar.
Socrates in the fifth book of Socrat. eccl. hist. lib. 5 proem.
his ecclesiastical history took the catalogue of the Emperors to be one of
his principal drifts, his reason was because the ecclesiastical affairs
seemed alvvayes to depend very much of the Emperors and Princes. The third
place contains the famous men with the favorers of the truth* the Martyrs
and Sayncts of God. The gladsome tidings of the glorious Gospel was not first
revealed unto Princes and Presidents, unto the mighty and wise of this world
(for God needed not their aid and power) but unto the vveake, simple,
ignorant, foolish and contemptible in the sight of men, such as were sheperds,
fishermen, tolegatherers and tentmakers. The fourth riglet contineweth the
reign of the kings of Iudaea. Matthew and Luke began their Gospells with
the reign of Herod. But they lasted not very long. In the days of Herod
Christ was borne in the flesh, after him came Archelaus, the third was Herod
the tetrach which beheaded John the baptist, the fourth was Herod Agrippa
which beheaded James the brother of John with the svvord and dyed miserably
him self. The last was Agrippa minor before whom Paul pleaded in the Acts
of the Apostles, in Joseph. Intiq. lib. 18. cap. 11. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 20.
cap. vlt.
whose days Jerusalem was destroyed. Anno Dom. 73. Josephus vvriteth that
within the compass of one hundred years all the progeny of Herod was
rooted out. The fifth order is of high priests neither have I omitted them
seeing both the Evangelists and the Historiographers mentioned such as were
in the time of Christ. They end likewise with the kings of Iudaea and the
destruction of Jerusalem. I remember Josephus writes that from Aaron which was
the first highpriest unto the last at the overthrow and burning of the temple
under Titus there were highpriests to the number of fourscore and three. The
sixth diuisionis of counsels, sometimes of the wicked as of the Pharisees and
heretics, some other times of the godly as of the Apostles and Apostolickmen.
where it appears manifestly unto the wholl world that the bishop of Rome had
as little to do therein as other bishops, for Emperors, princes, and sometimes
the bishops of some province or other within themselves, have summoned
cou^cells, called bishops together and decided such matters as were called into
controversy without the advice of the bishop of Rome. For says Socrates the
chiefest councels Socrat. lib. 5. eccl. hist. proem.
were summoned and are unto this day called together by the commandment and
consent of the Emperors. Besides all the aforesaid I have laid down the
succession of bishops in the four most famous churches, as Jerusalem, Antioch,
Rome, Alexandria. Though other writers addict them selves wholly unto the
Catalogue of the church of Rome, omitting no not one, Joan the she Pope only
excepted Some will marvel why I prefer Jerusalem and Antioch before the seae
of Rome, the reason is because Eusebius. eccl. hist. lib. 2. cap. 1. A^^. 11.
A^^^n. Chron* part ^^^. 6. cap. 4. ^. 1. Eusebius. eccl. hist. lib. 3. cap. 1. 4.
Ierem. Catalog. eccl. script. Eusebius. eccles. hist. lib. 2. cap. 14. 16.
those churches had their bishops before the church of Rome. Clemens
Alexa^drinus writes that James called the brother of Christ was immediately
after the assumption of our Savior chosen bishop of Jerusalem by Peter, James
and John the Apostles. Again as Luke reports the Antiochians were first
called christians. Paul and Barnabas preached there one wholl year and if fame
fail us not of the truth Peter the Apostle was bishop there seven years and
spente seven other about Jerusalem and the Eastern contreyes before his
coming to Rome. He came to Rome the second year of Claudius the Emperor
Anno Dom. 44, a great while after the seae of Jerusalem and the bishoprik of
Antioch were settled. Let no man muze why I lay downethese foures^aes otherwise
then all Chronographies in what language so ever unto this day extant have
done, I do it not of any singularity for these ancient Historiographers
Eusebius, Socrates, and Euagrius have followed the same order though other
Chronologers and Chronographers have not imitated them. Last of all I have
placed the heretics by themselves so that the reader may easily see when they
lived, who they were, what they have taught, by whom they were condemned and
the end of most of them as far forth as the lines might be contrived within
the colume and the long tediousnes avoided. Now drawing toward the birth of
Christ where the Chronographye begins I think best by way preface not as my
principal drifte, briefly to run over the years of the world that thereby
we may the sooner learn when our Savior Christ Jesus appeared in the flesh
and first we have to begin from Adam.

The year of the world Adam was the first man and made of the mould of the
earth being Genes. 1. 5.
a hundred and thirty year old he begat Seth, he lived in all nine hundred
and thirty years. Genes. 5. he was alive until the fiftyeth and six year of
Lamech the father of Noe and departed this life 126. year before Noe was
borne. The first age of the world from Adam to Noe. 130. Seth was a hundred
and five year old when he begat Enos he lived in all nine hundred and twelfe
years. Genes. 5. he departed this life in the year of the world on thousand
forty and two, after the death of Adam one hundred and twelfe years, before
Noe was borne 14. years. 235. Enos was fourscore and ten year old when
he begat Cainan he lived in all nine hundred and five years. Genes. 5. he
departed this life in the year of the world, one thousand one hundred and
fortieth year, he lived together with Noe fourscore and four years. 325.
Cainan lived threescore and ten years and begat Malalael, he lived in all
nine hundred and ten years. Genes. 5. he departed this life in the year of
the world 1235. 395. Malalael lived threescore and five years and begat
Iared, he lived in all eight hundred ninety and five years. Genes. 5. he
departed this life 366. years before the deluge, after Noe was borne 234.
years. 460. Iared lived a hundred threescore and two years and begat Enoch,
he lived in all nine hundred threescore and two years. Genes. 5. he departed
this life in the year of the world 1422. he lived with Noe three hundred
threescore and six years. 622. Enoch lived threescore and five years and
begat Mathusalem, he lived in all three hundred threescore and five years and
was translated. Genes. 5. he was taken up into heaven seven and fifty years
after the death of Adam. 687. Mathusalem lived a hundred fourscore and seven
years and begat Lamech, he lived in all nine hundred sixty and nine years and
died in the year of the deluge. Genes. 5. 874. Lamech lived a hundred
fourscore and two years and begatt Noe, he lived in all 777. years and died
five years before the deluge. Genes. 5. 1056. Noe was borne in the year of
the world one thousand fifty and six, in the 182. year of his father Lamech,
after the death of Adam 126. after the death of Seth 14. years, being five
hundred year old he begat Sem, and lived in all nine hundred and fifty years.
Genes 9. Genes. 9.
he lived with Enos 84. years, with Cainan 179. with Iared 366. with
Mathusalem 600. with Lamech 595. with Sem his son 448. 1656. Anno mundi 1656.
The deluge drowned the whole world in the six hundred year of Noe. Genes. 7
8. Genes. 7. 8.
It was in the year of the world one thousand six hundred fifty and six, for
so does Augustine write de ciuitate Dei lib. 15. cap. 20. finding fault with
the error of the Septuagints Augustine.
whom Eusebius in his Chronicon, and Beda have followed, for they numbered
2262. years which can not be. Again Augustine de ciuitat. Dei lib. 15. cap.
12. and 14. misliketh very much with such as doubted whether the years of old
were as long as we find them of late, he proves that there were so many
hours in the day, so many days in the week, so many weeks in the month,
and so many months in the year alike from the beginning of the world. 1658.
Sem being an hundred year old begat Arphaxad the second Genes. 11.
year after the flood, he lived in all six hundred years. Genes. 11. he was
borne nynety and nine years before the deluge, he departed this life in the
year of the world 2158. The second age of the world from Noe to Abraham.
Arphaxad being borne the second year after the deluge, lived thirty and five
years and begat Sale, he lived in all 438. years Genesis 11. he lived with Noe
348. years, with Sale his son 403. with his nephew Heber 373. with Phaleg,
Reu, Saruch, Their, until the 148. year of Abraham the 48. of Isaac. he died
after Isaac was borne 48. years, 12. years before Jacob was borne. 1693. Sale
lived thirty years and begat Heber, he lived in all 433. years. Genes. 11. he
lived after the death of Abraham 3. years, with Isaac 78. and with Jacob 18.
1723. Heber of whom the Hebrews are called lived four and thirty years and
begat Phaleg, he lived in all 464. the longest lived of all the fathers after
the floode. Genes. 11. he lived after the desease of Abraham 64. with Isaac
110. with Jacob 80. 1757. Phaleg lived thirty years and begat Reu, he lived in
all 239. years. Genes. 11. 1787. Reu lived two and thirty years and begat
Saruch, he lived in all 239. years. Genes. 11. 1819. Saruch lived thirty
years and begat Nachor, he lived in all 230. years. Genes. 11. 1849. Nachor
lived nine and twenty years and begat Their, he lived in all 148. years.
Genes. 11. 1878. Their lived seventy years and begat Abraham, he lived in all
205. years. Genes. 11. 1948. Anno mundi 1948. From the floode unto the birth
of Abraham 292. years. from Adam and the creation of the world unto Abraham.
Abraham being a hundred year old begat Isaac, he lived in all a Genesis 21. 2^
hundred seventy and five years. Genes. 21. 25.1948. the third age of the
Iudic. 3.
world from Iudic. 3.
Abraham to David. Eusebius.
2048. Isaac being three score year old begat Jacob, he lived in all a Genesis
25. 35
hundred and four score years. Genes. 25. 35. 2108. Jacob afterward called
Israel was a hundred and thirtye year old when he went to Egypt and
presented him self before Pharao. Genes. 47.
he lived in all 147. years. Genes. 47. 2238 Anno mundi when Israel with the
12. Patriarchs (Ruben. Simeon. Leui. Judah. Zabulon. Issachar. Dan. Gad. Aser.
Nepthali. Joseph. Benjamin) went into Egypt. 2238. 2309. Joseph died being a
hundred and ten year old. Genes. 50. it was the four and fiftieth year
after the desease of his father Jacob. Genes. 50.
2373. Moses was borne three score and five years after the death of Joseph.
The Israelites dwelled in Egypt four hundred and thirtye years. Exodus 12.
which is not to be taken precisely between their incomming and outgoing, but as
S. Paul Galat. 3. alleges from Exodus 12.
the calling of Abraham out of Haran. Moses was four score year old when he
presented him self before Pharao for the deliverance of the Israelits. Exodus 7.
2453. Anno mundi 2453. the Israelits came out of Egypt after the deluge Exodus
7.
797. years. 2493. Moses lived in all a hundred and twenty years. Deuteronomy. 31.
34. he ruled over the Israelits the space of forty years during their abode in
the wilderness. Deuter. 29. Deuteronomy. 29.
The highpriestes. The Prophets. Deu. 31. 34.
Aaron was the first highpriest. Exodus 28. 29. 2510. Iosue ruled Israel 17.
years, he was a hundred and ten year old when he died. Iosue 24. ^ue. ^^.
2550. Othoniel of the tribe of Judah was judge 40. years. Iudic. 3. Eleazer.
2630. Aod was captain four score years. Iudic. 3. Phinees. 2670. Debora and
Barach governed forty years. Eusebius. Chronic. Iudic. 8.
Abiu. 2710. Gedeon was captain over Israel forty years. Iudic. 8. Iudic. 9.
Bocci. 2713. Abimelech was prince over Israel 3. years. Iudic. 9. 2736. Thola
judged 23. years. Iudic. 10. Iudic. 10.
2758. Iair judged Israel 22. years. Iudic. 10. 2764. Iepthe judged Israel 6.
years. Iudic. 12 Ozi. Iudic. 12.
2771. Abesan judged Israel 7. years. Iudi. 12 2781. AElon judged Israel 10.
years. Iud. 12 2789. Abdon judged Israel 8. years. Iudi. 12. 2809. Sa^pson
judged Israel 20. years. Iu. 16. Iudic. 16.
2929. -- The judges of Israel ceased in Samuel. Act. 13. Heli the priest
judged Israel 40. years. 1. Reg. 4. 2969. Saul was the first King of the
Hebrews, he reigned 40. years. Act. 13. Achitob. Samuel in the days of Heli
and Saul, Act. 13.
he was both priest and Prophet 3. Reg. 2.
and judge of the peopl 3. Reg. 11.
Natha^ in the reign of David. 3009. David was king of Israel 40. years. 3.
Reg. 2. Achimelec. Abiathar. The fourth age of the world from David unto the
captivity in Babylon. 3049 Solomon was king of Israel forty years. 3. Reg.
11. lest we should be deceived in the supputation of the years, it pleased
the holy Ghost in the Scriptures (3. Reg. 6.) to 3. Reg. 6.
lay down the number of the years from the departure of the children of
Israel out of Egypt unto the 4. year of King Solomon's reign, to wit: four
hundred and eighty years, for then he began to build the temple. Sadoch.
Achimaas. Azarias. 3066. Roboam reigned over Judah 17. years. 3. Reg. 14. From
Aaron unto the building of the temple under Solomon there were 12. highpriests
as Joseph writes Anti. lib 20. cap. 18. Gad in the days of Solomon. 3069.
Abia reigned over Judah 3. years. 3. Reg. 15. Iohanan. Ahias in the days of
Roboam. 3. Reg. 14. 3. Reg. 14.
3109. Asa reigned in Jerusalem 41. years. 3. Reg. 15. Azarias was highpriest
at the building of the temple. 1. paralip. 6. Addo in the days of Abia 3. Reg.
15.
Iehu in the days of Asa. Helias in the days of Iosaphat. 3. Reg. 22.
3134. Iosaphat reigned in Jerusalem 25. years. 3. Reg. 22. Meraioth. Helizeus
in 4. Reg. 8.
the days of Ioram. 3142. Ioram reigned over Judah 8. years. 4. Reg. 8. 2.
paralip. 21. some learned writers do think that he raygned 20. years more
and that the holy Ghost because of the Kings wickedness concealed it in his
son Ochozias age saying 4. Reg. 8. that he was 22. year old when he began
to raygne, but in 2. Paralip. 22. that he was 42. year old etc. Amaria. 3143.
Ochozias his son reigned one year. 4. Reg. 8. Achitob. 3150. Reg. 11.
Athalia his mother raygned 7. years. 4. Reg. 11. Sadoch. Abdias in the days
of Ochozia. 3190. Reg. 12.
Ioas reigned 40. years in Jerusalem. 4. Reg. 12. Sellum. Amos in the days of
Ioas. 3219. Reg. 14.
Amasias was King of Judah 29. years. 4. Reg. 14. Ioddas otherwise Iohaida who
lived 130. years. Jonas in the days of Amasia. 3270. Reg. 15.
Azarias reigned over Judah 52. years. 4. Reg. 15. Axiora. Esaias in the days of
Azarias or Ozias. Osee in the days of Ioatha^. Joel in the time of Achaz.
3286. Ioathan was King in Jerusalem 16. years. 4. Reg. 15. Phadaeus. 3302.
Reg. 16.
Achaz reigned 16. years over Judah. 4. Reg. 16. Sadaeus. 3330. Reg. 18.
Ezechias raygned 29. years in Jerusalem. 4. Reg. 18. Iculus. 3385. Reg. 21.
Manasses reigned in Jerusalem 55. years. 4. Reg. 21. Ioatham. 3387. Amon
raygned two years. 4. Reg. 21. Vrias. Micheas in the time of Ezechia Sophonias
in the time of Manasses. 3418. Reg. 22.
Josias was king of Judah 31. years. 4. Reg. 22. Neri. Ioachas was king 3.
months. 4. Reg. 23.
Reg. 23. Ioas. 3429. Ioacim otherwise called Eliacim raygned over Judah 11.
years. 4. Reg. 23. Selam. Jeremy in the days of Amon. Ezechiel in the days
of Iosia. Daniel in the days of Ioachas Abacuk in the days of Ioacim Nahum In
the days of Iechonias. Ioacim otherwise called Iechomas reigned 3. months. 4.
Re. 24. Helchias. Virias in the days of Sedechias. Iere. 26. I would not have
the times of these Prophets so precise taken but that they were also at other
times. 3440. Reg. 24.
Sedechias reigned in Jerusalem 11. years. 4. Reg. 24. under whom the
captivity befell, both city and temple were destroyed and the people led into
Babylon. Sareas. Eusebius Chron. says that from the first building of the
temple in the 4. year of Solomon unto the captivity under Nabuchodonozor
there are 442. years the which I find to be true if we attribute 28. years
to king Iorams reign. From the buylding of the temple under Solomon unto the
captivity under Nabuchodonozor in the time of Sedechias there were 18.
highpriestes as Josephus writes Antiq. lib. 20. cap. 18. 3510. The captivity
continewed 70. years Zachary. 1. Ieremi. 25. 29. Euse. Chronic. Clemens
Alexandrin. but some as Eusebius. says begine to tell the years from the 3. of
Ioachim unto the 20. of Cyrus: some from the 13. of Josias unto the first
year of Cyrus. the fifth age of the world from the captivity of Babylon unto
Christ. Nabuchodonozor raygned 26. years after he lead the people captive. The
eleuenthe year of Sedechias was the 19. of Nabuchodon. Ierem. 32. Euilmerodach
his son raygned 30. years. Regasar 3. years. Labarsadach 6. years.
Baltassar 5. years. Iosedech with others. Daniel. Sidrach. Misach. Abednago.
Zachary. Malachias. Nehemias. Aggaeus in the days of Zorobabel.
The 70. years of the captivity. 3510. King Cyrus released the captivity and
gave them license to build again their temple in Jerusalem but they were
hindered so that they could not begin before the 2. year of Darius the temple
was finished the sixth year of the raygne of Darius. 1. Esdras 6. the temple
and the walls were a finishing until the 32. year of Darius 2. Esdr. 5.
Darius raygned 36. years Eusebius. Chronic. Jesus the son of Iosedech was
priest 56. years. Captains of the Jews. Darius Hystaspis called both Xerxes
and Artaxerxes Assuerus raygned 20. years. Eusebius. Ioachim in whose time (was
Esdras) was priest 8. years. Eliasib was priest 21. years. Zorobabel was over
the Hebrews 58. years. Artabanus was King 7. months Eusebius. Resa 66. years.
Darius Artaxerxes called (...) or Longimanus reigned 40. years Eusebius. Ioachas
was priest 48. years in his time were Hester and Mardocheus. Xerxes 2. was
king 2. months Sogdianus 8. months Eusebius. Darius Nothus raygned 19. years
Eusebius. Ioaida 24. years. Artaxerxes Memnon raygned 40. years Eusebius. Ioanna
53. years. Artaxerxes otherwise called Darius Ochus raygned. 26. Eusebius.
Ioathan 24 years. Arses otherwise called Arsanes the son of Ochus raygned 4.
years Eusebius. Darius the last Monarche of Persia in the sixte year of his
raygne, was slain by Alexander Magnus. Eusebius. Iaddaeus 10. years. Judas 14.
years in his time the Persian monarchy ended. The en^ the mon^chie of I(...)sia.
3700. The Persian Monarchy lasted 191. years. Alexander magnus was Monarche.
5. years. he had governed 7. years before. Onias was highpriest 27. years.
Philo Iud. Josephus became ruler over the Jews the 1. year of Alexander
magnus and continewed 7. years. in whose time 3724. The space of 12. years
after Syria was tossed. Alexander did great reverence both unto the temple and
to the highpriest. Philo Iud. 3755. Seleucus Nicanor was the first king of
Syria and Babylon, he raygned 32. years. Eusebius. Simo^ highpriest 23 1. Machab.
13. 14. Philo Iud. Abner Semei 11. years. in his time Ptolomaeus ransacked
Jerusalem. Philo Iud. Mattathias Eli 12. years. 3774. Antiochus Soter was king
in Syria 19. years. Eusebius. Chronic. Eleazar highpriest 20. years. he was
enemy to Antiochus Theos in his time at the request of Ptolomaeus the
Septuagints translated the old testament out of hebrew into greek Philo Iud.
3789. Antiochus Theos raygned 15. years. 3809. Seleucus Gallinicus was king
of Syria 20. years. Eusebius. Seleucus Ceraunius reigned 3. years. 3848.
Antiochus magnus reigned in Syria 36. years. Eusebius. Manasses highpriest 27.
years. he was a great friend of Seleucus Gallinicus. Aser Maath 9. years.
Nagid Arphaxat 10. years in the time of Eleazar the highpriest and the
Septuagints. Seleucus Philopator reigned 12. years. Agar Heli 8. years.
Maslot Naum 7. years Amos Syrach 14. year Mattathias Siloa 10. years. Philo
Iud. 3868. Antiochus Epiphanes reigned 11. years. Eusebius. Simo^ Iustus
highpriest 28. years. he was honored of Antiochus magnus. Onias highpriest 39
years he was spoiled of Seleucus. Philo Iud. Antiochus Eupator was king in
Syria 2. years. 3878. Demetrius Soter raygned 10. years. Joseph Arses 60.
years he was honored of Ptolomaeus and Antiochus magnus. Philo Iud. Ianneus
Hircanus 16. years. Philo Iud. Alexander reigned 5. years. Jason. From
Antiochus Epiphanes unto Christ, the captains of the Jews became both Kings
and highpriestes. Phil. Iud. Judas Machabeus governed the Jews 5. years. he
took armor against Antiochus Epiphanes, Antiochus Eupator* and Demetrius.
Philo Iud. Demetrius Nicanor 2. years. Onias in whose time Antiochus Epiphanes
plagued the Jews. Nicephor. Antiochus Sedetes 3. years. Alcimus. Triphon 3.
years. Onias the son of Onias. Ionathas his brother was both Priest and
Prince 19. years. Philo Iud. Antiochus pius 12. years. Simon Ionathas 8.
years. Ioannes Hircanus the son of Simon 34. years. Demetrius Nicanor 4.
years. Alexander 2. years. 3907. Antiochus Gryphius reigned 29. years.
Seleucus Gryphius together with others strove 10. years for the king dome.
Aristobulus his son one year. The Syrians seeing that the princes contended
among them selves for the crown took it in ill part and chose Tigranus king
of Armenia to govern them, which ruled 18. years. Alexander was Prince and
priest 27. years. Pompeius the Romayne captain conquered Syria overcame
Tigranus, brought all subject unto the Empire of Rome, led Aristobulus king of
the Jews captive to Rome, made Hircanus high priest whom the other had
deposed and appointed Antipater Liuetenante of Iudaea, Alexandria his wife
governed the Jews 9. years after her husbands death Hircanus the son of
Alexander and Alexandria was highpriest 9. years. Caius Julius Caesar (17.
years after) was Emperor of Rome and raygned 5. years. Hircanus after the
desease of his mother was both priest and prince. Augustus was Emperor 56.
years in the 42. year of his raygne our Savior Christ Jesus was borne into
the world. Aristobulus his brother deposed him both of his priesthood and
princely power. But Pompei ouertooke this Aristobulus and brought him captive
to Rome. Antigonus, Aristobulus and Hircanus raygned 34. years by turns. 3970.
Herod an aliene in the 10. year of Augustus the Emperor was made king of
Iudaea. In the 34. year of his raygne Christ Jesus was borne into the world.

Toutching the year of the world when Christ was borne, diverse men be of
diverse opinions. Eusebius. Ierom. Epiphanius Nicephorus Rabini. Ludouicus
Carettus. Carrion. Phrigio. Theodorus Zuinger. Cytreus. Luther. Eliot. Eccl.
Tigurina. Demochares. Pantaleon.
Eusebius in his Chronico^, laid down 5199. contrary to the supputation of
the Hebrews as Ierom notes reckoninge 2000. for one 1000. Ierom, 3965.
Epiphanius aduers. here is. lib. 2. tom. 2. 5480. Nicephorus eccl. hist. lib. 1.
ca. 10. 5505. The old Rabins 3759. Ludouicus Carettus a Jew, 3760. Carrion
3944. Phrigio 3962. Theodorus Zuinger 3964. Cytreus 3962. Luther 3960. Eliot
3962. The ministers of Tigurine 3974. Demochares 3959. but says he there be
some which count 3969. As I herein can gather by supputation of the years from
Adam to Christ there are 3970. neither do I herein prejudice all the rest,
neither arrogat singularity unto my self, Pantaleo^ a learned chronographer of
this our age is of mine opinion, and me thinks it stands with goodreason. If
ye refer the age of John who began to preach when he was 30. years old
unto the later number to wit, 3970. it will rise just to 4000. The received
opinion namely of Augustine, Justinius Martyr quest. 71. Irenaeus li. 5.
Mu^ster, Ludouicus Carettus with others is that the world shall last 6000.
years, 2000. before the law, 2000. under the law, 2000. vnde^ Messiah that
is Christ. Again I read that our Savior said in the Gospel the law and
the Prophets to have ended in John and if the common opinion is true then
were the 4000. years expired. From thence let us begin with Christ as it
is in the Chronographie follovvinge.

A Chronographie.
THe Hebrews, the Israelits, the Jews were governed first by captains,
beginning at Moses and his successor Joshua, next by Judges, as Othoniel and
Aod, afterward by Kings beginning at Saul, whom David succeeded. Last of all
by Priests, who were also their Princes, until that Pompeye the Roman
captain besieged Jerusalem, and took captive Aristobulus the Prince and
Priest of the Jews (which unto that time had continewed the succession of
Kings from his progenitors) together with his sons to Rome, committing the
office of Highpriesthoode to his brother Hyrcanus. From that time forth the
Jews became tributaries unto the Romans. Not long after when Hyrcanus was
taken of the Parthians, Herod (34. years after their siege under Pompeye,
Eusebius. Chronic.) by father an Idumaean, by mother an Arabian, took of the
Roman Senate and Augustus Caesar, the government of the Iewishe nation. Then
the prophecy of Jacob written by Moses (Genes. 49.) was to take place and to
be fulfilled, which said: The scepter shall not depart from Judah, neither a
lawegeuer fail of his loins, until the Messiah come. Then I say at that time
was the scepter taken from Judah, that is from the Ievvishe tribe, and given to
Herod a stranger. Then was the Messiah borne into the world, to vve^e our
Savior Christ Jesus. Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 7.

THE Acts of Christ and the years of his incarnation. THE raygne of the
Emperoures. THE famous men and favorers of the truth. THE Kings of Iudaea. THE
highpriests of the Jews in Jerusalem. SECTS and heretics as well among the
Jews, as afterward among the Christians. The promised MESSIAH, the
anointed of God our savior Christ* Jesus was conceived in Nazareth, and borne
in Bethleem, from the beginning of the world the 3970 year. in the 42. of the
reign of Augustus Caesar. Eusebius. lib. 1. cap. 6. Cytraeus in Genes. Epiphan.
lib. 1. tom. 1. AUGUSTUS CAESAR was in the 42. year of his raygne when Christ
was borne. Eusebius. lib. 1. cap. 6. Epiphan. lib. 1. tom. 1. The shepheardes had
the first tydinges that Christ was borne. Luc. 2. The wise men commonly called
the KINGS of COLEN, saw his star the same night in the East, Mat. 2. Ioh.
Huss. HEROD was king of the Jews, and went on the 34. year of his raygne
when Christ was borne. Eusebius in Chronic. SIMON the son of Boethus, the
father in law of king Herod, was Highpriest of the Jews when Christ was
borne. whom Herod the last year of his reign deposed, suspectinge him to be
of the conspiracy and treason practiced for the poysoninge of the king.
Joseph. Antiq. lib. 17. cap. 5. By that which S. Paul wrote unto the Colossians
cap. 3. (that in Christ Jesus there was neither Jew neither Gentile, neither
Scythian, neither Barbarian) we gather that the nations of old were
distinguished and noted one from an other, and that for sundry considerations.
Some time in the good part, as of Heber the Hebrews were called: of Israel
the Israelites: of the tribe of Judah the Jews: of Leui the Levites: of Christ
the Christians: so again in the ill part and worse sense diverse have had
their appellation, and were called Heretics, after their names whose steps
they followed, and whose opinion they maintained. The which Epiphanius notes
very well lib^de haeresibus. Augustus rained 57. years Eusebius. lib. 1. cap. 10.
Although others do write that he raygned but 56. years. ZACHARY the priest
the father of John Baptist, no highpriest but an inferior, one of the 24.
orders mentioned in 1. Paral. 24. of the eight lot called Abia, Lyra in Luc.
Zachary at the birth of his son John Baptist song Benedictus. Luc. 1.
Herod burned the Genealogies of the Hebrwes to make him self a ge^tleman.
Eusebius. lib. 1. cap. 8. MATHIAS the son of Theophilus is by Herod appointed
to succeed Simon. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 17. cap. 5. Among the Jews there were
sundry sects, which continewed also the time of Christ. Eusebius. Eccles. hist.
lib. 4. cap. 21. allegeth out of Egesippus, that in the time of the
Circumcision there were sundry sects among the children of Israel, varyinge
in opinions, and set opposite against the tribe of Judah, and Christ, namely
these: the Ess^ans, the Galilaeans, Hemerobaptists, Ma^^o^haans, Samaritans,
Sadduces, and Pharisees. Epiphanius besides these numbreth others* to were: the
Gorthaeans, Sebuaeans, Dosithaeans, Scribes, Ossaeans, Nazaraeans, Herodians.
In the time of Augustus there was a general taxing. Luc. 2. Zacharias was
slain between the temple and the altar, as Basilias and Origin: in Mat. hom.
26. do write. The cause was as they said, in the defense of the virginity of
Marie. The virgins had a several place in the temple to pray. Marie after the
was delivered and known to have had a son, resorted thither nevertheless. the
Pharisees withstoode her. Zachary affirmed she was a virgin, therefore was he
flame. Joseph. bell. Iud. lib. 5. cap. 1. writes that there was one Zacharias
the son of Baris, wrongfully slain in the temple by Zelotae, it is like it
was he whom Christ did mean. Herod slew his wife, his children, his nearest
kinsfolks and most familiar friends. Euse. lib. 1. cap. 9. JOSEPHUS the son
of Ellimus in the time of this Mathias executed the office of Highpriesthoode
for one day and no more. The cause was that Mathias the Highpriest dreamed the
night before, that he had the company of a woman. therefore the day following he
could not play the Highpriest. Joseph. antiq. lib. 17. cap. 8. The Essaeans
celebrate festival days not after the Jews, but seuerallye at several
times. They think them selves purer then other people. Epiphan. de haeresib.
The Essaeans, says Josephus (Antiquit. lib. 15. cap. 13.) exercise the like
trade of life as Pythae^oras delivered among the Grecians* Agayn^ (lib. 13.
cap. 8.) they affirm all things to (...) governed by destiny. They marie no
wiu^^ they think (bell. Iud. lib. 2. cap. 7.) that no woman will keep her
self to one man. they have nothing proper, but all common. They are in number
above 4. thousand. Antiq. lib. 18. cap. 2.

The acts of Christ, and the years of his incarnation. The raygne of the
Emperors. The famous men and favorers of the truth. The Kings of Iudaea. The
Hyghpriests of the Jews in Jerusalem. The counsels some times of the
wicked, as of the Pharisees and heretics* some times of the godly a^ of the
Apostles and Apostolic men. Sects and heretics as well among the Jews as
afterward among the Christians. Augustus Caesar during his raygne after the
birth of Christ sent these many presidents to Iudaea. 1. Cyrenius. 2.
Copinius. 3. Mar^us. 4. Annius Ruffus. Iosep. Antiq lib. 18 cap. 3. 4.
ELIZABETH the wife of Zachary the mother of John Baptist, uttered a piece of
the Hayle Marie, the angel Gabriel the rest. ^OAZARVS the son of Boethus is
chosen highpriest by Herod after that the said Herod had deposed also Mathias
for suspicion of conspiracy. Joseph. antiq. lib. 17. cap. 8. There is a
second sort of Essaeans, says Josephus (bell. Iud. lib. 2. cap. 7.) which
agree with the other in all things, marriage only excepted. They commend
maryadge for the maintenance of succession, their manner is for three years
space to behold the health and behauior of maidens, then if they see them
healthie and fit for procreation, they marie them. JOSEPH a carpente^ to whom
Marie was betrothed. ^uc. 1. MARIE the mother of Christ the author of
Magnificat. The Galilaeans as I suppose, were they of whom certain had showed
unto Christ ( Iuc. 13.) that Pilate had myngled their blood with their own
sacrifices. VVherevpo^ Ambros. in Luc. notes their sacrifice to have been
abominable. Euse. Ecclesiast. hist. lib. 1. cap. 6. mentions the here^ie of
the Galilaeans out of Josephus, to have spronge up of one Judas Galilaeus in
the time of Augustus, when Cyrenius was president of Iudaea, and under the said
Emperor, of an other called Simon Galilaeus under Copinius the Presidont. They
exhorted the Jews to a lawless and carnal liberty, affirminge that tax and
tribute was nothing else, but slauishe servitude. They misliked moreover with
the Jews, that they suffered mortal men under God to reign over them. Of the
same opinion were the Galilaeans in the time of Pilate, under the Emperor
Tiberius. Wherefore Judas (as Josephus writes) was hanged together with his
accomplices, Simon came to naught, and Pilate rewarded them under him as rebels
deserved. Antiquit. lib. 20. cap. 5. Bell. Iud. lib. 2. cap. 7. Luc. 13. Di^ 8.
Christ was the 8. day after his birth circumcis^d. Luc. 2. THE VVISH men came
12. days after, and offered their gifts. John. Huss. Anton. part. 1. tit 5.
cap. 1. paragr. 3. Epiphan. lib. 1. tom. 1. lib. 2. tom. 1. haeres. 51. says
that it was the second year after Christ's birth when the wise me^ came. the
which I see not how it can stand. The Hemerobaptists were Jews in all
points. they affirmed that it was impossible for any man to attain unto
everlasting life, unless he were every day purified and baptized. Epiphan.
Prae^ac. lib. 1. de haeres. Di^ 13. Christ was presented in the temple 33.
days after, that is the (...) ^aye after his ^irth* for that ^as the time ^f
his mo^rs (...) Leuit. 12. (...) 2. Anton. (...) part. 1. SIMEON a man that
feared God, took the babe Jesus in his arms when he came to the temple to be
presented, and song (...). Luc. 2. A COUNCIL of the chief p^iests and Scribes
was gathered together by Herod^ to fifte out of the law and prophets where
Christ should be borne. which made aunsvvere that he should be borne in
Bethlem Judah. Mat. 2. The Samaritans, as Josephus Antiq. lib. 11. cap. vlt.
deny the Jews in adversity, in prosperity they call the^ cosins, deriuinge
there pedegries from Joseph, Ephraim, Manasses. etc. they only receive the 5.
books of Moses, denyinge all the prophecies after him. they retain all the
Iewish^ ceremonies, except the abhorring of the gentiles. They deny moreover
the resurrection of the dead. Epiphan. prae^ac. lib. 1. de haeres. Anno. 3.
Christ was carried into Egypt the 3 year after his birth. Epiphan. co^tra
haeres. lib. 2. tom. 1. haeres. 51. Anno. 44. of the reign of Augustus. Eusebius.
chron. ANNA a prophetess being a widow of many yeare^ continually given to
fasting and praying in the Temple at that instant praised God and spoke of
Jesus Luc. 2. Herod commands the infants to be slain^. lib. 1. cap. 9. Anno.
Christi 3. The Saduces calling them selves after the etymology of their name,
just men, affirmed as Josephus writes (lib. 2. bell. Iud. cap. 7.) that man
had free will, that it lay in man to do good or badd. Mat. 22. and Luc. Act.
23. say^ that they denied the resurrection, affirming there was neither Angel,
neither spirit. Herod when he had reigned, 37, years over the Jews, dies
miserably. Eusebius. lib. 1. cap. 9. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 17. cap. 10. Eusebius.
chronic. ELEAZAR was appointed hyghpriest by Archelaus after that this
Archelaus had deposed Ioazar for suspicion of conspiracy. Joseph. Antiq. lib.
17. cap. 19. The Pharisees according unto the etymology of their name, were a
sect divided from the rest of the people. Theophilac. in Luc. cap. 11. likeneth
the^ to the Monks of his time. Joseph. (Antiq. lib. 18. cap. 2.) says they
maintained fatal destiny. Christ ^aried in Egypt 2. years Epip. lib. 1.
tom. 1. ARCHELAVS king of the Jews succeeded his father Herod^, Euse. li. 1.
cap. 10. Eusebius. chronic* JESUS the son of Sea succeeds Eleazar. Joseph.
Antiq. lib. 17. cap. 19. Our savior tells us in the Gospel Luc. 11. that
they were wholly set upon outward ^e^singe, they washed the utter side of the
cupp, they bragged of their alms, they fasted twice a week, they washed their
hands when they come from the market, before meat. they ^y^hed mynte and re^
their attire was sup^^stitious, they wore ^^^^acteries. Luc. 11. M^^^* 7.
Epiphan. prae^ac. lib* 1. de haeres. Anno. 6. Christ the 6. year after his
birth came out of Aegipt. Joseph hearing that Archelaus did raygne in his
steed feared to go to Israel and went to Galile. Matt. 2. Anno 47. Augusti
Euse. chronic. Archelaus afterward is deposed by Augustus Caesar and
appointed ruler over certain provinces as Idumaea, Iudaea, and Samaria, Eusebius.
lib 1. cap. 10. Joseph. Antiqu. lib. 17. cap. 17. ANANVS otherwise called Annas
was appointed high priest by Cyrenius that was sent by Augustus into Iudaea
after the exile of Archelaus this Cyrenius first deposed Eleazar and
substituted Annas, Joseph. Antiq. lib. 18. cap. 3. belike Eleazar was
afterward admitted and the 2. time deposed. The Scrib^^ were the doctors of
the law^* foolish and superstitious glossers, mayntayners of blind customs
contrary to the truth* Epiphan. de haeres. Anno. 12. Christ being 12. year
old went up with his parents to Jerusalem at the feast of the Passover and was
found disputing among the doctors. Luc. 2. Archelaus last of all is banished by
Augustus (as Eusebius. in chronic. the 9. year of his reign but as Joseph Antiq.
lib. 17. cap. 19. writes the 10. year.) into Vienna a city of France.
ISMAEL the son of Baphus is placed highpriest, and Annas deposed by Valerius
Gra^us who was sent from Caesar into Iudaea. Eusebius. lib. 1. cap. 11. There was
a council of priests gathered together at Jerusalem a little before Christ
revealed him self, to choose a Priest in the rovvme of one that was deseased.
Look how many letters there are in the Hebrew tongue, so many priests there
were in the temple: to were 22. the manner was to register in a certain book
reserved in the temple, the day of the election, the name of the elected, the
name of his father, of his mother, and of his tribe. whilst that they thought
some on one man, some on an other, there stepped forth a priest one of the
multitude, and said: My will is that JESUS the son of Joseph the carpe^ter
be elected priest, who though he be yo^g in yers, yet passes he in vttera^ce
and vvisdome, and manners. I think truly there was never seen in Jerusalem
such a one, both for eloquence, and life, and manners, the which I am sure all
that inhabit Jerusalem do know as well as I. The which was no sooner
spoken, but was allowed of. and the party, I mean Jesus, chosen to be a
priest. They doubt of his tribe, again they were therein resolved. They call
for his parents to register their names. The priest that favored Jesus made
answer that Joseph his father was dead, yet Marie his mother was alive. She
was brought before them, she affirmed that she was his mother, and that Jesus
was her son, but she said moreover that he had no father on earth, that she
was a virgin, and that the holy Ghost had ouershadovved her. They sent for
the midvviues and also for such as had been present at the birth. She was
found to be a virgin, in the end they concluded with one voice that he
should be registered Jesus the son of God, and of Marie the virgin. We
remember moreover Josephus to have said that Jesus sacrificed in the temple
together with the priests. Heerevpon also it fell out that as Jesus entered into
the synagogue of the Jews, the book was delivered unto him where he read of
the prophet Esai: whereby we gather that if Jesus had not been priest among
the Jews* the book vvoulde not have been delivered unto him. Neither is it
permitted amongst us Christians for any to read holy scripture in the open
assembly, unless he be of the clergy. So far Suidas as he learned of a
Jew. Anno. Christi. 15. Anno. 56. August Eusebius. cronic. TIBERIUS succeeded
Augustus Caesar in the empire of Rome. VALERIVS GRATVS was sent from Tiberius
into Iudaea there to be president. and after him Pilate Iosep. Anti. li. 18.
ca. 4. Eusebius. lib. 1. cap. 10. Herod the Tetrarch king of the Jews succeeds
Archelaus. Herod heard of the ^ame of Jesus, yet believed he not in him Math
14. Herod married Herodias the wife of his brother Philip, his brother being
alive. John Baptist reprehended him for it, which cost him his head. Math.
14. Anno. Do. 30. Christ was baptized the 30* year of his age, the 15. of
Tiberius the emperor the 4. of the procuratorship of Pontius P^^ate, Herod
being Tetrarch of Galilee, Philip tetrarch of I^u^aea, Lysanias tetrarch of
Ab^^ene. Iuc. 3. Eusebius. lib. 1. cap. 11. Anno. 15. T^berij. About this time
John the Baptist preached in the wilderness of Iudaea, he pointed at ch^^st with
the ^inger, he baptized Christ in Jordan, he reprehended Herod for marying his
brothers wife, he is beheaded in p^^son by the co^ma^deme^t of Herod Math. 3.
John. 1. Math. 14. Josephus gives of ^^m a notable report. Eusebius. lib. 1. cap.
12. Herod had to wife the daughter of Aretas king of Arabia, the which he
dimissed and married Herodias: for which cause Herod and Aretas warred on
against the other, in the which battle Herodes host was utterly ^oyled as it
was thought, for a plague, for beheadinge John Baptist. Eusebius. lib. 1. cap. 12.
out of Josephus. ELEAZAR the son of Annas not long after was placed by the
same Gra^us and Ismael removed. Eusebius. lib. 1. cap. 11. The Gorthaeans were
^ects celebrating their festival days at other times then the Jews did.
Epiph. prae^ac. lib. 1. de haeresib. VIT^LLIVS the procurator of Sy^^a, is sent
from Tiberius to and Herod against Aretas. Joseph. Antiq* lib. 19. cap. 7. 8
SIMON the son of Camithus the year after was placed, and Eleazar deposed by
the same Gratus. Eusebius. lib. 1. cap. 11. The Sebuaeans were in their ceremonies
contrary to the Jews and to the Gorthaeans. Epip. The Dosithaeans were such as
in diverse ceremonies severed themselves from the Jews* some of them would
marry, yet live and continue virgins, they fasted from al living creatures:
they began of Dosithaeus who showing his folowers an example of fasting
famished him self to death, and thereby proved him self a fool. Epiphan. lib.
1. tom. 1. here is. 13. The Ossaeans after the Etymology of their name, signify
impudent persons, they used other scriptures besides the law, they rejected
the greater part of the later Prophets. Epipha. prae^ac. lib. de here is. Christ
being baptized in the first year of his preaching, was led into the wilderness,
and having fasted 40. days and 40. nights ( Mat. 4.) was seen of John who
pointed at him with the ^inger and said: behold the Lamb of God, the which
when Andrewe heard he followed him. Ioh. 1. The next day the Lord found
Philip and said: follow me. Ioh. 1. The third day there was a marriage in Cana
of Galilee, there Christ wrought the first miracle. Ioh. 2. The Jews
Passover was at hand, then Jesus went up to Jerusalem and threw the b^ers and
sellers out of the temple. Ioh. 2. He came thence into Iudaea. Ioh. 3. He
walked about the seae of Galilee. Luc. 5. He chose 12. Disciples whom he
called Apostles. Math. 10. He appointed also other 70. Luc. 10. Christ went
about the country, preached many Sermons, wrought many miracles. About this
time John Baptist is imprisoned. Haec and alia Anno suae praedicationis primo.
John. Huss. The Mazar^ans were such as used no living creatures, they abhorred
the eating of flesh* they allowed of Moses and of the law written by him, but
they denied that the 5. books under his name were written by him, affirming
them selves to have found other books Epiphan. lib. 1. tom. 1. here is. 18.
Christ in the 2. year of his preaching came to his own contreye. Math. 13.
Herod was desirous to see him. This Herod beheaded John Baptist in prison,
Math. 14. Jesus we^tthe^ce into the wilderness, he also and his disciples went
into the land of Genazareth through Bethsaida, Mat. 14. The Herodians were they
of the Jews which thought that Herod was Christ, and applied unto him the
prophecy of Jacob ( ge^. 49.) the scepter shall not depart from Judah, etc.
which is verified in none other but in

The Acts of Christ and the years of the incarnation. The Counsels sometimes
of the wicked, as of the Pharisees and heretics, sometimes of the godly, as
of the Apostles and Apostolic men. Sects and heretics as well among the
Jews, as afterward among the Christians. He passed through the coasts of
Tire and Sidon. Mathewe. 15. This being done he went up to Jerusalem at the
feast of Pentecost. John. 5. Jesus went away thence and came near unto the sea
of Galilee, from thence he took ship and came to the parts of Magdala. Math.
15. Afterward into Caesarea Philippi. Luc. 9. after 6. days, Math. 17. after
8. days. he transfigured him self in mount Thabor. Luc. 9. Thence he went to
Capernaum. Math. 17. After these things he came from Galilee into Iudaea.
Math. 19. Again he went to Galilee. Ioh. 7. They bid him go out of Galilee for
Herod sought to slay him. Luc. 13. He went up to the feast of Tabernacles
although he told his brethren he vvoulde not. Ioh. 7. he preached many sermons,
he wrought many miracles etc. Haec anno praedicationis suae 2. John Huss. The
Scribes and the Pharisees gathered a council at Jerusalem, and sent from the^
Scribes, Pharisees and Levites, unto John Baptist, to know who, and what he
was. John. 1. Christ. Epiphani. lib. 1. tom. 1. here is. 20. Christ in the 3.
year of his preaching went up to Jerusalem to the feast of dedication, it
was vvinter and he vvalked in the temple in Solomon's porch. John 10. Thence he
went beyond Jordan, afterward he came to Bethania where he raised Lazarus.
Ioh. 10. John Huss. The high priests and Pharisees gathered a council in the
hall of the high priest, to advise them what was best to be done touching the
doings of Christ: if they let him a lone, then feared they lest the Romans
came and took their place and nation: they decreed therein, that whosoever
knew the place of his abode, he should inform them thereof: they decreed
also, that whosoever confessed christ should be excommunicated, they consulted
how they might put Lazarus to death, and how they might take Jesus by
subteltie, and kill him: then Judas went into them, and said: what will ye
give me, and I will deliver him into your hands, and they appointed him 30.
pieces of silver. Ioh. 1^. 12. Math. 26. Judas Gaulonites, and Sadochus a
Pharise mayntained the heresy of the Galilaeans. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 18. cap.
1. In the beginning of the 4002. year of the world the 10. day of the month
March Christ came over Jordan into Bethabara. Ioh. 10. The 11. day hearing of
the disease of Lazarus, he continewed there 2. days. John 11. The 13. day
Lazarus died and Christ took his journey to go and raise him. Ioh. 11. The 14.
day he enters into Jericho, and heals the son of Timaeus. Marc. 10. The
15. day he spends by the way. The 16. day he comes to Bethania, where he
raises Lazarus now 4. days dead. John 11. The 17. day he goes to the
desert into the city of Ephraim. John. 11. The 18. day he contineweth in the
desert. The 19. day being 6. days before the passover, he returns to
Bethania, and suppeth with Lazarus John 12. The 20. day was Palm sunday, so
called because the multitude took branches of Palm trees, and went to meet
Jesus coming to Jerusalem. John 12. That evening he returned to Bethania.
Math. 21. The 21. day coming out of Bethania, he cursed the Fig tree. Math.
21. In the evening he goes out of the city. Marc. 11. The 22. day in the
morning he passes by the withered fig tree. Marc. 11. That night Christ
supped in Bethania in the house of Simon the leper, and 2. days after was the
feast of passover. Mat. 26. Mar. 14. The 23. day Judas couenaunted to betray
him. Luc. 22. The 24. day in the evening Christ celebrated the Jews
passover. Afterward his own called the Lords supper. He vvasheth the
disciples feet: he goes out into Mount Oliuet: he prays, he svveateth
blood: he is taken: he is brought to Caiphas, Peter denies him. Math. 26.
Marc. 14. Luc. 22. John 18. Cytraeus in the 21. cap. Math. John Huss. Simon
Galilaeus taught the heresy of the Galilaeans above mentioned. Eusebius. eccle.
hist. lib. 1. cap. 6. Joseph. bell. Iud. lib. 2. cap. 7.

The Acts of Christ and the years of the Incarnation The reign of the
Emperors. The famous men and sauorers of the truth. the Kings of Iudaea. The
highpriests of the Jews in Jerusalem. The Cou^cells some times of the wicked,
as of the Pharisees and heretics, some times of the godly, is of the Apostles
and Apostolic men. Sects and heretics as well among the Jews, as
afterward among the Christians. Our savior Christ Jesus when he had lived
here on earth, 33. years full and some what more, sust^^ed death for the
salvation of man kind the 25. days of M^h the 18 yer^ o^ the (...) of T(...),
^^n^^us P^^te being presidente of Iudaea, H^^ de the (...) king of the Jews,
(...) i^ highp^^est (...) in ^1. cap. Math. ^^s^b. Chronic. (...) Chronic.
Eusebius. ^^^l. hist li. 1. cap. 11. Anno 18. ^ ^he^^ Eusebius. Chronic. When Christ
was on the cross there stood by, his mother and Marie Cleopas his mothers
sister, and Marie Magdalene and the disciple whom Christ loved. Ioh. 19.
Herod the tetrarch when he had mocked Christ (whom Pilate sent unto him) sent
him back to Pilate again ^uc. 23. CAIPHAS other wise called Joseph was high
priest when Christ suffered next after Simo^ placed by Cratus, Eusebius. lib. 1.
ca. 11. Joseph Antiq: lib. 18. cap. 4. The Scribes Pharisees and elders hearing
that Christ was risen from the dead, gathered a council for to suppress the
rumor thereof, and concluded that a piece of money should be given to the
soldiers for saying that his disciples stole him away by night. Math. 28.
Judas Iscarioth being one of the 12. was the first Apostata that fell from the
truth in Christ, he sold his master for 30. pieces of silver. Math. 26.
P^^A^^ certifieth the emperor Tib^^ius of the doings of Christ his passion
and resurrection. Eseb. (...). hist. li. 2. ^a. 2. JOSEPH of Arimathia who was
a disciple of Jesus but secretly for fear of the Jews came to Pilate and
begged the body of Jesus. Ioh. 19. NICODEMVS also came (who at the first came
to Christ by night Io. 3. and brought precious ointments. Ioh. 19. The holy
Eua^gelists do record Annas and Caiphas to have been highepriests in the
compass of our Saviors preaching and passion, so they might very well be both
placed and displaced and placed again within that time, these 5. Annas Ismael
Eleazar Simon and Caiphas are said to have been within 4. years. The cause of
so great a change of priests was the often alteration of Presidents sent from
the Emperor into Iudaea. Eusebius. lib. 1. ca. 11. Christ ^ose from the d^^d the
3. day being the 27. day of March the sam^ day he showed hi^ self diversely 1.
to Ma^^^ Magdalene 2. to other women 3. to the disciples as they went to Emaus
4. to James 5. to Peter 6 to all the Apostles when the doors were shutt 7. to
mo the^ 500. brethren. Mat. 28. Mar^. 16. Luc. 24. Ioh. 20. 1. Cor. 15. eyghte
days after, that is the 3 of April he appeared unto Thomas afterward he
showed him self at the sea of Tiberias John. 20. 21. Cytreus in 21. cap. Math.
TIBIRIVS would have had Christ to be canonized by the Senate of Rome, in the
catalogue of the Gods: the Senate would not. Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 2 The names
of the 12. Apostles. Mat. 10. Marc. 3. Act. 1. Luc. 6. IONATHAS the son of
Anna succeeds Caiphas by the commandment of Vitellius president of Syria
who deposed Caiphas for his lewdness Joseph Antiq. lib. 18. cap. 8. Forty
days after that is the 5. of May he ascended into the heavens Act. 1. Math.
28. Mar^. 16. ^u^. 24. C^treus in 21. cap. Math. MARCIIIVSIS lent into Iudaea
in the towme of Pilate ( Joseph. Antiq lib. 18. cap. 7.) by Vitellius President
of Syria. 1. Peter called both Simon and Cephas. 2. Andrewe Peter his brother.
3. James the son of Zebedaeus the brother of John the Evangelist. 4. John the
Evangelist the brother of James. 5. Philip of Bethsaida, 6. Bartholomaeus. 7.
Mathewe the son of Alphaeus. Marc. 2. called Leui and a Publicane. 8. Thomas
called Didymus. 9, James the son of Alphaeus called Iustus and Oblias, and
the brother of the Lord, touching whom look Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 23. and the
censure following. 10. Jude the brother of James called Lebbaeus and Thad
daeus. 11. Simon the brother of James and Jude called the Cananite and Zelotes.
12. Judas Is charioth who slew his father, married with his mother and betrayed
his master in the end he hanged himself. Chronic. Al bon.
THEOPHILUS brother to Ionathas is placed high priest and Ionathas removed by
the same Vitellius. Zuinger Theat. hu. vit.

The acts of Christ and the years of the incarnation. The reign of the
Emperors. The Fathers of the Church. The Kings of Iudaea. The High-priestes
of the Jews in Jerusalem. The Counsels. The bishops of Jerusalem. The Bishops
of Antioche. The bishops of Rome. The Bishops of Alexandria. The H^tickes. The
Apostles imme diatly after the ascentio^ of our savior returned sro^ Mount
Oliuet to Jerusalem, and there assembled together for the election of one to
succeed in the rowme of Judas the traitor. where they chose Mathias. Act. 1
JAMES called the brother of Christ, as Cleme^s writes, was immediately after
the assumption of our savior chose^ bishop of Jerusalem, by Peter, James, and
John, the Apostles. Euse. lib. 2. cap. 1. he co^tinewed Bishop of that seae 30.
years. Anto. chron. part. 1. tit. 6. cap. 8. paragr. 1. He was martyred an.
Dom. 63. Eusebius. chron. The Jews, but especially Ananias the highpriest set him
up to preach unto the people. when he had done, they threw him down
headlong, and brayned him with a Fullers clubb. Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 23.
Josephus thought that the destruction of Jerusalem was partly because of the
martyrdom of this James. The Antiochians as Iuke reports were first called
Christians Paul and Barnabas preached there one whole year. Act. 11. Eusib.
eccles. hist. lib. 2. cap. 3 The 15. day of mayhe sent the holy ghost upon the
Apostles, on the day of pentecost. Act. 2. Cytreus in 21 cap. Math. Mathias is
added to the eleven in the rowme of Judas the traitor. Act. 1. Besides these
12. Christ appointed other 70. disciples there names are found in this volu^e
before this Chronography written by Dorotheus. Luc. 10. Seven dea cons are
chosen by the Apostles, Stephan, Philip, Prochorus, Nicanor, Timon, Parmenas,
Nicolas. Act. 6. PETER the Apostle was the first bishop of Antioch. He
continewed there 7. years and 70. there years about Jerusalem and the Eastern
relegio^s Anton. chron. part. 1. tit. 6. cap. 4. parag. 1. Eusebius. eccl. hist.
lib. 3. cap. 1. 4. Ana^ gethe^ Saph^ wife f^ from faith hypo^ and dis(...)
latio^ cons(...) toge^ ^or t^ lude (...) holy (...) in re^ back^ part (...)
sold (...) sion (...) espi^ and a (...) ami^ had (...) the^ fall (...) dea^
dow^ his (...) Act(...) Anno Christi 34. Eus. Chronic. Anno Tiberij 19. Eusebius.
in Chronic. Stepha^ was stoned to death Ac. 7 A council is summoned of the
Apostles and disciples of Christ at Jerusalem for the removing of the tumult
risen between the Grecians and the Hebrews about the conte^ning of their
widows wherein they chose 7. deacons. Act. 6. EVODIVS one of the 70. disciples
whom S. Paul. remembered in his epistles was bishop of Antioch after Peter.
Eusebius. eccles. hist. lib. 3. ca. 19. MARK the Evangelist being the disciple
and interpreter of Peter was the 1. bishop of Alexadria, being at Rome he was
entreated of the brethren to write a go spell. the which when Peter herd of he
allowed and committed the said go spell with his authority to be read in the
church. Mark was not al ways resiant at Alex andria, for he preched also in
the contreyes about. (...) from ^encri unto (...) as he (...) per^ing: (...)
Saul, (...) perse ^t (...) me? (...)9. When Tiberius had ^aigned 23. years he
dyed. Paul is converted to the ^aith. The Eunuche converted by Philip, preached
the Gospel to the Aethiopians his contreyme^ Act 8. Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 1.
Chri Caius Caliguia succeeds, Tiberius Pilate which gave the sentence upon
Christ fell into such misery being acused for his cruelty that he slew
himself in the time of Caius. Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 7. Philo Iudae us flourished
about this time, he is sent in embassy unto Cauis from the Jews in Alexandria
Euse. lib. 2. cap. 5. he came first to Ro^e under Caius. the 2. time under
Claudius. Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 18. Philo wrote a notable book of the Christians
at that time in Egypt called worshipers Eusebius. lib. 2 cap. 16. 17. his own
are to be seen. Euse. lib. 2. ca. 18 HEROD the tetrarche when he had been king
of the Jews 24. years is banished by Caius the Emperor together with his
harlot Herodias. Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 4. into lions a city in France. Eusebius.
Antiq. lib. 18. cap. 14. Chri Euse. ^c. Caius Caligula called himself God.
Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 6. Caius when he had reigned 3. years and 10. monethsis
slain of his guard in his palace Eusebius. li. 2. cap. 8. Eusebius. in chronic. Chri
CLAUDIUS succeeds Caius Caligula: Anno Claudij. 2. AGRIPPA the son of
Aristobulus, nephewe to Herod the great brother to Herodias, by the
commandment of Caius Caligula succeeds Herod the tetrarche king of the
Jews. Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 4. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 18. cap. 11 14. Bell. Iud.
lib. 1. cap. 10. 11. SIMON otherwise called Canthara is by the commandment of
king Agrippa placed highpriest and Ionathas deprived. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 19.
cap. 5. Chr There was a great famine. An 4. Claudij. Philo Iudae us talked at
Rome with Peter the Apostle in the time of Agrippa beheaded James the brother
of John. Act. 12. IONATHAS the son of Anna is now the 44 Anno Christi 46.
Claudius. Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 16. JAMES the brother of John is beheaded Act.
12. Peter came to Rome in the time of Claudius Eusebius. lib. 2 cap. 14. confuted
Simon Magus and preached cap. 16. Agrippa when he had raygned 7. years died
miserably. Eusebius. li. 2. cap. 10. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 19. cap. 7. 2. time
placed and Simon Canthara removed by Agrippa. this Ionathas requested that his
brother Matthias being the worthier and holyer man might enjoy his place
Agrippa was entreated and admitted Matthias. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 19. cap. 6.
The Apostles, elders and brethren gathered a council at Jerusalem. an. 4.
Claudij, to determine what was to be done toutching the doctrine sowed by
certain brethren of the Pharisees which came from Iudaea: affirmi^g that
circumcision was necessary and the observation of the law. this news Paul
Barna bas and Titus brought unto the^. Galat. 2. where they decreed that the
faithful should abstain from things offered to Idols, from blood, from that
that is stra^gled, and from fornication, the which they published by their
letters unto the churches of Antioche, Syria, and Cilicia, with Silas and
Judas, which accompanied Paul and PETER the Apostle. anno Do. 44. and the
second of Claudins came to Rome, and as they say co^tinewed there Bishop 25.
years 12, under Claudius, and 13. under Nero. Ierom. catalog. ec cles. scrip.
Euse. eccle. hist. lib. 2. cap. 14. 16. He foiled Simon Magus in the city of
Rome, and in the presence of Nero. He was crucified at Rome the last year of
Nero, with his head down wards, which kind of death he himself desired not
presuming to have his head upwards, because his master Christ was so handled.
Eusebius. hist. eccle. lib. 2. cap. 25. lib. 3. cap. 1. and in chron. The
Christians under him at Alexandria (as Philo Iudaeus writes) used the like
trade with the^ of whom Luke reported Act. 4. they had al things common Euse.
Eccl. hist. lib. 2. cap. 15. 16. 24. Ierom cata. eccle. script. Dorotheus b. of
Tyrus says that in the time of Traian he had a cable rope tied about his neck^
at Alexan dria by the which he was drawn from the place called Bucolus unto
the place called Angels where he was burned to ashes and buried at Bucolus. but
Philo says it was the first year of Nero. Ierom says it was the 8. year of
Nero. Antoni. chron. part. 1. tit. 6 ca. 16. says it was An. Domi. 57. the 2.
of Nero. Certain Pha^ after they bele^ in Christ, taug^ that circumci^ was
necessary, the observation the law. Act. Gal. 2. 3. 4. 5. Simon Magu^
sorcerer being Samaritane of village Gitto^, baptized by P(...) the Deacon in
maria. He wo^ have bought^ Peter the gy^^ the holy ghos^ him role the (...)
Simonie. Act. 8. seb. lib. 2. cap. 1 came to Rome the time of C(...) us, he
called (...) self a god, h^ honored there (...) a picture haui^^ this
superscrip^ Simoni Deo s(...) he had to his mate one Hel^ whom Irenae calls
Selen, (...) witch and a co^ harlott, whom called the pri^ pall vndersta^^
Eusebius. lib. 2. c^ 13. 14. he said the Samarit^ he was the (...) unto the Iew^
that he was t^ son descer^ from heaven the Gentiles t^ was the holy Irenaeus
lib. 1. 20. Epiphan. (...) tom. 2. here is(...) ter foiled hi^ Samaria, wh^ shame
he fle^ leaving Sam^ Iudaea he sa^ East to Was(...) king to live (...) hearts
ease (...) to Rome vn^ Claudius, wh^ ter also bei^ no doubt b^ holy ghost^ him.
Euse. (...) li. 2. ca. 1. 14. 15. Peter had much to do with him in the
presence of Nero. as Anton. chron. writes he had 3. conflicts with him, in the
end Simon seeing him self foiled and his witchcraft prevailing not at all,
told them he would leave their city and fly up unto the heavens whence he
came. Wherefore upon a certain day appointed, he clymed up into the high
Capitol whence he took his flight by the means of his witchcraft and the
spirits which bore him in the air. the people at the sight hereof were
amazed. But Peter fell down and prayed unto god that his witchcraft might be
reveled unto the world. he had no sooner prayed but down comes Simon Magus
and bruseth him self in pieces so that thereby he died miserably. Abdias
Babylon: Apost. hist. lib. 1. Egesip. lib. 3. cap. 2. Epiphan. lib. tom. 2.
haeres. 21. Anton. chron. part. 1. tit. 6. cap. 4. An. Do. 47 Claudius
commanded all Jews to depart from Rome. Act. 18. because a certain Jew
seduced on Fuluia a noble matron to believe in the ir ceremonies. Joseph Antiq.
lib. 18. cap. 7. Claudius after the dea the of Agrippa mayor sends Cuspius
Fadus live tenant into Iudaea. Joseph. Antiq lib. 19. cap. vlt. It may very
well be that Peter at this time came to Rome, but that he stayed there the full
space of 25. years (as it is reported) I take it for a fable. I read ( Act.
18.) that Agrippa the son of Agrippa mayor called minor by the appointemente
of Claudius succeeds his father in the kingdom over the Jews being of the
age of 17 when his father died. Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 19. Joseph. An tiq. li. 19.
ca. 8 Tiberius A lexader suc cedeth Fadus and Cumanus succedeth Tiberius
Alexander. Anno 9. Claudius gave commandment that all Jews should de part
Rome Peter being a Jew he must needs give place or abide the danger thereof
trouble I find he suffered none his abscence stood him in stead no doubt he
went away when as also the Jews na^^ly Priscilla and Aquila departed Rome and
met Paul at Corinthus. Act. 18. Again Eusebius writes that he suffered
martyrdom at Rome together with Paul, under the Emperor Nero. so it may very
well be, at his second return unto Rome, so that the reader may count so many
years that is 25. from his first coming under Claudius unto the end of his
passion or martyrdo^e under Nero, and thus it were better to reco^cile writers
then statly to deny all or to say he was never at Ro^e ELIONEVS the son of
Githaeus by Agrippa is placed and Matthias deposed Zuinger. Theat. hu. vit.
Simon Canthara again is placed. Zuinger. Joseph the son of Cainus is made
high priest, and Simon Can thara deposed by the commandment of Herod king of
Chalcis brother to Agrippa mayor who received authority of Claudius (during
the nonage of young Agrippa) to consecrate priests. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 20. cap.
1. Ananias the son of Nebedaeus (before whom Paul pleaded in the Act*) is by
the said Herod placed highpriest and Joseph removed. Claudij. Joseph. antiq.
lib. 20. ca. 5 Felix is sent by Claudius into Iudaea after C^^nanus. Antiq.
lib. 20. ca. 9 This Felix tre^bled at the preaching of Paul. Act. 24. Marie the
mother of Christ (as it was reveled unto some says Eusebius. in Chronic.) about
this time departed this life where tell who can. Agrippa mino^herd the
pleadinge of Paul, and Paul thought him self happy that he had license to
plead before him. Act. 26. This Ananias is sent to Rome together with Cumanus
the president to render before Claudius an account of his doings. Joseph. Ant
lib. 20. ca. 1. 5. bell. Iud. lib. 2. cap. 11 Ionathas (whom I suppose now the
3. time to have been placed being highpriest and freely reprehe^ding according
unto his duty is by the commau^deme^t of Felix cruelly and spitefully put to
death. Antiq. lib. 20. cap. 11. Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 20. Barnabas. Act. 15.
Beda. Lyra. Theudas a Sorcerer called him self a Prophet, he made the Jews
believe the river Jordan would divide it self at his commandment, he seduced
many of them and drew many after him. But Fadus Liuetenant of Iudaea met him
unawares with great power, slew many of his company, took many alive. Theudas
him self he beheaded and brought his head to Jerusalem. Act. 5. Eusebius. lib. 2.
cap. 11. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 20. cap. 4. Ananus the highprist was a Saducee.
Eusebius. li. 2. cap. 23. ^o. 56 Claudius when he had been Emperor 13. years
eight months and twenty days died. Eusebius. lib. 2. ca 19. Joseph. Antiq. lib.
20. cap. 10. James. b. of Jerusalem, Paul and the elders summoned a council at
Jerusalem for the removing of the sclaunder bruted by the Jews of Paul, that
he was no obseruer of the law, that he spoke against Moses, wherefore for the
removing of this suspicion, and for the winning of the brethren the council
decreed that Paul should clear him and purify him self according unto the
law yelding a little for a time unto the ceremonies of the law Act. 21 An
Egyptian Sorcerer who called him self a Prophet drew after him unto mount
Oliuet as Josephus says 30. thousand, as Luke writes 4. thousand Jews. Felix
met him with power which ouerthrewe the seduced Jews, took many alive, but the
Sorcerer him self escaped away Act. 21. Eusebius. lib. cap. 21. Joseph. b^ Iud.
lib. 2. cap. 12. Nero succedeth Claudius in the empire o^ Rome. Eusebius. lib. 2.
cap. 19. Anno Christi 58. Euse. Chronic. Nero sent Portius Festus into Iudaea
to succeed Felix two years after. Act. 25. Antiq. lib. 20. cap. 13: Euse. lib
2. cap. 22. Paul comes to Rome now the first time being sent by Festus. And
clears him self, so that he escaped the lions mouth, meaning Nero. Act. 25.
2. Timoth. 4. Eusebius. lib. 2 cap. 22. ISMAEL the son of Siab is created
highepriest by Agrippa minor and being sent as legate unto Nero he is stayed
for a pleadge Iosep. Antiq. lib. 20. cap. 13. and 15. Elimas Bariesus (...)
Jew, being a fa^ prophet and a so^cerer, went abo^^ to pervert and tur^ from
the faith Sergius Paulus the butie. Paul the Apostle reprehe^d him, so that the
sorcerer was sm^ten with blindn^ and the debutie c^uerted of who^ Paul borrowed
(...) name. Act. 13: B^ An. Do. 63 Eusebius. chronic. Festus being dead, and
Albinus co^ing from Rome, Ananus the highpriest in the vacancie of the
liuetenantship martyreth James the brother of Christ bishop of Jerusalem. Eus.
lib. 2. ca. 23 Iose. antiq. lib. 16. James the brother of Christ called the
Just whom the Apostles had placed ouerscer of the faith full at Jerusalem, is
at this time martyred by the Jews, especially by Ananus the highpriest who
being a Saduce as Josephus says was given to cruelty. Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 23.
Joseph. lib. 20 cap. 15. 16. JOSEPHUS called Gaddis is placed high priest in
Ismaels rowme by Agrippa minor Antiq. lib. 20. cap. 15 Ananus the son of
Ananus is by Agrippa placed and Joseph displaced. This Ananus stoned James the
brother of Christbishop of Jerusalem, wherefore when he had been priest 3.
months, he is by the same Agrippa deprived. Antiq lib. 20. cap. 15 16. Eusebius.
lib. 2. cap. 23. Jesus the son of Dannaeus is chose^ highpriest. Antiq. lib.
20. cap. 16. Alexander the (...)per smith beca^ an Apostata and sisted the
prea^ of the word of God. 1. Timoth. 2. Timoth. 4. An. Dom. 66. ^LORVS
succeeds Albinus, a cruel liuetena^t unto the Jews. Euse. lib. 2. cap. 26.
Joseph. antiq. lib. 20. cap. 17. Jesus the son of Gamaliel is placed
highepriest by Agrippa and Jesus Dannaeus deposed Antiq. lib. 20 cap. 16. After
the death of James, the Apostles from every where gathered the^ selves together
at Jerusalem for the election of a Bishop, and they chose Simeon Cleopas.
Eusebius. lib. 3. ca. 11 SIMEON CLEOPAS the lords cosingermane one of the 70.
disciples and which saw Christ with his eyes, was the second Bishop of
Jerusalem, being chosen of the Apostles them selves to succeed James. This
Simeon was crucified in the time of the emperor Anianus was b. of Alexandria
after Mark where he co^tinewed 22. years. Eusebius. eccl. hist. lib. 3. cap. 13.
and in chronic. Hymenaeus and T(...)letus said that resurrection we already
past. 2. (...) moth. 2. Anno. Dom. 68. Neronis an. 12. Flori praesidis 2.
Iosep. antiq. lib. 20. cap. 18. the wars between the Romans and the Jews
began. Anno Agrippae. 17. Joseph. Bell. Iud. lib. 2. cap. 13. MATTHIAS the
son of Theophilus is chosen and Jesus the son of Gamaliel deposed by
Agrippa in the time of this Mathias the wars between the Romans and the
Jews began. Joseph. Antiq lib. 20. ca. 17. Traian. An Dom. 110. being a
hundred and twenty year old Eusebius. eccl. hist. lib. 3. cap. 11. 19. 29. and
in Chronic. Demas became Apostata, for^ Paul and fell (...) the world. 2.
(...) moth. 2. An Do. 70 Eusebius. Chr Nero sent Vespasia and his son Titus into
Iudaea. who plagued the Jews. Joseph. bell. Iud. lib. 3. cap. 1. Paul at his
second coming to Rome was beheaded the last year of Nero. Euse lib. 2. cap.
25. lib. 3. ca 1. Epiphan. says 12. an. Neron. Agrippa entertained Vespasian
in the time of the wars at Tiberias Joseph. Bell. Iud. lib. 3. cap. 16. The
canons of the Apostles agreed upon as they say by them in a certain assembly
were published by Clemens afterward b. of Rome the perfect number of them is
no where sound some receive them and some other reject them as invented and
forged by heretics. Council. tom. 1. IGNATIUS the disciple of John, was the
third bishop of Antioche. He wrote, as they say unto Mary the mother of
Christ, and Marie unto hi^ again, he wrote unto John the Evangelist, and to
Polycarpus his disciple. besides he wrote sundry other notable epistles which
are exta^t both in Greek and Latin. Last of all in the eleue^th year of the
Emperor Traian, an. Dom. 111. He was brought to Rome and torn in pieces of
wild beasts Eusebius. eccles. hist. lib. 3. ca. 19 32. and in chronic. Tritem.
Linus one of the 70. disciples of whom S. Paul made mention, succeeded Peter
in the Bishops seae of Rome, where he continewed Bishop 12. years. Eusebius.
eccl. hist. lib. 3. cap. 2. 13. 19. and in chronic. Phygellus, and Hermogenes
forsook Paul and made shipwreck of their faith. 2. Timoth. 1. Abdias
Babilonius says, that Philetus and Hermogeues said that Jesus was not the
son of God. Nero when he had reigned 13. years and 8. days died. Euse. lib.
3. cap. 5. ^s^. bell. Iud. lib. 5. cap. 6 Peter was crucified at Rome the last
year of Nero with his head downwards, which kid of death himself desired
lib. 2. cap. 25. lib. 3. ca 1. Epiphan says 12. an. Neron. About this time
Iosep. a Jew flourished, one that first rebelled against the Romans together
with his contreyme^ he is taken by Vespasian and committed to Titus his son
with whom he grew in (...) ^^edit. bell. Iud Agrippa is sent to Rome by
Vespasian to Galba the Emperor, he went also to Otho. Iosep. Bell. Iud lib. 5.
cap. 6 Nicolas one of the 7. deacons is by S. John abhorred. Apocal. 2. He was
accused of Jealousy over his wife, and to clear him self of this crime, he
brought forth his wife and bid marie her who would. This fact of his is
excused by Eusebius. His followers by occasion here of do practice their
wandering lust without respect of wife or maid Eusebius. ecclesi. hist. lib. 3.
cap. 26. GAIBA succeeded Nero, this Gaiba raygned but 7 months and 7. days,
but he was beheaded at Rome. Eusebius. lib. 3 cap. 5. Iose. bell. Iud. lib 5. cap.
6. Euse. chro. Otho succeeded Galba this Otho co^tinewed but 3. moneth^ and he
was slain. Joseph. bell. Iud. lib 5. cap. 6. Euse chronic. Vitellius succeeded
Otho, this Vitellius was Emperor but 8. months and he was (...) (...). be^l
I^^ lib. 5. PHANES the son of Samuel of the village Apathasis of the t^^be
Eniachim a contreye

Anno Domini. The reign of the Emperors. The Fathers of the Church. The
Kings of Iudaea. The Highpriests of the Jews in Jerusalem. cap. 6. Eusebius.
chronic. lib. 5. cap. 12. he exhorted his own contreymen to yield unto the
Romans with many orations he gave a notable testimony of Jesus of John
baptist. He attributed the cause of the destruction of Jerusalem to have been
for the death of James. He was present in the wars. He wrote the wars and
came to Rome in the time of Titus, and Vaspasian, showed them his books they
were commended of Titus, Vespasian and Agrippa they were chayned in the library
and he him self honored with a picture. Eusebius. lib. 1. cap. 12. lib. 2. cap.
23. lib. 3. cap. 9. 10. fellow is taken from the carte, and arrayed in priestly
attire, as it were a stage player, and by lot chosen highpriest, he knew
nothing that belo^ged thereunto. The seditious persons called Zelotae (as
though they were zealous for that which good was) chose him as an instrument
for their practices in those troublesome times. Joseph. bell. Iud. lib. 4. cap.
5. An. Do. 72 Eusebius. chronic. VESPASIANVS (after the death of Vitellius) being
general captain against the Jews, is proclaimed Emperor, he leaves
Iudaea, co^mittinge the wars unto his son Titus. Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 5.
Agrippa saw the books which Josephus wrote of the wars of the Jews, and
commended them. Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 10. Josephus says this Agrippa was a good
man, he was learned, he wrote 62. epistles. Eufeb. lib. 3. cap. 10. Joseph. bell.
Iud. li. 2. ca. 17. From Aaron which was the first highpriest unto the last at
the overthrow and burning of the temple under Titus, there were 83. highpriests.
Joseph. Antiq. lib. 20. cap. vlt. An. Do. 73 fortye years just after the
passion of Christ Eusebius. chronic. Jerusalem was destroyed the 2. year of the
reign of the Emperor Vespasian the 8. day of Septembre as Joseph. writes
bell. Iud. lib. 7. cap. 18. and Eusebius. eccles. hist. lib. 3. cap. 7. whereby
we we gather that although God vvinked a long while at their sin and
iniquity, yet at length he paid them home for the villainy they practiced
against his son in putting him to death, for persecuting and stoning and
martyringe and murdering of his Apostles, Disciples, Saints, and such as
served him. before his passion he beheld Jerusalem and wept over it and said
that there should not one stone be left upon an other, that should not be
destroyed. the signs prognosticatinge the destruction thereof, thou may see
gentle reader in the Evangelists and in Eusebius. eccle. hist. li. 3. cap. 7. 8.
alleged partly out of the Gospel, and partly also out of Josephus a Jew
who was present at the vvarres. all which signs were in number many, and
in shevve most terrible and dreadful, yet the Jews had not the grace to
repent. Wherefore the lamentable overthrow, the utter ruin, the ransacking
of the city, the burning of the temple, the profaning of the sacred
scriptures, the slaughter of the Priests, the dissension of the people, the
death of all and the famine worse then death it self, thou may revve, and
read with vvett cheeks and vvatrish eyes laid down at large by Josephus
and Eusebius eccle. hist. lib. 3. cap. 5. 6. 7. 8. etc. Now therefore the
temple being spoiled and overthrown their highpriestes ceased the country
also being subdued and ouerrunne, their Kings failed, as many Jews as were
left were dispersed. Their wickedness no doubt has deserved that from the
passion of Christ unto this day the name of a Jew is become very odious. The
Heretics. Vespasian the Emperor after the overthrow of Jerusalem,
commanded that all such as were of the line of David, should diligently be
sought out. He raygned 10. years, and dyed of a laske in the 69. year of his
age. Eusebius. lib. 3. ca. 12. 13. Eutrop. lib. 7. Eusebius. chronic. D^ONYSIVS
AREOPAGITA was by S. Paul placed bishop of Athe^s. There are extant sundry
works under his name, but suspected not to be his and sundry epistles, of the
which one to John the Euangeliste being in the Isle Patmos, an other unto
Polycarpus he was martyred as Tritemius writes Anno. Dom. 96. Act. 17. Euse.
lib. 3. cap. 4. lib. 4. cap. 22. Cerinthus or Merinthus being a Jew, taught
throughout Asia wicked doctrine, he preached circumcision: he taught that the
prophets and the law was given by Angels, and that the world was made by
them. Cerinthus moreover said, that Jesus was not borne of a virgin, which was
impossible, but of Marie and Joseph. that Jesus was not Christ, but that Christ
came upon him in the form of a Dove. that Jesus suffered and rose again but
not Christ. For Christ said he, did fly away from him before his passion.
Epiph. haeres. 28. Irenaeus lib. 1. cap. 25. He dreamed that the kingdom o^
Christ should become earthly, that after the resurrection Christ should raygne
oue^ us here on earth one thousand years. H^ lusted after the satisfying of
the belly, an (...) the things under the belly, with meat, drink, marriage.
John the Apostle is said to have abhorred the presence of Cerinthus. Eusebius.
lib. 3. cap. 25. lib. 4. cap. 14. lib. 7. cap. 24. Epipha. haeres. 51. says
that certain heretics called Alogoi, affirmed Cerinthus to have been the
author of the revelation.

Anno Domini. The raygne of the Emperors. The Fathers of the Church. The
Cou^cells. The bishops of Jerusalem. The Bishops of Antioche. The Bishops of
Rome. The Bishops of Alexandria. The Heretics. 81. Titus the son of
Vespasian succeeded his father in the empire, he reigned 2. years and 2.
months, and died the 42. year of his age, leaving his brother Domitian to
succeed. Eusebius. li. 3. cap. 13. and in chro. Europ. lib. 7. JOSEPH of Arimathra
together with his companions came into England, and there preached. Polydor.
lib. 2. 3. Anacletus was b. of Ro^e after Linus in the 2. year of Titus the
Emperor. Anno Domi. 81. he continewed there 12. years. Eu seb. lib. 3. cap.
13. 14. 19. and in chronic. There be so^e which next unto Linus do place
Clemens and so Cletus, the^ Anacletus, some other before Clemens do place
Cletus, but we following the ancient writers next unto the Apostles, to wete
Irenaeus, Euse bius, Epiphanius do place the^ thus: Peter. Linus. Anacletus.
Clemens. yet Epipha nius calls this Anacletus Cletus. Menander a sorcerer and
the disciple of Simon Magus, a Samaritane, said that he was the great power of
God come down from heaven, that the world was made by Angels, he called him
self a Savior, he said salvation was to be purchased by his baptism and that
such as were therewith baptized should never die, no not in this world. Eusebius.
lib. 3. cap. 23 Irenaeus lib. 1. cap. 21. Epiphan. haeres. 22. Saturninus of
Antioch call led also Saturnilius, budded out of Menander, and preached
throughout Syria in manner the like doctrine as Menander did before him. he said
moreover that marriage and procreation was of the devil. Ireneus lib. 1. cap.
22. Euse. lib. 4. cap. 6. 83. Domitian the son of Vespasian succeeded Titus.
he was the second after Nero which persecuted the Christians he exiled ma ny
noble per sonages, in the end he was slain in his palace, and after his
death ignominiously used, when that he had reigned 15. years. Eusebius. lib. 3.
cap. 13. 15. 16. 17. 18 Eutrop. lib. 7. JOHN the Euangehst preached in Asia, he
was banished into the Isle Patmos in the time of Domitian, where he wrote his
Revelation. In the first year of Nerua he returned from Patmos, and dwelt
again at Ephesus. He ruled the churches of Asia after the death of Domitian.
Euse. lib. 3. ca. 16. 18. Iren^us lib. 2. cap. 39. lib. 3. cap. 3. Of him is
reported a notable history in Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 20. John saw the three
Gospells of the Evangelists published and allowed of them. afterward wrote his
own to the consutation of Cerinthus, Menander, and Ebion the heretics. Eusebius.
lib. 3. cap. 21. Abdias says, he was thrown into a tun of hot scalding
oil, yet took no harm, Jerome says he dyed the 68. year after the passion
of Christ. anno Dom. 99. Dorotheus says he went alive into his grave, and
there dyed being 120. year old. Clemens was b. of Rome af ter Anacletus in
the 12. yea re of Domitia^ Anno Domini 93. he wrote from Rome a worthy epi stle
unto the Corinthians the which was used to be read in the church he was thought
to have translated the epistle unto the Hebrews from hebrew in to the grek
tongue, there is fathered upon him an other epistle with certain dialogues tou
tching Peter and Ap pion. he go uerned the church 9. years. Eusebius. lib. 3.
cap. 14. 19. 31. 33. Abilius was b. of Alexandria after Anianus in the 4. year
of Domitian Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 13. Basilides where of Basilidia ni agree in
diverse points with Simon, Menander, and Saturninus, he blased through oughout
Egypt that there were 365. heavens, he said that Simon of Cyren suffered in
stead of Christ and not Christ him self, that Christ taking the form of
Simon laughed them to scorn. Irenaeus lib. 1. cap. 23. Epiphan. haeres. 24.
Basilides the heretic wrote 24. books upon the Gospel. he feigned unto him
self Prophets whom he called Barcabus and Barcoph. he taught that things
offered to Idols might indifferently be eaten. that in the time of persecution
faith with perjury may be renounced. He commanded silence unto his scholars
for the space of 5. years, after the ma ner of Pythagoras. Eusebius. lib. 4. cap.
7. 93. AGRIPPA CASTOR confuted Basilides the heretic. Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 7.
Certain kynsmen of Christ according unto the flesh, re^dered an account of
their faith before Domitian the Emperor, he despised the^ because they were
simple. They depart thence and afterward govern churches, and became
Martyrs. Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 17 FLAVIA DOMICILLA a noble gentlewoman, was
banished into the Isle Pontia, in the 15. year of Domitian, for that she was a
Christian. Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 17. Corpocrates as Irenaeus lib. 1. ca. 24.
writes, lived in the time of Saturninus and Basilides. he gloried of charmed
love drinks, of deuelishe dreams, of associat spirits. Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 7.
Carpocrates patched his opinions out of Simon, Menander, Nicolas, Saturninus,
Basilides, Besides the wicked doctrine of these heretics which he
maintained, he worshipped, as Epiphanius says, the images of Jesus, of Paul,
Pythagoras, Pla to, Aristotle, etc. he denied that the body should be saved.
Epiph. haere. 27. August. li. de her. Ebion of whom the Ebionits are called,
affirmed Christ to be but a bare man borne of Joseph and Marie, he thought that
faith only did not justify, he affirmed the corporal observation of the law
to be necessary. he denied the epistles of Paul, accusing him that he fell from
the law. The Jewish sabbath and other ceremonies he observed together with the
Jews, only the Sunday he celebrated as we do in remembrance of the
resurrection Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 24. Epiphanius says haeres. 30. that John the
Evangelist hearing that Eb: n was in the bath resrained his company. Abdias b.
of Babylon says that Philip the Apostle overthrew this heresy of Ebion at
Hierapolis. 99. Nerua succede^^ Domitian in the empire. in whose time the
Roman senate decreed that the honors exhibited un to Domitian should cease.
that such as were exiled should return unto their native soil and rece ue
their substance. he taigned one year and 4. months and d^^d the 72. year of
his age. Eusebius. h. 3. cap. 18. Eutrop. lib. 8. POLYCARPVS b. of Smyrna, was
placed there by such as saw the Lord, he was the disciple of S. John. he saw
Cerinthus and Marcion the heretics. he came to Rome in the time of Anicetus,
and questioned with him toutching the feast of Easter. this Polycarpus being
old, was seen of Iren ^us being yo^g. In the end being 80. year old, he
was burned to ashes in the 7. year o^ Verus the Emperor. ann. Dom. 170.
Eusebius. lib. 3. cap 32. lib. 4. ca. 14 15. lib. 5. cap. 23. and in chronic. There
were 2. synods su^moned in Asia for the resormation of the Churches and
consecration of Bishops where John the Evangelist being sent for was present.
Euse. li. 3. ca. 20. Sima^^^^ a tra^slator of the old testament from the
Hebrewe into the Greek, was an Eb^nite. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 16. Gnostici, were
heretics which with swelling pride that they knew all things, so termed
themselves. Some call them Barborits for their beastly life. some write that
they budded out of the Ni^olaits: some other that they sprung out of
Carpocrates Epiphanius says that the Valentinians called them selves
Gnostici. all women among the^ are common. their sacrifices were too too
beastly, as Epiphanius writes, they abhorred fasting, saying it was of the
deuell. They said Christ was not borne of Marie, but revealed by Marie. that
he took not flesh in deed, but according unto appeara^ce. Epiphan. haeres. 26
100. ^aia nucceeded Nerua in the empire under hi was the third persecution of
the primitive Church yet at the report of Plini (...) Secundus he ceased from
persecuting of the Christians which proved them selves to be innocent, he
raygned 19. years and six months, the^ died of a lask being 63. year old.
Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 18. 29. 30. lib. 4. cap. 3. PAPIAS b. of Hicrapolis, a man
passinge eloquent and expert in the scriptures. he was the auditor of John the
Apostle the companion of Polycar pus. He wrote five books entitled the
expositions of the Lords sermons. Euarestus succeeded Clemens in the 3. year
of Traian. Anno Dom. 102. he was b. of Rome 8. years. Eusebius. lib. 3. cap 31.
lib. 4 cap. 1. Cerdo was b. of Alexandria after Abilius in the first year of
Traian, where he continewed 13. years. Eusebius. lib. 3. ca. 18 110. Eusebius. lib.
3. ca. 32 35. Of the Church of Jerusalem. Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 29. writes that
unto this time she was called a pure and an uncorrupted virgin. for as yet
being Anno Dom. 110. there was no false doctrine sown there. lib. 4. cap. 21.
PRIMVS was b. of Alexandria about the 12. year of Traian. after Cerdo. where
he continewed 12. years. Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 1 4. Papias b. of Hierapolis was
a Chiliast. Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 35. 119. AELIVS Adrianus succeeded Trai^ in the
empire he besieged and conquered Jerusalem in the 18. year of his reign, so
that after his name Jerusalem was called Aelia. He wrote unto Minutius ^undanu^
proconsul of Asia, at the request of Serenius Granianus in the behalf of the
Christians, He raygned 21. years, and the^ dyed being above three score year
old. Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 3. 6. 9. 10. and in chronic. Iustus a Jew was b. of
Jerusalem after Simeon. Euse. lib. 3. cap. 32. Zachaeus. Tobias. Heroes was b.
of Antioch after Ignatius about the eleventh year of Traia^. Eusebius. lib. 3.
cap. 32. ALEXANDER was b. of Rome after Euarestus ann. Dom. 111. where he
co^tinewed 10. years, and died the third year of Adrian the Emperor. Euse.
lib. 4. cap. 1. 4. Thebulis anno Dom. 110. was the first heretic in the
church of Jerusalem. he fell from the faith, because they would not choose him
bishop after Simeon. Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 21. Ophitae were heretics which
worshipped the serpent, and thought that the serpent which deceived Adam and
Eve was Christ: they ^sted a live serpent, which with openinge of the chest
and charming of the priest came forth, licked the bread upon the altar,
wrapped it self about it. their manner was to kiss the bread, and so to eat,
beleeuinge verily that the serpent had consecrated it. They defended the^
selves that the Nicolaits and Gnostici delivered the^ this service. Epipha.
haeres. 37. August. de haeres. 121. Quadratus one endued with the gift of
prophecy wrote an Apology in the defense of the Christian faith unto Adrian the
Emperor. Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 33. lib. 4. cap. 3. Aristeides an Athenian
Philosopher dedicated likewise an Apology unto the said Emperor. Eusebius. lib.
4. ca. 3. and in Chronic. AEgesippus lived under Adrian. he wrote of the siege
of Jerusalem, co^prising the ecclesiastical history from the Apostles unto
his time. Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 8. there is a counterfeit volume of 5. books
under his name, the translator whereof they say S. Ambrose was, nay it is liker
that Ambrose him self was the author. Benjamin. John in the 19. and last
year of Traian. Epiphan. haeres. 66. Mathias. Philip. Sennecas. Iustus. 2.
Leui. Ephrem. Xystus was b. of Rome after Alexander about the 3. year of
Adrian. Anno Domini 121. he was b. ten years and di^d the 12. year of the
said Emperor Eusebius. li. 4. cap. 4. 5. Iustus was b. of Alexandria after
Primus, where he co^tinewed 11. years. Euse. lib. 4. cap. 4. 5. Nazaraei were
Jews which believed inchrist and so called them selves of Nazareth. they
contraried the Jews in that they confessed Jesus Christ to be the son of
God. they erred in Christian religion, for that they addicted them selves wholly
to the observation of the whole law, Epiphan. haeres. 29. Joseph. Judas
continewed unto the 11. year of Antoninus. Epiphan. hae^es. 66. Cornelius was
b. of Antioche after Heroes Eusebius. li. 4. cap. 19. about the 12. year of
Adrian. Egesippus says of him self that he came to Ro^e in the time of
Anicetus and continewed there unto the time of Eleutherius. Anno Domi. 179
Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 11. From the passion of our Savior unto the 18. year of
the Emperor Adrian, there were 15. Bishops in the Church of Jerusalem, all
Jews. in the which year after the utter overthrow the siege and conquering of
the city under the said Aelius Adrianus, Jerusalem was called Aelia, after his
name, and began to be inhabited of strange nations. Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 5.
6. Cayni were heretics which honored Cayn and took him for their father,
they highely esteemed of Esau, Chore, Dathan, Abyram, with the Sodomits. they
called Judas the traitor their cousin honoring him for betrayinge of Christ
affirminge that he forsawe how great a benefitt it would become unto mankind.
They read a certain Gospel written as they said by Judas, they reviled the
law and denied the resurrection: Epiphan haeres. 38. August. de haeres. 130.
Justinius Martyr lived under Adrian. he wrote an Apology unto Adrian and to
Antoninus Pius Emperors. he wrote also against Marcion which lived at that
time, he was martyred under Verus the Emperor. Euse lib. 4. cap. 8. 11. 12 16.
but as Epiphan haeres. 46. writes it was under Adrian. Marcus of the gentiles
the first b. of Jerusalem. Eusebius. lib. 4 cap. 6. lib. 5 cap. 11. Telesphorus
succeeded Xystus in the seae of Rome, ann. Dom. 130. where he continewed 11.
years. Eusebius: lib. 4. cap. 5. 10. Eumenes was b. of Alexandria after Iustus
and co^tinewed there 13 years, Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 5. 11. Sethiani were
heretics deriuing their pedegrewe of Seth the son of Ada^, whom they
honored and called Christ and Jesus that in the beginning of the world he was
called Seth but in the later days Christ Jesus. Epiphan. (haeres. 39.) says
that he disputed with some of the^ in Egypt and that the last of them were in
his time. August. lib. de haeres. 140. Anno 18. Adriani. Meliton b. of Sardis
flourished about this time he dedicated an Apology unto the Emperor Verus in
the behalf of the christians, he wrote many notable tracts. Euse. eccl. hist.
lib. 4. cap. 13 25. Cassianus. Marcion of Pontus increased the doctrine of
Cerdon, he lived in the time of Justinius Martyr, which wrote a book against
him. he met Polycarpus and asked of him: know thou us? Polycarpus answered:
I know thee for the first begotten of Satan. Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 11. 14. He
said the soul only should be saved, and not the body. He thought that Cain
with the Sodomites and Egyptians, etc. were saved when Christ went down to
hell. Irenaeus lib. 1. cap. 29. Epiph. haeres. 42. writes of him that he was a
bishops son, who when he had destoured a virgin, was by his own father
excommunicated the church, and afterward he ^led to Rome. Being there,
because they admitted him not into the church, he began to preach detestable
doctrine: that there were three beginnings, good, just, and evil. that the new
testament was contrary to the old. he denied theresurrectio^ of the body. 141.
Antoninus Pius succeeded Adrianus in the empire he wrote unto the commons of
Asia in the behalf of the Christians, he reigned 22 years and odd months.
Philippus b. of Gortina was famous and wrote against Marcion the heretic. Euse.
lib. 4. ca. 24 Hyginius was b. of Rome after telesphorus in the first year of
Antoninus Pius. Anno Dom. 141. where he continewed 4. year. Eusebius. lib. 4.
cap. 10. 11. Pius was b. of Rome after Hyginus anno Dom. 144. and continewed
15. years. Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 11. Anicetus was b. of Rome after Pius An. Dom.
159. he had conference with Egesippus which came thither to him. He governed the
church 11. years and dyed the 8. year of Verus Eusebius. lib. 4 cap. 11. 19.
Marcus was b. of Alexandria after Eumenes, he governed the Church 10 years.
Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 11. Barchochebas a captain of the Jews, alluding unto his
name, affirmed that he was the light or a star come down from heaven, to
comfort the Jews. He led the^ to rebellion, so that (as Dion Cass in Adriano
writes) there were slain of them above fifty thousand Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 6.
Cerdon gatte him from Syria to Rome when Hyginus was b. there, and taught that
God preached of the law and prophets, was not the father of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Moreover he said that Christ was known, the father of Christ
unknown. he denied the resurrection and the old testament. Eusebius. lib. 4.
cap. 10. 11. Epiphan. haeres. 41. Publius. Celadion b. of Alexandria after
Marcus and continewed. 14. years. Eusebius. li. 4. cap. 11 19. Valentinus was
openly known at Rome in the time of Hyginus, he lived under Pius, and
co^tinewed unto Anicetus. Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 10. 11. Irenaeus confuted this
heresy at large. Epiphanius says that Valentinus thought Christ to have
brought a body down from heaven, and to have passed through the virgin
Marie, as through a conduyte. haeres. 31. Marcellina was of Carpocrates
opinion, and lived at Rome in the time of Anicetus. she worshipped and offered
incense unto the images of Jesus and Paul, etc. August. lib. de haeres.
Epiphan. haeres. 27. 144. Maximus. Montanus whereof the Montanists are called,
taught in Phrygia, hereof it is that the heresy is called Phrygian. Epiphan.
says it begannne about the 19. year of Antoninus Pius which succeeded
Adrian. This Montanus was taken in Phrygia for the holy Ghost, Priscilla and
Maximilla his women for Prophetisses. He forbad mariadge and commanded
abstinence from certain meats as unlawful. In the end Montanus and Maximilla
hanged themselves. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. The Montanists
otherwise callled Cataphrygians pricked a boy with bodkins drew the blood out
of his body soked therein the bread, and made a sacrament thereof, if the boy
dyed he was counted a martyr, if other wise a great priest. Epiphan. haeres.
48. August. lib. de haeres. Modestus wrote against Marcion. Eusebius. lib. 4. cap.
24. Iulianus unto the 10. year of Antoninus Pius Epiphan. haeres 66. Secundiani
of Secundus, together with Epiphanes and Isidorus taught the like with
Valentinus, in life they were beastly, all women among them were common, they
denied the resurrection of the flesh. Epiphan haeres. 32. 163. Marcus
Antoninus Verus was chose^ Emperor after Pius. He persecuted the church of
God, and raygned 19. years. Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 14. 15 lib 5. cap. 9.
Appollinarius wrote unto Verus the Emperor and against the heresy of
Montanus, which then began to bud in Phrygia. Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 20. lib. 5.
cap. 14. 15. Dionysius b. of Corinth, Pinytus b. of Creta were famous about
this time. lib. 4. cap. 20. There was a synod at Ancyra in Galatia gathered
together of the faithful where the sigme^ts of Montanus were confuted by
Apollinarius. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 14. Caius whom Epiphanius haeres. 66. does
call Gratianus. Ptolomaeus of whom Ptolomai are called, taught the heretical
opinions of the Gnostici, and of Valentinus, addinge thereunto of his own
certain heathenish doctrine out of Homer: he wrote unto Flora a woman of his
faith, and endeavored to pervert her. Epiph. haeres. 33. Musanus the^ flourished
and wrote against the Encratits which then newly spra^g, the author of which
heresy was Tatianus. Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 26. Germanicus martyred and torn in
pieces of wild beasts. Symachus 167. Metrodorus and Pionius burned. Caius 2.
unto the 8. year of Verus Epiphan. haeres 66. Theophilus was b. of Antioche
after Cornelius. He wrote of eleme^tal institutio^s and dedicated them unto
Autolycus. also against the heresy of Hermogenes and Marcio^. Eusebius. lib. 4.
cap. 19. 23. about the 8. year of Marc. Antoninus. Agrippas b. of Alexandria
about the 8. year of Verus where he governed 12. years Eusebius. li. 4. ca. 19.
li. 5. ca. 9. Iulianus 2. Soter was b. of Rome after Anicetus anno Dom. 167.
and continewed 8. years. Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 19. li. 5 in proem. Carpus, Papy
lus and Agathonica a woman martyred, also Ptolomaeus and Lucius. Eusebius. li. 4.
cap. 14. 15. 16. Capito. Marcus of whom Mar^o^ij, Colorbasus of whom
Colorbasij, and Heracleon after whom the heretics are called Heracleonits,
sacrificed with witchcrafte, to amaze their auditorie they pronounced Hebrew
words: they said unto the women, open your mouths and prophecy through the
power which comes from us: many women came to the church, and under color
of prophecy confessed that they were abused of them: Marcus ran away with
an other man's wise: they pour oil and water upon the head of the departed,
hopinge so to redeem them: they said that the life and generation of man
consisted in 7. stars, that Christ suffered not in deed, but was so thought,
and that there was no resurrection of the flesh. Epiphan. haeres. 34. 35. 36.
Irenaeus. Aug. li. de haeres. Alcibiades refrayned the use of Gods creatures he
is reformed by Atalus the martyr. Euse. li. 5. cap. 3. Bardesanes of
Mesopotamia wrote in the Syrian tongue against Marcion. Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 28.
Maximus unto the 16. year of Verus. Epipha^. haeres. 66. Archontici were
heretics in Palaestina which referred the creation of all things unto many
powers. they said that the saboth was the God of the Jews, and that the deuell
was the son of the sabbath. Epiphan. haeres. 40. August. lib. de haeres. 179.
Anno 17. of Verus the Emperor. Vegetius Epa gathus marty red. Sanctus a Deacon
beheaded. Maturus beheaded Atalus fried to death Blandina a woman after sundry
torments beheaded. Biblis a woman pitiously handeled. Pothinus b. of Lions
dies in prison. Alexander torn in pieces of wild beasts. Ponticus of 15.
year old martired. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 1. The brethren in France assemble
together, and lay down their censure toutchinge the opinions of Montanus,
writing unto Eleutherius b. of Rome that he would maintain the peace of the
church against such heretics. Eusebius. lib. 5 cap. 3. Antoninus Maximinus was
b. of Antioch after Theophilus. Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 23. Eleutherius was b. of
Romeafter Soter in the 17. year of Verus the Emperor ann. Dom. 178. where he
continewed 13. years. Eusebius. lib. 5. in proem. and cap. 20. Irenaeus was a
Chiliast. Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 35. Irenaeus was b. of Lions in France after the
martyrdom of Pothinus. in his youth he saw Polycarpus the disciple of S.
John. He was at Rome with Eleutherius he endeavored to confute Blastus and
Florinus the schismatikes and to appease the s^hisme raised at Rome he sharply
reprehended Victor b. of Rome for ex communicating the churches of Asia. Eus^b.
lib. 5. ca. 4. 5. 18. 23. There were held in Asia sun dry synods in the which
Mo^tanus was excommunicated and his heresy condemned. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 14.
Valens. Toutching the purity of the church of Rome, Egesippus reporting of
himself says thus. When I came to Rome, I stayed there until that Anicetus
was chose^ bishop, whose Deacon was Eleutherius, whom Soter succeeded and
after him Eleutherius. In all their successions and in every one of their
cities, it is no otherwise then the law and the prophets and the Lord himself
preached. Eusebius. li. 4. cap. 21. Irenaeus also having laid down those 12.
aforesaid bishops of Rome concludes thus: now Eleutherius was the 12. bishop
from the Apostles, after the sam order, the same doctrine and tradition of the
Apostles truly taughtin the church at this day continewed unto our time.
Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 6. Encratits were heretics after the etymology of their
name co^tinent. The author of their heresy was Tatianus of Mesopotamia the
disciple of Justinius Martyr. He abhorred mariadge, he forbadde the use of
living creatures, he offered water in steed of wine in the Sacrament. he
denied that Adam was saved. The Encratits prevailed in Pisidia and Phrygia.
Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 27. Epiphan. haeres. 46. 47. Dolychianus unto the time of
Comodus Epiphan. haeres. 66. Seuerus an Encratite, of whom Seueriani,
maintained the opinions of Tatianus, addinge thereunto of his own, reuiling
Paul, rejecting ^ his epistles, and denying the Act^ of the Apostles. He said
that ^ woman was of the deuell, and tha^ man from the girdle upwards wa^ of
God, and beneath of the deuel^ Epiphan. haeres. 45. Eusebius. li. 4. ca. 27* 182.
Comodus succeeded Antoni^^s Verus in the empire, he reigned 13 years, and was
smothe^ed to death, or as ^t^op, writes, poisoned. Pantentes moderater of the
school of Alexandria in the time of Iulianus bishop there, was the master of
Clemens Iulianus was b. of Alexandria after Agrippas in the first year of
Comodus where he co^tinewed 10. years. Euse. lib. 5. cap. 9. 20. Apelles was a
Marcionite, he said that Prophecies were of a contrary spirit, he was guyded by
one Philumena a woman. He thought it was not for men to reason of religion, but
every one to continue as he believed. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 12. Euse lib. 5. cap.
9. 24. and (...) chronic. Alexandrinus He went about a preaching as far as
India. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 9. 10. Demetrius was b. of Alexandria after
Iulianus. he governed the church 43. years. Eusebius. lib 5. cap. 20. lib. 6.
cap. 25. Potinus, Basilicus, Lycus, Synerus, were Marcionits, whom Rhodon
confuted. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 12. Anno 10. Comodi. Rhodo^ an Asian the disciple
of Tatianus wrote against the heresy of Mar^ion, he disputed with Apelles face
to face, Euse. lib. 5. cap. 12. Scrapion held a synod at Antioch where
together with many other bishops he condemned the Mo^tanists Eusebius. lib. 5.
cap. 17. There was a Synod held at Rome in the time of Victor tout chinge the
time of the celebratio^ of the feast of Easter, when he excommunicated all the
eastern churches, for which cause he was reprehended of diverse but sharply of
Irenaeus. Eusebius. lib. 5 cap. 21. 22. 23. Narcissus of him are many things
written, first that he turned water into oil for the la^ps of the church. he
was accused of a heinous crime, and although he was innocent, yet left he his
church and fledd away into the wilderness, where he co^tinewed a long time. In
the mean while his accusers were wonderfully plagued from above, to the
example of all perjured persons. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 11. lib. 6. cap. 7. 8.
Serapion succeeded Maximinus in the seae of Antioch he remembered the works of
Apollinarius against Mo^tanus. who^ he also together with many other bishops
condemned. Eusebius. lib. 5. ca. 17. 20 about the 10. year of Comodus. Victor was
b. of Ro^e after Eleutherius in the 10. year of Comodus the Emperor an. Do.
193. where he continewed 10. years Eusebius. lib. 5. ca. 20. 25. Pepuziani, were
heretics which came out of the village Pepuza, their abiding was in Galatia
and Cappadocia* they were called Quintilliani and Pris^illiani, because that
Christ in the form of a woman lay with Quintilla a maid (or as some say
Priscilla) and revealed unto her di^^ne mysteries. Women are priests among
them, their sacrifice is alike with the Montanists above* Epiphan. haer. 49
193. Miltiades wrote against the Phrygian heresy of Montanus. Eusebius. lib. 5.
cap. 15. Artotyritae were heretics which offered bread and cheese in the
sacrament. Epiphan. haer. 49. August. Apollonius a Phrygia^ wrote against the
Montanists. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 16. Alogi were heretics which denied Christ
to be the word. they condemned the Gospel after John, they said that
Cerinthus the heretic wrote the revelation. Epiphan. haeres. 51. August.
Thraseas a martyr. ibid. Adamits were heretics which devised them a church
after an hot house to keep them from cold, for the space of an hour or
service time, they were all naked men and women, the virgins preached unto the
rest. their church they called Paradise, and them selves Adam and Eve.
Epiphan. haeres. 52. Theodotus a Montanist through sorcerie took his flight
toward heaven, but down he fell and dyed miserably. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 14.
Florinus and Blastus fell from the church, and taught at Rome that God was the
author of evil, whom Irenaeus confuted. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 13. 18.
Apollonius a christian philosopher at Rome exhibited an Apollogie unto the
Roman Senate. afterward he was beheaded under Comodus. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap.
19 Theophilus b. of Caesarea in Palaestina. Ba^chyllus b. of Cori^th in Hella
da. Polycrates b. of Ephesians. ^^orished about this time. Eusebius. li. 5. ca. 20
Cleme^s called Alexandrinus, because he was of Alexandria, was the disciple of
Pa^taenus, and the master of Origin. he moderated after Pa^taenus the school
of Alexandria. he flourished chiefly in the time of Seuerus and his son
Antoninus. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 5. 12. 13. At Caesarea in Palaestina there was a
synod held toutchinge the feast of Easter. Where Theophilus b. of Caesarea and
Narcissus b. of Jerusalem were present and the chief pastors. Eusebius. lib. 5.
cap. 21. 24. Theodotus a tanner denied the diuiniti^ of Christ, he was the
first author of the heresy of Artemon. For which cause Victor b. of Rome
excommunicated him. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 25. Ierom. catalog. Heraclitus wrote
upon the epistles of Paul. In Pontus there was a Synod toutchinge the
aforesaid feast of Easter. where Palmas was chief. Eusebius. li. 5. cap. 21.
Artemon took Christ but for a bare and a naked man. He lived in the time of
Victor and Zephyrinus b. of Rome. He was the disciple of Theodotus the tanner,
and had to his companions Asclepiodotus and Natalius, which repented him self,
and fell at the feet of Zephyrinus b. of Rome for absolution. Eusebius. lib. 5.
cap. 25. Maximus wrote of the author of evil and against Artemon. Candidus
wrote of the 6. days works. Appion wrote of the same argument. Arabianus wrote
sundry good volumes. all flourished the same time. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 24. In
France there was a Synod toutchinge the feast of Easter where Irenaeus was
chief. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 21. Marcianus the Heretic maintained a self
opinion out of the Gospel after Peter. whom Serapion b. of Antioch confuted.
Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 11. 194. Pertinax was emperor after Comodus, as Eusebius.
writes, six months. lib. 5. ca. 24. E^trop. lib. 8. says it was but 3.
months. Iul. Capit. says he lived 60. years. 7. months. 26. days. He
raygned 2. months. 25. days. Tertullian b. of Carthage in Afric flourished
in the time of Seuerus and his son Antoninus, at length through emulation
betwne hi and the Roman clergy, he fell into the opinion of Mo^tanus. Ier.
catalog. Jude a famous writer wrote upon the 70. weeks of Daniel ending the
10. year of Seuerus. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 5. Leonides the father of Origin was
be headed the 10. year of Seuerus leauinge Origin very young of 17. year old.
Eusebius. lib. 6. cap 1. 2. In Ostroena there was a synod toutching the feast of
Easter, where Ba^chyllus b. of Corinth was chief Euse. li. 5. ca. 21. Dios was
b. of Jerusalem after the departure of Narcissus. Eusebius. li. 6. cap. 9. unto
the raygne of Seuerus Epiphan. haeres. 66. Noetus denied that there were three
persons, saying all three were one. He called himself Moses and said that
Aaron was his brother. He said the father^ the son and the holy Ghost
suffered in the flesh. Epiphan. haeres. 57. 194. Didius Iulianus whom Eutro.
calls Saluius Iulianus raygned after Pertinax, as A^lius Spartian. writes 2.
months. Eutrop says 7. months. be like his time was short, for Eusebius.
makes no mention of him. Tertullian was a mo^tanist. Ierom. catalog. 195.
Seuerus was emperor after D. Iul. He began to persecute the church of God
the 10. year of his raygne. he was Emperor 18. years, and dyed at York in
England. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 24. lib. 6. cap. 1. 2. 7. and in chronic. At
Ephesus many of the bishops of Asia met toutchinge the celebration of the
feast of Easter, where Polycrates b. of Ephesus was chief. Eusebius. li. 5. cap.
22. Zephyrinus was b. of Rome after Victor, ann. Dom. 202. and co^tinewed there
18. years. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 25. lib. 6 cap. 20. Melchised^chiani were
heretics which hon^red Melchisedech an^ said that he was greater then Christ,
an^ that he was no man Epiphan. haeres. 55. 202. In the aforesaid six synods
held an. Do. 195. the b. of Rome had no more authority the^ the other bishops.
He in his city and they in theirs were chief. and when as he went about to
challenge authority over the Eastern churches Iren. ^us b. of Lions in France
reprehended him sharplye for it. Fuse lib. 5. cap. 23. Proclus a captayn^ of
the Cataphrygia^ heresy was confute^ by Gaius a Roman (...) the time of
Zephyrin^ b. of Rome. Euse. lib. cap. 25. lib. 6. cap. 20. Germamon was b. of
Jerusalem after Di^s. Fuseb. lib. 6. cap. 9. Ambrose, not he that was bishop of
Millayne, was of the heresy of Valentinus, whom Origin converted. Eusebius. lib.
6. cap. 17. Epiph. haeres. 64. says he was partly a Marcionist, and partly a
Sabellian. 205. Anno 10. Seueri. There was a Synod held at Bostra where Orige^
consuted Beryllus. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 32. Beryllus b. of Bostra in Arabia,
denied Christ to be the second person in Trinity before he was made man.
Origin confuted him. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 32. Origin being a child exhorted his
father in prison to persevere constant, being of the age of 18. he catechi sed
in the school of Alexandria as he taught so he lived and as he lived so he
taught. for to embrace chastity he gelded himself he was made minister at
Caesarea. he came to Rome in the time of Zephyrinus. He preached many sermons
he confuted many he retikes, he traveled many contreys In the end he ^ell
from the faith yet he repented him and died under Gallus and Volusianus being
69. year old Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 2. 7. etc. lib. 7. cap. 1. Origin was sent
for to Arabia where the Arabians were condemned which denied the immortality of
the soul Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 36. Gordius was b. of Jerusalem after Germamon.
Eu seb. lib. 6. cap. 9. until the reign of Antoninus. Epipha^ haeres. 66.
Asclepiades was b. of Antioch after Serapion. Euse. lib. 6. ca. 11 about the
first year of Antoninus Caracalla. The Arabians taught that the soul dyed
with the body, and rose again at the general resurrection. Origin converted
the^. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 36. 213. Antoninus Caracalla was Emperor after
Seuerus. he ^yagned 7. years and 6 months. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 7. 20
Affricanus a famous writer flourished about this time. Eusebius. lib. 1. cap. 8.
lib. 6. cap. 30 Philetus was b. of Antioche after Asclepiades. Eusebius. lib. 6.
ca 20. about the first year of Macrinus. Helcesaitae (called of Epiphanius
Sampsai, the first author of them was Elxais a false prophet) they rejected
part of the old testament. They denied the Apostle. They counted it a thing
indifferent in case of necessity to deny with the mouth so that thou believe
with the heart. Orige^ confuted them. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 37. 220. Macrinus
succeeded Caracalla, and dyed in the first: year of his reign Euse. lib. 6.
cap. 20. Plutarchus was martyred. Heraclides, Heron, Serenus beheaded. Serenus
burned together with Rhais a woman out of the schole of Origin. Eusebius. li. 6.
cap. 3. Cessus the philosopher and heretic was confuted by Origin in 8.
books. Valesij were heretics which had their original of one Valens that
lived in Bacathis a country of Philadelphia, their manner was to geld them
selves and as many strangers as lodged among them, they abused the saying in
the Gospel: If thy member offend thee cut it of etc. Epiphan. haeres. 58.
221. Antoninus Heliogabalus reigned after Macrinus the space of 4. years, and
he dyed. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 20. Potamiaena a virgin together with Marcella her
mother burned. Basilides beheaded. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 4. Narcissus comes
home again, and is entreated after Gordius to take his former rowme, and
because he was a 116. year old they joined with him Alexander who before was
b. of Cappadocia. Eus. lib. 6. cap. 7 9. 10. Calistus was b. of Rome after
Zephyrinus in the first year of Antoninus Heliogabalus Anno Dom. 221. and
continewed there 5. years. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 20. 224. Alexander was Emperor
after Heliogabalus, and raygned 13. years. Euse. lib. 6. cap. 20. 27.
Gregorius N^ocaesariensis and Atheno dorus heard Origin in Caesarea the space
of 5. years. Although they were both young men yet were they chosen bishops
in Po^tus. Eusebius. li. 6. cap. 29. Socrat. lib. 4. ca. 22. Alexander who before
was b. of Jerusalem together with Narcissus, now after his death is there b.
alone, and died in the persecution under Decius. Euse. lib. 6. ca. 38 He
governed the church alone in the raygne of Alexander the Emperor. Epip.
haeres. 66. Vrbanus was b. of Rome in the 1. year of Alexander Anno Dom. 226.
and governed the church eight years. Eusebius lib. 6. cap. 20. 21. Nepos a b. of
Aegipt was a Chiliast and wrote thereof a book the which Dionysius b. of
Alexandria co^futedafter his death Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 22. 237. Maximinus was
Emperor after Alexander. he persecuted the church of God, and raygned 3. years
Zebinus was b. of Antioche after Philetus. Eusebius. lib. 6. ca. 21. about the 7.
year of Alexander Pontianus was bishopof Rome after Vrbanus An. Dom. 236. and
continewed there 6. years Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 21. 27. Anterus after Pontianus
was bishopof Rome the space of one month. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 27. 28. Heraclas
was first Origens Usher in the school of Alexandria, afterward b. of that
seae about the 11. year of the Emperor Alexander. where he co^tinewed 16.
years. Euse. lib. 6. cap. 14. 25. 34, 240. Gordianus was created Emperor
after Maximinus, he reigned 6. years. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 27. 33. Fabianus was
b. of rome after Anterus Anno Dom. 241. being a country minister he was
miraculously chose^ in the church by reason that a dove lighted upon his head
he suffered martyrdom under Decius Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 28. 38. Coracio^ a
Chiliast was in open disputation confuted by Dionysius b. of Alexandria. Eusebius.
lib. 7. cap. 23. 246. Philip was crowned Emperor after Gordianus, he was the
first Christian Emperor after Christ, and raygned 7. years. Eusebius. lib. 6.
cap. 33. 38. There was a synod held at Rome in the time of Fabianus where he
together with 60. other bishops removed the schism of Nouatus. Sabel.
Pantal. Babylas was b. of Antioche after Zebinus, and died in prison in the
persecution under Decius Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 28. 38 Dionysius the disciple of
Origin, was b. of Alexandria after Heraclas the 3. year of Philip the emperor.
he reports the peril he stod in and the persecution he suffered under Decius.
He wrote of the martyrs at Alexandria 254. Decius was Emperor after Philip. he
persecuted the church of God, and raygned not full 2. years. Eusebius. lib. 6.
cap. 38. lib. 7. cap. 1. Cyprian b. of Carthage flourished about this time. he
erred in the rebaptizing of heretics and suffered martyr dome under
Valerianus and Galienus. Eusebius. lib. 7. ca. 3 Ier. catalog. There was a synod
held at Rome in the time of Cornelius where Nouatus the here tike was
condemned. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 42. Cornelius was b. of Rome in the time of
Decius, he condemned and excommunicated Nouatus the heretic, and co^tinewed b.
3. years. Euse. lib. 6. cap. 38. lib. 7. cap. 2. unto Fabius b. of Antioch he
wrote unto the heretic Nouatus, unto Herma^mon, Stephen, and Xystus bishops of
Ro^e unto Philemo^ minister of Rome afterward unto Dionysius b. of Rome. He
was persecuted under Valerianus the Emperor. He confuted the book of Nepos
the Chiliast and confounded in opendisputation Coracion his disciple. He was b.
of Alexandria. 17. years and dyed the 12. year of Galienus. Eusebius. lib. 6.
cap. 28. 34. 39. 40. 44. 45. lib. 7. cap. 1. 2. 4. 5. 6. 7. 10. 22. 23. 27.
Nouatus a priest of Rome fell fro^his order and called his sect Catharous,
that is puritans. he would not admit unto the church such as fell after
repentance. he was condemned by sundry notable me^ and in sundry counsels.
Eusebius. lib. 6. ca. 42. He abhorred second mariadge Epiphan. haeres. 59. Cyprian
did err in rebaptizinge of heretics. Eusebius. li. 7. cap. 3. Metras and Quinta
a woman stoned to death Apollonia a virgin, Iulianus Cremon, Macar, Epimachus,
Alexander, 4. women burned. Scrapion had his neck broken Amonarion a a virgin,
Mercuria and Dionysia beheaded. Hero^ Ater, and Isidorus burned Nemesion a
martyr. Dioscorus, Ammo^ Zenon, Ptolomaeus, Ingenuus, Theophilus, co^fessors
Ischyrion beaten to death with a cudgel. Cheremo^ b. of Nilus fled into the
desert with his wife. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 40. 41. An other synod was held at
Antioche, where Elenus b. of Tarsis, Firmilianus b. of Cappadocia, Theoctistus
b. of Palaestina, and Dionysius b. of Alexandria, were present to the
comdemnation of Nouatus. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 45. Fabius was b. of Antioche
after Babylas in the time of Decius. Euse. lib. 6. cap. 38. Lucius was b. of
Rome after Cornelius, and governed the church not full 8. months Eusebius. lib.
7. cap. 2. A whole Council held at Carthage in the time of Cyprian did err.
Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 3. Gallus was Emperor after Decius and raygned not full
two years. Euse. lib. 7. cap. 1. 9 AEmilianus was Emperor 3. months after
Gallus Eutrop There was a synod held at Carthage, which erred about the
rebaptizing of heretics, in the which Cyprian was chief. Eusebius. lib. 7. cap.
3. An other at Iconium and Synadis, for receiving of heretics after
repe^ta^ce. Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 6. Mazabanes was b. of Jerusalem after
Alexander. Eus. lib. 6. cap. 38. until the reign of Gallus and Volusianus.
Epiph. haeres. 66. Angelici were heretics which worshipped Angels August. lib.
de haeres. 255. Apostolici were heretics in Pisidia which arrogantly so
termed them selves, because they allowed not the company of married men, and
such as had proper possessions, for the catholic Church has (says
Augustine) many such religious and clergy me^. August. lib. de haere. Epiphan.
haeres. 61. 256. Valerianus together with Galienus his son was created
Emperor he persecuted the church of God. Not long after his son Galienus
ruled alone and restored peace unto the christians. He co^tinewed Emperor 15.
years. Eusebius lib. 7. ca. 9. 12. 28. Priscus, Malchus, Alexander, and a woman
were torn in pieces of wild beasts. Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 11. Marinus be headed.
Euse. lib. 7. cap. 14. Hymenaeus was b. of Jerusalem after Mezabanes in the
time of Valerianus. Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 13. until the raygne of Aurelianus.
Epiph. haeres. 66. Demetrianus was b. of Antioche after Fabius, in the time of
Valerianus. Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 13. Stephan was b. of Rome after Lucius Anno
Dom. 256. He reprehended Cyprian b. of Carthage for rebaptizinge of heretics
and governed the church 2. years. Eusebius. lib. 7. ca. 2 3. 4. Sabellius of
whom the Sabellia^s have their appellation, says Augustine, was the disciple
of Noetus, and taught the like doctrine with Noetus, that the three persons in
the Trinity were one, but says Epiphanius they differed in that Sabellius
said not the father to have suffered. The heresy of Sabellius began at
Pentapolis in Ptolemais, and was impugned by Dionysius b. of Alexandria, in the
time of Xystus b. of Rome. Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 5. He denied that there was a
trinity. Epiphan. haeres. 62. August. lib. de haeres. 271. Claudius was
Emperor after Valerianus 2. years. Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 28. Astyrius a senator
of Ro^e was a great fauorer of the Christians lib. 7. cap. 15. 16. There was a
synod held at Antioche about the 12. year of Galienus, where Samosatenus was
condemned. Euse. lib. 7. cap. 26. 27. Xystus the 2. of that name was bishop of
Rome after Stepha^ where he co^tinewed 11. years. Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 4. 26.
Maximinus was b. of Alexandria in the 12. year of Galienus and continewed 18.
years. Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 10. 27. 31. Paulus Saniosatenus b. of Antioch
denied the diuinitye of the son of God. Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 26. Quintilius
was Emperor after Claudius 17. days. Eutrop. lib. 9. Agapius b. of Caesarea
in Palaestina, Pierius a minister of Alexandria, Meletius b. of Pontus
flourished at one time. Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 5. Paulus Samosatenus the heretic
succeeded Demetrianus. he was excommunicated and deprived by the 2. synod
held at Antioche in the time of Valerianus. Eus. lib. 7. cap. 26. 29.
Dionysius was b. of Rome. after Xystus An. Do. 265. and co^tinewed 9. years.
Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 26. 29. 273. Aurelianus was emperor after Quintilius. in
the beginning of his reign he was well affectioned toward Christian
religion, so that the heretic Samosatenus was through his help banished the
church, but in the end he persecuted the church of God, and when as he went
about to subscribe unto an edict against the Christians, the crampe took him
so that he was not able to hold pen in hand* he raygned 6. years. Eusebius.
lib. 7. cap. 28. 29. Malchion in open disputation confuted Samosatenus the
heretic at Antioch. Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 28. A second synod was held at
Antioch under Aurelianus, where Samosatenus the heretic was condemned and
deprived the church Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 28. 29. Zambdas b. Jerusalem Eusebius. li.
7. cap. 31. Domnus the son of Demetrianus was by the 2. held synod at Antioch
appoi^ted to succeed Samosatenus in the seae of Antioch. Eusebius. lib. 7. cap.
29. Felix was b. of Rome after Dionysius, and continewed 5. year. Eusebius. lib.
7. cap. 29. 31. Origeniani were heretics called after one Origin (not he that
was the great clarke of Alexandria) they condemned marriage, yet lived they
beastly their manner was to have among them religious women like Nuns, whom
they defiled, yet used means to keep them from swellinge Epiphan. haeres. 63.
From Christ unto the end of Au relianus the Emp^roure when Manes the heretic
lived there are 276. reares after Epiphan hare. 66. Ta^itus was Emperor 6.
months. Eutro. lib. 9. Eusebius. chron. Origeniani again were heretics which so
called the^ selves of Origin Adamantius the great clerk of Alexandria, they
taught as Epiphan. says (haeres. 64.) that there was no resurrection, that
Christ was a creature, and the holy ghost a like. that the souls were suste in
heaven, and came down into the bodies, as it were into prison. that in the
end the deuells should be saved. Epiphanius, as I read in Socrates (eccle.
hist* lib. 6. cap. 11.) was become the enemy of Orige^ through the spite and
malice of Theophilus bishop of Alexandria. The deuell bare Origin a
displeasure, he procured heretics to father upon him lewd opinions. He
complayneth him self in a certain epistle how that heretics corrupted his
works. Pa^philus Martyr the great friend and familiar of Eusebius wrote an
Apology in his behalf. Eusebius. (lib. 6. cap. 3. 18. 20. 26.) reports of the
famous men that favored Origin. Socrates (eccle. hist. lib. 6. cap. 12.)
writes in his commendation. Athanasius gave of him a notable testimony.
Chrysostom would in no wise be brought to condemn either Orige^ o^ his
works. Socrat. li. 6. ca. 11. 12. 13. Buddas otherwise called Terebinthus was a
little before Manes the heretic he taught about Babylon that he him self was
borne of a virgin, that he was bred and brought up in the Mountains. He wrote
4 books, one of mysteries. 2. entitled the gospel. 3. Thesaurus the 4. a
summarie. Through witchcraft he took his flight into the a^r to offer
sacrifice but the deuell threw him down broke his neck so that he dyed
miserably Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 17. 279. ^lorianus was Emperor 80. days.
Eutrop li. 9. Eusebius. chron. Probus was emperor 6. years. Eusebius. lib. 7. cap.
29. Anatolius b. of Laodiceaslorished under Probus and Carus. Iero^. catalog.
Hermon b. of Jerusalem and the last before the persecution under Dioletiam.
Euse. lib. 7. ca. 31 Tim. eus was b. of Antioche after Domnus. Eusebius. lib. 7.
cap. 31. Eusychianus was bishop of Rome scarce 10. months Eusebius. lib. 7. cap.
31. Gaius was b. of Rome an. Dom. 283. 15 years. Euse. lib. 7. cap. 31. 285.
Carus was Emperor scarce 3. years. Euse. lib. 7. cap. 29. The infiite number
of martyrs which suffered in the persecution under Dio^letian are to be scene
throughout the 8. book of Eusebius ecclesiastical history. These a of
Jerusalem was always honored and the succession contine wed unto the days of
Eusebius him self Eusebius. lib. 7. ca. 18. Cyrillus b. of Antioche. Eusebius. li.
7. cap. 31 Theonas was b. of Alexandria after Maximinus and co^tinewed 11.
years Eusebius. li. 7. cap. 31. 287. Dio^letian was Emperor and persecuted the
church of god. In the 19. year of his ^aigne he began to overthrow the
churches, burn the bibles, persecute the Christians. When he had raygned
together with Maximianus, who persecuted with him 20 years, he deposed him
self voluntarily, and lived a private life. From that time unto his end he
pyned and wasted away with diseases. But Maximinia hanged him self. Eusebius.
lib. 7. cap. 29. lib. 8. cap. 2. 3. 14. 19 Socrates lib. 1. cap. 2. Arnobius
flourished in the time of Diocletian. Ierom. catalog. There was a council of
300. bishops called together at Siunessa where Marcellinus b. of Rome was
condemned for de nyig Christ and sacrificing to Idols. tom 1. council. Dorotheus
b. of Antioche. Marcellinus was bishop of Rome about the 10. year of
Diocletian Anno Dom. 295. Eusebius. li. 7. cap. 31. He denied Christ offered
sacrifice unto Idols in the persecution under Diocletian and was condemned of
3. hundred bishops 30. priests, afterward he repented him and was martyred
under Diocletian. tom. 1. council 307. Tyrranus b. of Antioch. Eusebius. lib. 7.
cap. 31. Constantius and Maximinus ruled the empire after the deposition of
Diocletian. Constantius dies at york in England when he had ruled 16. years
Anno Do. 310. Eusebius. lib. 8. ca. 14. and in chronic. Lacta^tius the disciple of
Arnobius flourished in the time of Diocletian. in his old age he was the
master of Crispus the son of Constantius Ierom. A council was held at
Ancyra in Galatia in the time of Vitalis where with certain conditions such as
sacrificed were received, and the deacons that can not contain suffered to
Marie tom. 1. council. About this time Licinia an holy maid of Rome dying,
made Marcellus b. of that seae her heir and executor, gave him al her great
substance, from that time forth says Polydor (lib. 6. de invent. cap. vlt.)
the bishops of Rome were greatly enriched. Peter was b. of Alexandria about the
7 year of Diocletian, where he co^tinewed 12. years. he was beheaded and
crowned a martyr in the persecution under Diocletian. Eusebius. lib. 7. ca. 31.
Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 3. Manes the heretic whereof the Maniches have their
appellation had his original in persia (as Epiphan. haeres. 66 writes) about
the 4. year of Aurelianus. he called him self Christ and the comsorter.
Hechose unto himself 12. Apostles. He said that Christ was not truly borne but
phantastically. Eusebius. li. 7. cap. 30. Socrates lib. 1. ca. 17. says of him
that at the f^sthe was called Cubricus afterward chau^ging his name he went
into Persia, found the books of Buddas and published them in his own name he
taught that there were many Gods, that the sun was to be worshipped that
there was fatal destenie, that the souls went from one body into another.
The king of Persia his son fell sick Manes through sorce^y took upon him to
cu^e, him and killed him. The king caused him to be clapped in prison, but he
brake prison and fled into Mesopotamia there was he taken and flayd alive his
skin filled with chaff and hanged at the gates of the city. 310.
Consta^tinus Magnus the son of Constantius borne in Brytayne was there
proclaimed Emperor after the desease of his father. He makes Licinius who
married his sister his fellow Emperor. At the same time Maxentius played the
tyrant at Rome and Maximinus in the East. He saw in the aer the sign of the
cross he fully persuaded him self to fight against the tyrants and in the
behalf of Christian religion. Pamphilus martyr suffered under Maximus. Ierom.
There was a counsel held at Neo caesarea where among other things it was
decreed that none should be made priest before he were 30. years old. tom. 1.
council. Marcellus was b. of Ro^e after Marcellinus a very short while, some
take hi^ for the former, and so it may be, for Eusebius. made no mention of him.
yet in Damas. Pont. I find that he governed 5. years. Achillas was b. of
Alexandria after Peter Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 3. Hierax taught in Egypt that
there was no resurrection, he abhorred marriage, he said the children that dyed
before the years of discretion were damned, he thought that Melchisedech was
the holy ghost Epiphan. haeres. 67. 311. Suidas says that from Christ unto
Constantinus Magnus there are 318. years the which is true after Eusebius
computation if we take the time after the overthrow of the tyrants when heru
led alone. Antonie the Monk flourished in the days of Constantine, he wrote
seven epistles, the which are at this day to be seen, he lived 100. and 5.
years. Ierom. catalog. Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 17. A council was called by
Constantine at Rome in the time of Miltiades to reform the varia^ce between
Caecilianus b. of Carthage and his colleges. Eusebius. lib. 10. cap. 5. Macarius
was b. of Jerusalem after Hermon. he was the means with Helena that the cross
of Christ was found there. he was at the council of Nice. Constantinus Magnus
wrote unto him sundry epistles. Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 6. 9. Vitalis was b. of
Antioch after Tyranus. Eusebius a Grecian b. of Rome after Marcellus 1. year
and 7. months. Eusebius. chro. tom 1. council. Alexander was b. of Alexandria
after Achil las. by preachinge of the trinity somewhat curiously he gave
occasion to Arius one of his clergy to fall from the faith. Socrat. lib. 1.
cap. 3. He was at the council of Nice. Meletius b. of some city in Egypt,
sacrificed to Idols in the time of the persecution under Diocletian, and was
deposed by Peter b. of Alexandria. he rayled at Peter after his death, he
reviled Achillas, last of all he fell to backbiting of Alexander, and to take
part with the Aria^s. the true church was called the Catholic church, but he
called his church the church of martyrs. the Council of Nice condemned him
and took from him all authority that belonged to a bishop, and there upon the
Meletians were divided from the church. Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 3. 6. Ephiphan.
haeres. 68. Ammon a monk, yet married, Didymus, Arsenius Pior, Isidorus Pambo,
Petirus, Macarius, Euagrius, were famous about that time. Socrat. lib. 4. cap.
18. Osius b. of Corduba in Spain, a grave father, was sent by Constantine to
reconcile Alexander and Arius, he was at the council of Nice. the Arians in
the council of Si^miu^ scurged his bare sides because he would not subscribe
unto their heretical opinions. Socrat lib. 1. ca. 4. 5. 9. li. 2. cap. 26.
Constantine called a council at Orleance to remove the dissension risen
between Bishops. Eusebius. lib. 10. cap. 5. Alexander b. of Alexandria called
there a council of many bishops, where he condemned Arius and accursed his
heresy, writing unto the bishops throughoute christendom, what opinions he
held. Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 3. Meltiades was b. of Ro^e after Eusebius in the
time of Co^sta^tinus Magnus ann. Dom. 312. and co^tinewed 6. years. Eusebius.
chron. eccle. hist. lib. 10. ca. 5. Siluester was b. of Rome after Meltiades
an. Dom. 314. and continewed 20. years. Euse. chron. When Constantine offered
him a golden scepter he refused it, as a thing not fit for the priestly
function. Sabell. 330. He ^oyled Maxentius upon the river Tiberis. Li^^^us
overcame Maximinus. they^oyntly published edicts in the behalf of the
christians. In the end ^i^imus rebelled against him, Consta^tinus overcame him,
ruled alone, restored peace unto the whole world, gave money unto the church
delivered the bishops from paying tax or tribute, he wrote unto Paphnutius b.
of the upper Thebais had one of his eyes pulled out in the time of persecution
Constantine was wo^t to kiss the empty place he was present at the council
of Nice, and turned the wholl assembly from separating married priests from
their wives. Socrat. lib. 1. ca. 5. 8 Spiridion a man of great fame in in those
days was at the council of Nice, though he were a bishop, yet kept he
sheep in the fields. Athanasius being a young man was at the counsel of Nice,
look more of him in the colume of the bishops of Alexandria. A general
counsel was called at Nice in Bithynia of 318. bishops by Co^sta^tinus Magnus
as Nicephorus says, the 20. year of Constantine, an. Dom. 328. some say 326.
some other 324 in the time of Siluester b. of Rome, where they condemned Arius,
debated the controversy of Easter, laid down the form of faith commonly
called the Nicene Creed, ratified the clause of one substance, and wrote unto
the church of Alexandria that they had deposed Arius. Socra. lib. 1. cap. 5.
6. Philogonus was b. of Antioch after Vitalis and dyed a martyr. Nicephor.
Athanasius was b. of Alexandria after Alexander and the breaking up of the
Nicen council being a heathen boy he played the part of a Christian bishop
in a certain play which prognosticated he would prove a no table man being
deacon he went to the council of Nice, and disputed against the Arians. Socrat.
lib. 1. cap. 5. 11. being bishop the Arians falsely accused him of bribery
treason, that he sent of his clergy into Mareotes which beat the altar with
their feet overthrew the Lords tablebrake the holy cup and burned the bible,
they accused hi^ of murder and magic and to answer unto those crimes he was
constrained to come to the council held at Tyrus where he was deposed.
Socrat. lib. 1. ca 20 Arius borne in Libya yet a priest of Alexandria, hearing
Alexander the bishop entreatinge curiously of the trinity, thought verily that
he maintained the opinion of Sabellius, set him self against the bishop, and
said that the son of God had a beginning of essence, that there was a time
when he was not, he said that God was not always a Father, that the son was
not from everlasting, but had his beginning of nothing. Being called before
the Emperor, he would subscribe unto the Nicene council and swear toe. His
deceate was to carry in his bosom his heretical opinion written in a piece of
paper and when he came to the book he would swear that he thought as he had
written meaning in his bosom. His end was lamentable for coming from the
Emperor after the oath he had taken with great pomp through the street of
Constantinople he was taken with suddayne fear and withal he felt a laske,
immediatlye he asked of them where there was any house of office, thither he
went and voyded his gutts, as many as went by, were wont to point at the
place with the finger and say, In yonder iakes dyed Arius the heretic. Socrat.
lib. 1. cap. 3. 25. Epiphan haeres. 68. 69. Alexander b. of Alexandria, and to
Arius the heretic exhorting the^ to unity* when he was 60. and 5. years old,
he dyed after that he had reigned 31 years. Eusebius. li. 8. ca. 14. 15. 16. lib.
9. cap. 9 10. lib. 10. cap. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 2 4. 26. He
differred his baptism unto his last end purposing fullye to have it in
Iordaine where Christ was baptized It was Eusebius b. of Nicomedia as Eusebius
Ierom and Socrates do write that baptized him for all the travel that
Cardinal pool took and the flattering glosses to prove the contrary. The
donation that is fathered upon him is but a mere fable in the judgment of the
best writers. Eusebius Pamphilus bishop of Caesarea in Palaestina wrote the
ecclesiastical history from the birth of Christ unto the raygne of
Constantine the great he was at the council of Nice, wrote the Nicene creed
sent it to Caesarea, condemned Arius with his own hand yet was he thought to
be an Arian, and to clear him of the suspicion, Socrates wrote an Apology in
his behalf which is to be seen in his history. Constantine had hi^ in great
reverence. Because of his familiaritye with Pamphilus the martyr he was called
Eusebius Pamphilus, he wrote many notable books and died in the time of
Constantine the younger. Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 1. 5. 18 lib. 2. cap. 3. 17. Ierom
catalog. Frumentius was made bishop by Athanasius and sent to convert the
Indians. Socrat. lib. 1. ca. 15. Eusebius Emisenus a godly bishop was a great
clerk and a profounde philosopher in the days of Constantine. Socrat. lib. 1.
cap. 18. lib. 2. cap. 6. There was at Rome in the time of Siluester a Council
of 277. bishops, which ratified the Nicene counsel, and condemned Arius,
Photinus, and Sabellius. tom. 1. council. In the time of Constantine says
Marianus Scotus Helen his mother writes unto him that he should renounce
Christ, and become a Jew. To try the truth Hele^ brought with her 120. Jews.
Constantine brought Siluester b. of Rome, with 24. other bishops, they disputed
of Christ, in the end the Jews were overthrown. to. 1. council. Eustathius
was b. of Antioch after Philogonus he was at the council of Nice. But he fell
into the heresy of Sabellius and was deposed in a council held at Antioch
Eusebius Pa^philus confuted him after his deposition the seae was void the
space of 8. years Socrat. li. 1. cap. 9. 18. Marcus was b. of Rome after
Siluester and co^tinewed 8. months. Ierom. Alexander b. of Constantinople a
godly father set him self against Arius, he trusted not to the quirckes of
logic but to the power of Christ, helockt him self in the church and prayed
thus unto God: I beseech thee o lord if the opinion of Arius be true that I my
self may never see the end of this disputation but if the faith which I
hold be true that Arius may receau due punishment for his blas phemous
opinion, which in deed sell out as it is to be seen in Arius end.
Alelexander was 118. year old when he dyed. Socrat. lib. 1. cap 25. li. 2
cap. 4. Siluester called at Rome 284. bishops in the presence of Constantine
and Helena his mother, where they laid down canons for the government of the
clergy. tom. 1. council. A council held at Antioche deposed Eustathius b. of
Antioche, for maintaining the heresy of Sabellius. Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 18. A
council held at Eliberis in Spain, in the time of Co^sta^tine decreed that the
usurer should be excommunicated that tapers should not burn in the day time in
church yardes, that women should not frequent vigills, that images should be
banished the church that nothing should be painted on the wall to be
worshipped, that every one should communicate thrice in the year. tom. 1.
council. They accused him at Constantinople be fore the Emperor that he should
say he would stay the cariadge of corn from Alexandria to Constantinople for
the which Constantinus magnus ^an ished him into Treuere a city of France
lib. 1. ca. 23. Constantine the younger called him home from exile. lib. 2. cap.
2. The council of Antioche charged hi^ that he took the bishoprike after his
exile without the warrant of a council, they deposed him, and chose Eusebius
Emisenus, when he refused it, they chose Gregorius an Arian, who was brought
thither with armed soldiers, so that A thana^ius fled away to save his life,
afterward they misliked with him, and placed Georgius in his rowme, which
had a miserable end. lib. 2. ca. 5. 6. 7. 8. 10. lib. 3. ca. 2. he went to
Julius b. of Rome, and came to enjoy his bishopric by virtue of his letters.
lib. 2. ca. 11. Again the Aria^s accused him to the emperor, that he had taken
the corn which the emperor gave to the poor, and sold it to his own lucre,
so that he was feign the second time to slye unto Julius b. of Rome, where he
co^tinewed one year, and six months, until the cou^ cel of Sardice where he
was restored to his bishopric. lib. 2. ca. 13. 16. but Co^sta^tius being an
Arian, banished him again so that Constans his brother threatened him with
wars and constrained him to do it. lib. 2. ca. 18. after the death of
Constans, Constantius exiled him again. lib. 2. cap. 21. After the death of
Constantius he came to Alexandria, but he was feign to fly in the time of
lulian the Apostata. li. 3 ca. 4. 12. He came hom in the time of Iouianus and
fled away in the time of Valens the A rian he was b. six and forty years and
dyed An. Dom. 375. Socrat. li. 4. cap. 12. 16. Acesius a Nouatia^ bishop was of
Constantine called to the council of Nice, to render an account of his
opinion. Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 7. The first council of Arelate decreed with
other things, that Easter should be kept at one certain time. tom. 1. council.
A council of Arian bishops meet at Tyrus, and deposed Athanasius, but
Constantine removed them to consecrate the temple lately builded at Jerusalem,
and called them afterward to Constantinople in his presence, to determine
Athanasius causes. Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 20. 22. Julius was b. of Rome after
Mark Anno Do. 336. where he contine wed 16. years. Ierom chron. Socrat. lib. 2.
cap. 5. 27. says it was 15. years. Marcellus b. of Ancyra in Galatia, taught
the heresy of Paulus Samosatenus, that Christ was but bare man, the bishops in
the council of Constantinople deposed him, and ^usebius Pamphilus confuted him
in three books. Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 24. etc. 336. Maximus was b. of Jerusalem
after Macarius hedetested the Arians and refused to come to the council of
Antioche lest he should condemn the Nicen Creed in the end the Arians
deposed him. Socrat li. 2. c. 5. 30. Audius was a schismaticke, a man of an
hot spirit, he rebuked the clergy men to their faces for their disordered
life, and being councelled to deal modestly nay chastized, he divided him
self from the church, and fell to raising of private co^uenticles. he kept
Easter with the Jews. Epiphan. haer. 70. Eusebius of Nicomedia, not only in
Arius time, but also after his death mayntayned the heresy of Arius, together
with Macedonius b. of Constantinople* Theognis b. of Nice, M^*ris b. of
Chalcedo^, Theodorus b. of Heraclea* Vrsacius, Valens, etc. Socrat. lib. 2.
cap. 2. 9. 15. 340. Consta^tinus the younger beig made Caesar the 10. year of
his fathers ^avgne* Co^stantius being made Caesar the 20. year of his fathers
raygne: and Constans being made Emperor the 30. year of his fathers reign
succeeded their father after his desease and divided the Empire among them.
Constantinu^ enio^ed it but alitle while for he was slain by the soldiers of
his brother Constans when he sought to invade his brother Co^stans dominions
Consta^s not long after was slain by Magne^tius the tyrant. These two were
godly emperors but Co^stantius was an Aria^ in the end Co^stantius dyed being
five and forty year old. he reigned 38. years, thirteen with his father
Co^sta^tinus Magnus, and five and twenty after his fathers death Socrat. lib.
1 cap. 25 26. lib. 2. cap. 3 20. 37. Iero^. chronic. Rheticus a learned writer
flourished in France about this time. Ierom catalog. There was a counsel held
at Caesarea in Cappadocia where Eulalius b. of that seae condemned his own
son Eustathius b. of Sebastia in Armenia for many crimes. Socrat. lib. 2.
cap. 33. The Council of Gangra condemned the heretical opinions of
Eustathius, allowing the marriage of priests. Socra. lib. 2. cap. 33 tom. 1.
council. A council held in Carthage, decreed there should be no rebaptizing,
that clergy men should not meddle with temporal affairs. tom. 1. council.
Julius held a provincial synod at Rome, where he condemned Arius and
ratified the Nicene Creed. tom. 1. council. Eulalius an Arian was b. of Antioch
after Eustathius. Nicephor. Eustathius b. of Sebastia in Armenia went in such
attire as was not decente for a priest. He sorbad Mariadge: made laws of
fasting he parted married couples asunder. He caused such as refrayned the
churches to raise conuenticles at home, he took servant from their masters
under color of religion, he commanded his followers to wear the philosophers
habit, he caused the women to be shaven, he sorbad the accustomed fastingdays,
and commanded they should fast on the sundaye. He detested the prayers of
married men, he abhorred the offering and communion of the married priest, not
reme^bringe that his own father was a priest and bishop of Caesarea in
Cappadocia. he was first condemned of his own father in a council held at
Caesarea, afterward by the counsel of G^gra, last of all at Gonstantinople.
Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 33. Iuuencus a priest of Spain who wrote the four
Eua^gelists in heroical verse flourished about this time Ierom catalog.
Euphronius an Arian was b. of Antioche after Eulalius. Socrat. lib. 1. ca. 18.
Maximus b. of Treuere in France entertained honorably Athanasius b. of
Alexandria being exiled into France. Ier. chro. A council of Arian bishops
met at Antioche the first year after Consta^tines desease, where they deposed
Athanasius, and endeavored to abrogate the Nicene creed Socrat. li. 2. ca. 5.
6. 7 The bishops of the East called a council together, laid down their creed
with long expositions, and sent it to the west churches by three bishops.
Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 15 A council held at Coleyne in Germany, condemned
Euphrata the bishop for denyinge that Christ was god ^om. 1. council. A general
council was summoned at Sardice by Constantius and Constans the Emperoures,
for the hearing of Athanasius b. of Alexandria and Paulus b. of Constantinople,
whom the Arians had exiled. The council restored them, deposed their
accusers, condemned the Arians, and confirmed the Nicene creed. Socrat. lib. ^
cap. 16. Cyrillus an Arian was chosen b. of Jerusalem after the deposition of
Maximus he was deposed forcer^e^ heinous crimes and would not come and purge
him self. Socrat. li. 2. cap. 30. 31. 32. Macedonius at the first being an
Arian, and deposed by Acacius sect, could not quiet him self, but fell from
the Arians into an other heresy. he denied the godhead of the holy ghost,
tearming him the servant and the drugge of the father, and of the son. this
opinion, they say, Marathonius bishop of Nicomedia taught before him. These
heretics are called Pneumatomachoi. Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 25. Epiph. haeres.
73. A council summoned at Jerusalem by Maximus b. of that seae, where he
received Athanasius unto the communion, and ratified the Nicene creed. Socrat.
lib. 2. cap. 19 A council called together at Alexandria by Athanasius where
the acts of the counsel of Sardice and of Jerusalem were confirmed. Socrat.
lib. 2. cap. 21. Heraclius. Placitus an Arian was b. of Antioch. Socrat. lib.
2. cap. 5 6. 7. Euphrata bishop of Coleyne, denied that Christ was God, he was
condemned in a council held at Coleyne. tom. 1. council. 350. Hilarious b. of
poetiers in France a great adversary of the Arians wrote sundry notable
books whereof one he delivered into Constantius hand at Constantinople. He
died in the time of Valens and Valentinianus Ierom. catalog. Socrat. li. 3. ca.
8. Herenius. Stephan an Arian succeeded Placitus. Socrat lib. 2. cap. 21.
Liberius was b. of Rome after Julius an. Do. 351 and co^tinewed 17. years he
was banished by Constantius the Arian emperor, yet restored again. Socrat.
li. 2. cap. 27. 29. Damasus in po^ti^. tom. 1. council. Ierom. in chronic. and
catalog. eccl script. in fortunatiano^ Ant. chro. part. 2. tit. 9. cap. 4.
parag. 5. do say that he yielded to the Arians, subscribed unto their here sie,
and recovered his bishopric again. Antoninus says he exhorted others to
co^sta^cie but did not persevere him self. Aetius the master of Eunomius the
heretic was made deaco^ by Leo^tius the Arian b. of Antioch, yet says
Epiphanius by Georgius the Arian b. of Alexandria. He was an Arian, yet fell he
from them, because they received Arius into the communion after his feigned
recantation. He was counted a great logician and called an^ A theiste for
reuiling^ the aunciente Fathers. He was excommunicacated, yet would h^ seem
of his own accord to leave the church he taught that the substance of the
father and (...) the son were not like one the other. Socrat. li* 2. cap. 28.
li. 3. cap. 8. The heretics of this opinion were called An^m^ioi. Epiphan.
haeres. 7* Eunomius b. of Cyz^ cum and the scribe of A^tius, said that God h^
no more knowledge t^ man. He termed. (...) the man of God, and (...) baptized
all that ca^ to him in the name the uncreated god, in (...) name of the son
(...), and in the name of the sanctifyinge spirit created of the created
son. Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 7. Theodor. lib. 2. cap. 29 Epiphan. haeres. 76.
355. Didymus Alexandri nus a notable clerk was in his youthtime troubled with
sore eyes and became blind he left behind him many notable works, Antony the
monk came out of the desert into Alexandria and conforted him. Socrat. lib. 4.
cap. 20. A council held at Antioche decreed that such as were present at
service should communicate, otherwise depart. tom. 1. council. A council held
at Sirmiu^ in the time of Constantius condemned Photinus bishop of that seae
which mayntayned the heresy of Sabellius and Paulus Samosatenus, this council
was of Arians, they scourged among them Osius b. of Corduba in Spain, and made
him subscribe unto Arianisme. Socrat. li. 2. cap. 24. 26. Hilarious. Leontius an
Arian succeeded Stephan he gelded him self to avoid the suspicion of a woman
whose company he kept. wherefore he was by Constantius made b. of Antioch.
Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 21. Felix was b. of Rome by the commandment of
Co^sta^tius and the procureme^t of the Arians one year while Liberius was in
exile. he was an Arian as Socrates writes. lib. 2. cap. 29. Iero^. in chro^.
and Ruff. lib. 1. cap. 22. yet Antoninus says he was a godly man. Photinus b.
of Sirmiu^ maintained the heresy of Sabellius and P. Samosatenus that Christ
was not God before Marie bare him. He said the word was at the begini^g with
the father but not the son. Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 24. Epiphan. haeres. 71 A
general council was su^moned to meet at Mediolanum, where the East and west
churches brauled about Athanasius, and dissolved the council agreeinge upon
nothing. Co^sta^tius seeing the countries were far asunder, commanded the
East churches to meet at Nico media in Bithynia, and the west at Ariminum in
Italic. Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 29. The council of Ariminum condemned the Arians.
Socra. lib. 2. cap. 29. Eudoxius b. of Germanicia in Syria crepte through wiles
into the bishoprike of Antioch after the desease of Leontius but the counsel
of godly bishops held at Seleuciadeposed him, afterward he got to be
bishop of Constantinople. Socrat. lib. 2. ca 29. 32. 33. Aerius an Arian
heretic condemned says Augustine the prayer for the dead, which Epiphanius
does call the comemoration for the dead. He abhorred the prescribed
fastingdayes he said that a bishop was no better then a priest conte^ning
therein the cano^ of the church August. lib. de haeres. Epiphan. haeres. 75.
363. A council of Arian b. met at Nice in Thracia, where in steed of Nice in
Bithynia, they bleared the eyes of the godly with the sound of the Nicene
Creed. Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 29. A council was held at Seleucia in Isauria,
where the Arians were condemned. Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 31. Cyrillus who was
above deposed, recovered his bishop rick again Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 35.
Lucifer b. of Sardinia fell from the church upon a stomach, he believed says
Augustine that the soul came by transfusion to wit by pour^g out from the one
into the other, moreover they say that the soul is of the flesh and the
substance of the flesh. Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 7. August. de haeres. Theodore^.
lib. 3. cap. 5. 364. A council of 50. Arian bishops was called at
Constantinople, where they condemned the Nicene creed, Eustathius b. of
Sebastia in Armenia, and Cyrill b. of Jerusalem. Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 32.
Anianus was by the council of Seleu cia made b. of Antioch after they had
deposed Eudoxius the Arian, but the Arians exiled him immediately Socrat. lib.
2. cap. 32. Audaeus the heretic lived in Caelosyria in the time of Constantius
as Ierom says in chro^. He thought that God had the shape of man,
misco^struing the saying let us make man after our image, etc. Theodoret. li.
4. cap. 10. These heretics in the time of Chrysostom were called
Anthropomorphits. Donatus of whom the Donatists have their original was in the
time of Co^stantius. There was an other of the same name immediately after he
fell through contention from the church at Carthage, and taught through
Aphricke that as many as came unto him were to be rebaptized: that the son
was inferior to the father, and the holy ghost inferior to the son. Iero^
chronic. August. lib. de haeres. A council of Arians met at Antioch, and
confirmed the blasphemy* of Arius. They were called Anomoioi and Execoutioi.
Socrat. lib. 2. Meletius is chosen b. of Antioch after Eudoxius, but
Co^stantius deposed him for maintayning the Nicene Creed against the Arians*
Socrat. lib. 2. ca. 34. Apollinarius the father and the son of one name fell
from the faith upon a stomach at Laodicea in Syria, they taught that Christ
took a body but no soul, again seeinge that was absurd they said he had no
reasonable soul. Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 36. Ruff lib. 1. cap. 20. Euzoius the
Arianwas by the Emperor made b. of Antioch after the deposition of Meletius.
Socrat. lib. 2. ca. 34. Dimeritae were heretics of Apollinarius opinion so
called because they denied the third part, to wit the reasonable soul in
Christ. Some of them said that his body was coessentiall with his divinity,
some other of them denied he had any soul at all some again of them said that
he took no flesh of the virgin but that the word became flesh. Epiphan.
haeres. 76. 77. 365. Julian succeeded Consta^tius in the empire, he heard at
Constantinople Macedonius the Eunuch, Ni^ocles the Laconian, and Ecebolius the
sophist. Co^stantius fearinge he would fall from christian religion into
heathenish idolatry, sent him to Nicomedia, charging him nor to tread in the
school of Libanius, yet by stelthe he resorted unto him, and read his
heathenishe doctrine. When the Emperor suspected his disposition, Iulia^
shaued him self, and became a reader in a certain church, yet after the
Emperors death, and the obtayninge of the empire he became an Apostata, he
banished the Christians out of his court, and entertained in steed of the^
philosophers and coniurers. Not long after being the third year of his reign,
he was slain in a battle which he gave the Persians. An arrowe was shot at
hi^ which pierced him in the ribbs, and gave him his deaths wound. Some say it
was one of his own servants some other, that it was a fugitive Persian, some
other say that it was a deuell, some do write, that he took the da^te out of
his side, threw it all bloody into the air, and cried, O Galilaean (meaning
Christ) thou have overcome. Socra. lib. 3. cap. 1. 9. 10. 18. Sozomen. lib. 6.
cap. 2. Theodo. lib. 3. cap. 25. Iouianus a godly man one that mayntayned the
Nicene creed was Experour after Julian. He raygned no longer then seaue^
months but he dyed. Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 19. 20. 22. Macedonius, Theodulus and
Tatianus, were broyled to death in the time of Julian. Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 13.
Theodorus was sore tormented Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 16. A council held at
Alexandria by Athanasius after his return from exile, in the time of Julian
where the Arians, Apollinarians and Macedonians were condemned. Socrat. lib. 3.
ca. 5. A counsel held at Lampsacu^ 7. years after the counsel of Seleucia,
where the Aria^s were condemned. Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 2. 4. A council of
bishops in Sicilia condemned the Aria^s. Soc. lib. 4. cap. 11. John was b. of
Jerusalem after Cyrill. Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 25. Dorotheus Paulinus and
Euagrius beig godly me^ were chosen by the people yet notsuffred to continue.
Massiliani, were idle monks whom the deuell had possessed, they said, that
the body of Christ in the sacrament did neither good, neither harm. they
said baptism was to no purpose. Leotius b. of Melitena drove the thieves out
of their dens, the wolves from among the sheep, and set their monasteries
on fire. Theodore^. lib. 4. cap. 11. these heretics were called also Euchitae,
so called because of their co^tinewa^ prayinge. It is a wonder says
Augustine, to hear what a number of prayers they run over (much like unto
the late mumblinge of prayers upon beads) where Christ said: Pray always,
and Saint Paul: Pray without intermission, which is devoutly to be taken for
every day, they do it to much, and therefore says Augustine, to be numbered
among heretics. They say when the soul is purged, that a sow with her
pigges is seen to come out of man's mouth, and that a visible fire enters in,
which burns not. these Euchits did think that it appertayned not unto the
monks to get their lyuinge with the sweat of their brows, but to live idlye.
Epiphanius says, that when Luppicianus the Praetor executed some of them for
their lewdness, they called them selves Marryrianos. Some of them thought
that it was their duty to worship the deuell, lest he should hurt them,
these were called Sataniani. If ye called any of them Christ, a Patriarche, a
Prophet, or an Angel, he would answer that he was so. They slepte like
swine, men and women all in one heap. August. lib. de haeres. Epiphan. haeres.
80. These Massilia^s were condemned in the general council held at Ephesus in
the time of Theodosius junior. Cyrill. lib. Apologet. Artemius a noble man
beheaded for the faith. Theodor. lib. 3. cap. 18. The Meletia^s esse^bled at An
tioche, where they laid down the Macedonian opinion of the son of God iump
between the Arians and the true christians, where they proved the^ selves
neutrans. Ier. chro. Socr. li. 3. cap. 8. Dorotheus took possession of the
bishopric the second time and co^tinewed there a good while Democh. Socrat.
lib. 4. cap 28. A council at Laodicea, anno Domini 368. decreed that the
laytie should not choose the priest that lesso^s should be read in the church
between certain Psalms that service should be morning and evening that the
Gospel should be read with other Scriptures on the sunday that le^t should
religiously be observed without marie^g and solemnizinge the feasts of
martyrs. That christians should not dance at brydehouses etc. tom. 1. co^c.
367. Valentinianus one whom sometime Julian banished his court succeeded
Iouianus in the Empir he joined with him his brother Valens. Valentinianus was
a true Christian but Valens an Arian. the one persecuted the Church the other
preserved the christians. Valentinianus dyed Anno Domini 380. after he had
lived four and fiftye years and raygned thirteen. Valens his brother raygned
3. years after him and departed this life. Socrat. lib. 4. ca. 1. 26. 31.
Basilius b. of Caesarea in Cappadocia florishedabout this time. when Valens the
emperor sent for him out of Caesarea into Antioch he be haued him self very
stoutly in the defense of the truth. Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 21. Gregory
Nazianzen the master of S. Ierom lived in the time of Valens and dyed in the
raygne of Theodosius Magnus. Socrat. li. 4. cap. 21. Ierom catalog. eccles.
script. A council of Nouatians met at Pazum, and decreed contrary to the Nicen
counsel that the feast of Easter should be kept alike with the Jews.
Socrat. li. 4. cap. 23. Nepos Meletius came the second time to be Bishop.
Democh. 368. Ambrose b. of Millayne being Liuetenant of the province was chosen
to govern the church by the uniform consent of the people and confirmed by
Valentinianus. Ierom suspended his judgment of him because he lived in his
time Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 25. A council of macedonia^smet at Antioch and
condemned the Nicene council with the clause of one substance Socrat. lib. 5.
ca. 4 Damasus was b. of Rome, an. Dom. 369 after Liberius where he continewed
18. years. Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 17. 24. lib. 6. ca. 9. lib 7. ca. 9. Ierom.
chronic. 378. A counsel of 90. Bishops called at Rome by Damasur, where Arius,
Eunomius, Macedonius, Photinus, Hebio^ and their disciples were condemned where
also the holy Ghost was said to be of one substance with the father and the
son. tom. 1. council. Peter was b. of Alexandria after Athanasius an. Dom. 375
the Aria^s by authority from the emperor clapped him in prison, and chose Lucius
in his room Peter got out of prison and fled unto Damasus b. of Rome. Socrat.
lib. 4. cap. 16. 17. 80. priests were put in a ship, and burned quick by the
commandment of Vale^s the Arian Emperor. Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 13. Ammonius a
religious man cut of his ear, and fledd away because he would not be bishop.
Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 18. A council was called at Illyrium by Valetinianus
where the truth in the blessed trinity was confessed. Theod. li. 4. ca. 7. 8.
9. Lucius an Aria^ over the Arians. Socra. li. 4. ca. 16. Antidicomarianitae,
were heretics which impugned the virginity of Marie, saying that after the
birth of Christ Joseph did know her. August. lib. de haeres. Epiphan. haeres.
78. Euagrius a religious man, fled away because he would not be bishop. Socrat.
lib. 4. cap. 18. Jerome the learned writer whose works are famous throughout
the world, flourished about this time. Ierom. catalo. Ab. Tritem. A council
held at Rome by Damasus and Peter b. of Alexandria where the heresy of
Apollinarius was condemned. Ruff. lib. 2. cap. 2. Prayllius Theodoret. lib. 5.
cap. 38. Flauianus was chose^ b. of Antioche, and co^tinewed to the time of
Arcadius. Socrat. lib. 6. cap. 1 Ruff. lib. 2. cap. 21. Collyridiani were he
retickes which worshipped the Virgin Marie. Epiphanius in discoursing of this
heresy inueheth against images and worshipping of saints and Angels. haeres.
78 79. Metangismonitae were here tickes which said that the son was in the
father as a lesser vessel in a greater. August. lib. de haeres. 383. Gratianus
to gether with Valentinianus the younger succeeded Vale^tinianus and Valens in
the Empire Gratianus chose Theodosius Magnus a noble man of Spayn to govern
the Empire. These three ruling at one time were godly Empetoures. Ruffinus
priest of Aquileia one that was at great variance with Iero^, wrote many
notable volumes, he was a great tra^slator of Greek writers. Gennad. catalog.
A council held at Aquileia condemned Palladius and Secundianus the Aria^s tom.
1. council. Timothe a godly man succeeded Peter in the church of Alexandria.
Socra. lib. 5. cap. 3 8. Marinus the Arian thought that the father was a
father when there was no son. Such as were of this opinion were called
Psathyrians the reason why is to be seen in Socrates. lib. 5. cap. 22.
Euthicus an Eunomia^ baptized not in the trinity but in the death of Christ.
Socr. li. 5. c 23 Gratianus was slain by Maximus the britain when he had
lived four and twenty years and raygned fifteen. Valentinianus was stisled to
death. Augustine b. of Hippo in Aphricke wrote sundry excellent books,
Gennadius suspecteth his opinion toutching the resurrection of untimely
byrthes. Ge^^ad. catalog. Seleuciani, or Hermiani of one Seleucus, taught that
the substance whereof the world was made was not made of God but was coeternall
with God: that God makes not the soul, but Angels of fire and spirit: that
evil is some times of God, and some times of the thing it self ^ that Christ
sits not in the flesh at the right hand of the Father but has his seat in
the Sun. that there was no visible paradis^ that Baptism is no^ to be
received by water: that there shall b^ no resurtectio^, but the daily
generation ^ children. August. lib. ^ haeres. Theodosius the Emperor who of all
theother was most famous throughout the world, fell sick and dyed when he had
lived 60 years, and raygned 16. Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 2. 11. 24. 25. Nectarius
a man of noble lineage and profounde learning was chosen b. of Constantinople
by a hundred and fifty bishops. Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 8. This Nectarius banished
confession and the shriuinge priest out of the church and so did other
Bishops, because that a cestayne Deacon abused at Constantinople a grave mation
under color of confession. Socrat. lib. 5 cap. 19. A council of a hundred and
fifty bishops met at Co^tantinople by the commandment of Theodosius Magnus
where they confirmed the faith of the Nicene counsel, divided patria^chships,
decreed that no bishop should meddle with anything out of his own diocese, and
chose Nectarius b. of Co^sta^ntinople. Socras. lib. 5. cap. 8. Siricius was b.
of Rome after Damasus An. Do. 387. and co^tinewed 15. years Prosp. chron.
Socrat lib. 7. cap. 9. This b. of Rome was the first which decreed that
priests should not mary. Gra. Polid. ^ Proclianits deny that Christ came in the
flesh. August. Patri^iani said that man's flesh was not made of God but of the
Deuell, so that some dispatched them selves to cast of the flesh. August. 399.
Arcadius and Honorius the sons of Theodosius Magnus succeeded their father,
the one in the east the other in the west. When that Arcadius had raygned 13.
years with his father Theod^sius Magnus, and 14. after his desease, he dyed
leaving behind him his son John Chrysostom was b. of Constantinople after
Nectarius anno Dom. 401. his lineage and education is laid down at large by
Socrates. He made Antemnes in the church of Constantinople. There was great
variance between him and Epiphanius b. of Cyprus. It was A council held at
Vale^tia in France decreede in the time of Siricius b. of Rome, that Prestes
should not marie. Isid. in council. Porphyrius was b. of Antioche after
Flauianus. Socr. lib. 7. cap. 9 Authropomorphitae were Monks inhabitinge the
deserts of Egypt which thought that God the father had a body and was like
man, these lived in the time of Chrysostom. Anno Domini. 402. they had their
original of one Audaeus mentioned before in the time of Co^stantius. Socrat.
li. 6. ca. 7 hereupon it rose that God the father has been painted like an
old man in a graye bearde. 401. The^d sius junior, of the age of eight years
to succeed him in the east, Honorius continewed never theles in the west.
Socrat. lib. 6. ca 1. 21 lib. 7. cap. 1. Theophilus b. of Alexandria that set
them by the ears. He made a sermon against all women and was therefore by the
procurement of the empress deposed, the people made such ado that he was
called hom again, yet was he exiled afterward and died in banishmente. anno
Dom. 412. Socrat. li. 6. ca. 2. 3. 9. 14. The first counsel held at Toledo in
Spain in the time of Arcadius decreed that priests should mary. tom. 1.
council. A council held at Burdeux in Gascoygne condemned Priscillianus the
Spaniard for his heretia all opinion. Prosper. ch^on. There was a council held
at Chalcedo^, where Chrysostom was co^demued of spite and for no other crime.
Socrat. lib. 6. cap. 14. Anastasius was b. of Rome after Siricius Anno Dom.
401. and governed three ye^es. Prosp. chron. Socrat lib. 7. cap. 9. Theophilus
was b. of Alexandria after Timothe, for fear of his life he yielded unto the
heresy of the Anthropomorphits against which he wrote a notable book as
Ge^nadius reports of him. It was he that made Chrysostom and Epiphanius
dedly foes, he was a spiteful man all his lifetime, and in the end dyed of a
lethargy. Socrat. lib. 6. ca. 1. 7. 9. lib. 7. cap. 7 Gennad. catalog. vir.
illustr. Ascitae of (...) a bottell, gadded about the contry with a bottell,
bibbinge thereof and saying, that they were the new bottells whereof the
Gospel spoke, filled with new wine. August. lib. de haeres. Alexander was b.
of Antioche after Porphyrius. Socras. lib. 7. cap. 9. Aquari were heretics
which offered water in the sacrament in steed of wine. August. lib. de haeres.
Priscillianus a Spaniard maintained the opinion of Gnostici, Manichaeus, and
Sabellius being condemned by the council of Burdeux he appealed unto Maximus
the usurping Emperor which found him an heretik and beheaded him Prosp.
chronic. he said the soul was of one substance with God and come down from
heaven to endure voluntary conflictes. He said that man's actions were governed
by the stars. he condemned the eating of flesh, he parted married couples
referring the creation of the flesh, not to god but to wicked angels. he
allowed of the scriptures called Apocrypha. unto every of his followers he
said, Iura, periura, secretum prodere noli. August. li. de haeres. Epiphanius
b. of Cyprus flourished in the time of Arcadius. he was at deadly enmity with
Chrysostom, the worker of all that mischief was Theophilus b. of Alexandria.
He came from Co^stantia in Cyprus to Constantinople, celebrated the communion,
gave orders without the license of John the bishop, therein to gratify
Theophilus. At his farewell from Constantinople he said thus unto Chrysostom,
I hope thou shall never dye a bishop. Chrysostom said unto Epiphanius again,
and I hope thou shall never come alive into thy co^ try. the truth is it fell
out so to both, Epiphanius died by the way and Chrysostom in exile. Socrat.
lib. 6. ca. 9. 11. 13 Theotinus b. of Scythia reprehended Epiphanius for
conde^ning rashly the books of Origin. Socrat. lib. 6. cap. 11. A council was
called at Cyprus by Epiphanius where through the spite of Theophilus b. of
Alexandria the books of Origin were condemned. Socrat. lib. 6. cap. 9.
Theophilus called a council at Alexandria and condemned of malice he bare unto
certain monks the books of Origin. Scrat. li. 6. cap. 9. Iuuenalis b. of
Jerusalem after Prayllius, he was at the counsel of Ephesus and condemned
Nestorius the he reticke. an. 435. Socra. lib. 7. cap. 3 he was also at the
council of Chalcedo^, in the time of Martianus. Euag. lib. 2. ca. 4. Pelagius a
Britain and a monk of Bangor wrote notable books as Gennadius said before
he fell into heresy, his heresies were these: that man without the grace of
God was able to fulfill all the commaundeme^ts of God: that man had free will:
that the grace of God was given unto us according to our merits: that the just
have no sin in this life: that children have no original sin: that Adam
should have died if he had not sinned. August. lib. de haeres. Polidor. 404.
Effrem Syrus lived about this time. his books were thought so notable, that
they were read in the church. Ierom. catalog. A council held at Carthage
called the 2. decreed that priests should not marie. tom. 1. council. Theodotus
was b. of Antioche after Alexander. Theodor. li. 5. cap. 38. Innocentius was b.
of Rome after Anastasius Anno Do. 404. where he continewed 15. years. Prosp.
chron. Socr. lib. 7. cap. 9. this Innocentius wrote unto Chrysostom and to the
clergy of Constan tinople. Sozom. lib. 8. ca 26. Coluthiani were heretics
which said that the evil which is so called in respect o^ us to we^e, the
evil o^ punishment, cross, an^ vexatio^ proceeded no from God. August. An
other council held at Carthage called the 3. decred that the clergy in their
years of discretion should either marry, or vow chastity: that the chief
bishop should not be called the prince of priests, or highest priest, but
only the bishop of the chief seae. tom. 1. council. Iouinianus a mon^ taught
with the stoil^ that all sins were ^ quall: that man had n^ sin after
baptis^^ that fasting was to (...) purpose, that Mar^ was no virgin wh^ she
was delivered. August. lib. de haeres. A council held at Hippo anno Dom. 417.
decreed that bishops and priests should look well unto their own children:
that no bishop should appeal over seae: that the bishop of the head seae
should not be called the chief priest: that no scripture be read in the church
but canonical. tom. 1. council. Heluidius said the Marie was a Virgi^ when
Christ was bo^ yet afterward to ha^ borne the brethren Christ. August. Genn^
catalog. vir. illustr. 412. Theodosius iu nior the son of Arcadius being left
of the age of 8. years succeeded his father in the Eastern empire. though he
were lesie young yet governed he the empire wiselye by the means of Anthemius a
politic man his virtues and manner of living are set for that large in
Socrates history. When that Honorius was slain in the battaill between the
Romans and the Persians he proclaimed Valentinianus the younger Emperor of
Rome and gave him Eudoxia his daughter to mariadge but he was slain by the
soldiers of Actius. Theodusius in his life time detested all heretics and
made a law wherein he condemned Ne^torius. he raygned 38. years and the^ dyed
Anno Dom. 450. Socrat. lib. 7. ca. 1. 22. 23. 24. 43. Euagrius lib. 1. cap. 12.
22. Orosi^^ a Spaniard and a learned historiographer slo^shed about this time,
Gennad. he wrote unto Augustine, and Augustine unto him again. Primasius b. of
Aphricke and the disciple of S. Augustine wrote upon holy s^^ip ture. Gessner.
Johannes Cassianus the deacon of Chrysostom lived about this time. Gennad.
catalog. The 4. and 5. council of Car thage laid down the ol^ctio^ and
office of clergy men. to. 1. concis. John was b. of Antioche after Theodotus
he was at great variance with Cyrill b. of Alexandria but they were
immediately reconciled he was at the council of Ephesus and condemned
Nestorius. Socrat. lib. 7. ca. 23 Euagr. li. 1. ca. 5. 6. Ge^nad. catalog.
Zosimus was b. of Rome after Innocentius An. Dom. 418. and co^tinewwed 2. years
Prosp. chro. Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 11. Bonifacius was b. of Rome after Zosimus
three years and 9. months. Socr. li. 7. c. 11 Cyrillus succeeded Theophilus in
the seae of Alexandria and withal he chale^ged to him self more authority the^
ever any other bishop had before him. from that time forth besides the
oversight and rule of his clergy and ecclesiastical affairs, the bishop of
Alexandria took also the government of te^porall matters. he banished all the
Jews out of Alexandria for murdering of the christians he condemned Nestorius
in the council of Ephesus. Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 7. 13. 33 Rhetorius was of a
wonderful vain opinion. He thought that all heretics walked aright and
maintained the truth. August. lib. de haeres. Paterniani were heretics which
thought that the nether parts of man's body^ were made not by God but by the
deuell. and there fore yielded all those parts unto all beastly life. some
called these men Venustianos. August. Acacius b. of Amida was famous for his
godly acts in the days of Theodosius the younger. he pytied the Persian
captives which the Romans had taken, and lamented to see them perish for
want of food. he called his clergy and said thus unto them. Our lord has no
need either of po^^i^gers or of cups. for he neither ^ateth neither drinks,
etc. he persuaded them so that he sold the treasure, relieved the prisoners,
and redeemed the captives. Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 21. The council held at
Taurinu^ at the foot of the alps was held for the reformation of the clergy
tom. ^. council. The council of Malta condemned the Pelagians and Donatists, and
concluded that all me^ were sinners, that the grace of God was given to the
fulfilling of the law, that infants were to be baptized. to. 1. council* A
counsel held at Telene in the time of Zosimus, thrust upon the clergy vowed
chastity which Siricius had first commanded. tom. 1. council. The 6. council
of Carthage ratified the canons of the Nicene council. tom. 1. council.
Celestinus was b. of Rome after Bonifacius Anno Donini 425. and continewed 9.
years. Soc. lib. 7. cap. 11 Prosp. chro. this Celestinus sent Palladius to be
bishop of the Scotts. Tertullianistae were heretics which denied second
mariadges and said that the souls of wicked men became deuells after their
departure out of this life and that the soul is continewedby goinge from one
into an other as much to say by carnal descent and succes^ion. August 425.
Isidorus a Peleusian, was of great fame in the days of Cyrill, and wrote a
book unto him. Fuag lib. 1. cap. 15. The 7. council of Carthage laid down what
kind of me^ were fit to bear witness against the clergy. to. 1. co^c. A
council was held in Aphrike where all the provinces came together in the time
of Bonifacius and Celestinus bishops of Ro^^, where they condemned Pelagi^s,
and decreed that no bishop should be called the head of all priests, that no
appeal should be made out of Aphrick to any other bishop. etc. tom. 1. council.
In the time of Celestinus says Socrates the bishop of Rome passinge the
bosides of his priestly order, presumed to chale^g unto him self secular power
and autoriti^. lib. 7. cap. 11. Nestorius the heretic by birth a Germayne,
yet priest of Antioch, was sent for by Theodositis to Constantinople, and
there made bishop. for his crucltie he was called a fire bra^d. he brought from
Antioch a priest in his company whose name was Anastasius, which taught in
the church that Marie was not to be called the mother of God, whom he
defended, and avoided as Socrates says this clause: the motheror bearing of
God as a bugg or frayinge ghost, yet he proceeded in spite, and being called
to the council of Ephesus, he denied that Christ was God, and seeing that
there rose great stir thereof, he seemed to repent, but the council deposed
and banished him into Oasis God winked not at his impiety, but plagued him
diue^sly from above, his tongue was eaten up of worms, and so he dyed. Socrat.
lib. 7. cap. 22. 23. 29. Euag. lib. 1. cap. 2. 3. 7. Synesius b. of Cyrene an
eloquent man and a profou^d philosopher flourished in the time of Theodosius.
Euagr. lib. 1. cap. 15. A general counsel called at Ephesus an. Do. 434. (
Prosper. chron.) of 200. bishops, where Nestorius the he retick was condemned.
Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 33. Euagr. lib. 1. cap. 4. A council was held at Rhegiu^,
for the redress of ecclesiastical matters. tom. 1. council. Abelitae were
heretics about Hippo in Aphricke, so called of Abel the son of Adam. wives
they abhorred, yet lived they not without. men and women under color of
chastity lived in one house, and to be their heir they would always adopt one
or other of their neighbors children. Augu. 434. Prudentius and Sedulius
christian Poets lived about this time. Gennad. catalog Prosper Aquitanicus one
that wrote many notable tractes whose sentences are to be seen among
Augustines works, flourished in the reign of Theodosius. He wrote also a
notable chronographie. Gennad. A council was called at Rome by Valentinianus
the yo^ger, where Sixtus the b. purged him self of certain crimes that were
laid to his charge A sect of here ticks the first authors name is not known,
said that after the resurrection this world should not be changed, but
remain still as it does, contrarit to the scripture, which says there shall
be a new heaven and ^ new earth. August. 435. In the reign of this
Theodosius the bryttaynes s^t for the Saxones out of Germany to asist them
against the Scots and Picts* Polidor. Symeon a religious man in the time of
Domnus b. of Antioche was the author of a strange kind of life. he lived many
years in a pilloure. He was known to be a godly man. Euagr. lib. 1. cap. 12.
lib. 2. ca. 10. Sixtus called a council at Ro^e to examine the doings of
Polychronius b of lerusale^. to. 1. co^c. The counsel of Agatha decreed that
none should be made priest before he were 30. years old that the clergy
should wear such attire as became their profession with many other
constitutions. to. 1. council. An other sect went always barefoote not for the
aflictio^ of the body but because they understood fo^dly certain places of
the scripture. August An other sect would never eat mea^ with men. They took
the holy ghost for a creature. August. Socrates Scholasticus which co^tinewed
in seven books the ecclesiastical history of Eusebius P^philus from
Constantinus magnus unto the better part of Theodosius junior his raygne was
about this time of great fame through out all Greece. The 1. and 2. counsel
held at Aurenge decreed among other things that such as fled to sanctu aries
should be aided: condemned free will and grace of merits. tom. 1. council. The
1. and 2. counsels held at Vasio, in the time of Theodosius, decreed that in
such churches where preachers were not, Deacons should read homilies. tom.
1. council. I find tom. 1 council. That in the time of Sixtus b. of Rome there
was one Polychronius b. of Jerusalem a very short while and deposed in a
council held at Rome for Simony and extorcion: But other writers make no
mention of him and say that from Theodosius to Martianus the Emperor,
Iuuenalis was b. of Jerusalem. Domnus was b. of Antioche after John. Euagr.
lib. 1. cap. 10. Sixtus the third was b. of Rome after Celestinus. An. Dom.
435. and continewed 8. years. Prosp. chr. One Bassus laid diverse crimes to his
charge so that he called a council and purged him self tom. 1. con cil. Gennad
catalog. An other heretic said that the divinity of Christ sorowed when his
naked body was nailed to the tree* August. An other there was which said that
God was of three parts, the father, the son, and the holy ghost, calling
them all not absolute persons, but parts of one. August. some heretics said
that the water was not made by God but was always coeternall with hi^. August.
Theodoretus b. of Cyrus wrote about this time the Ecclesiastical history
co^prising a hundred and five years. Sozome^^s wrote the Ecclesiastical history
from Co^;sta^tinus Magnus unto the reign of Theodosius junior Maximu^ b. of
Taurinum one that wrote many notable tractes lived about this time. Ge^nad.
catalog. A council held at Carpe^toracte decreed that the bishop should not
poule the parishes. tom. 1. council. Some said that the body and not the soul
was the image of God. August. Others said that the souls of wicked men were
turned into deuells and to every sort of beasts correspondent to their
merits. August. 443. The 3. council of Arelate decreed that no deacon should
be made before he were 25. year old, no priest before 30. years. tom. 1.
council. A provincial council was held at Constatinople, where Eutyches was
condemned. Euag. lib. 1. cap. 9. An heretical council held at Ephesus, where
by the means of Dioscorus b. of Alexandria, Eutyches the he reticke was
restored. Euag. lib. 1. cap. 10. Maximus was b. of Antioche after Domnus. he
was at the counsel of Chalcedo^. Euagr. lib. 2. cap. 4. Leo was b. of Rome
after Sixtus Anno Dom. 443. where he co^tinewed 21. years. Prosp. chr. Palmer.
liuagr. lib. 1. cap. 10. He died in the time of the Emperor Leo and Maioranus.
Go^nad. catalog. Some said that when Christ went to hell all the unfaithful
believed and were delivered. August. Other say that Christ was always with the
father but not always a son August. 450. Martianus a Thracia^ sueceeded
Theodosius junior in the eastern Empire. He was one that behaved him self
virtuously toward God and man He raygned 7. years and then dyed. Euag. li.
1. ca. 22. li. 2. ca. 1. 8 Gennadiu^ a learned writer, the author of the
catalogue of famous men which is found among Ierome^ works s^o^^shed about
this time. A council of 630. bishops was held at Chalcedon by the
commandment of Martianus, where Dioscorus b. of Alexandria was deposed,
Nestorius, Eutyches, and Macedonius condemned. Euagr. lib. 2. cap. 2. 4. 10
Theodosius was by the idle monks made b. of Ierusalemin the absence of
Iuuenalis, but Martianus the Emperor deposed him, and restored the other.
Euag. lib. 2. cap. 5. lib. 3. cap. 6. Dioscorus was b. of Alexandria after
Cyrill, he was of Nestorius opinion, and deposed by the council of
Constantinople. he was also of Eutyches opinion, and deposed by the counsel of
Chalcedon. Euagr. lib. 1. cap. 10 lib. 2. cap. 5. Proterius was b. of
Alexandria after the counsel had deposed Dioscorus, he was a godly man, yet a
soldier, ran him through with a naked sword upon Easter day, and the
seditious persons after his death burned him to ashes. Euagr. lib. 2. cap. 5.
8. Eutyches mayntayned the opinions of Nestorius and said that our Lord
co^sisted of 2. natures, before the divinity was coopled with the humanity,
but after the vnitinge of the^ to be of one nature, and that the body of Christ
was not of one substance with ours. the counsel of Constantinople deposed him
but he appealed unto Theodosius, and procured the counsel of Ephesus to be
su^moned where Dioscorus the heretic restored him. Euagr. lib. 1. cap. 9.
This Eutyches being condemned in the council of Chalcedo^ brake out into these
words. this is the faith that I was baptized in, this is the faith which I have
learned of the fathers, and in this faith will I die. tom. 2. council. Dioscorus
b. of Alexandria was an Eu^ychian. Euagr. Maximus in his time was Emperor of
Rome after Valentinianus death 70. days but Ge^zerichus king of the Va^dals
took Rome, tore Maximus in pecces threw his car ^^asse into tibris and went
back to Car thage. Auitus was Emperor after Maxi^^^ 8. months. Johannes
Damascenus a learned writer wrote against the Arians. Pantal. A council held
at Venice about this time decred that no clergy men should wa^der from one
diocese to an other without dimissarie letters: that they should not be at
weddinge diners, daunces, and hering of wantonsonnets: that throughout the same
province they observe one manner of divine service tom. 2. council. A council
was called at Tours in France for the reformation of Ecclesiastical matters.
tom. 2. council. Martyrius b. of Antioch. Nicephor. Theodore^. collect.
Timotheus AElurus a monk was by the seditious persons made b. of Alexandria
while Proteriu^ lived, he was of Apollin^rius opinion and immediately deposed
by Leo. Euag. lib. 2. cap. 8. 11. he went about the monks lodginges in the
night time and cried like a spirit, that they should chose Timotheus AElurus
to their bishop, meaning him self. Theod. collect. Timotheus an heretical
bishop. Maioranus was Emperor of Rom in the end of Martianus and the beginning
of Leo where he raygned. 4 years But Seuerus dispatched him and took his rowme
himself. Euag. li. 2. cap. 7. Palmer. chronic. Anatolius b. of Constantinople
flourished in the days of Leo. Euagr. Iulianus b. of Antioch Nicephor.
Theodore^. collect. Timotheus Basilicus, otherwise called Salofaciolus was b.
of Alexandria after the exile of his predecessor. Euag. lib. 2. cap 11. but he
was banished not long after. 458. Leo was Emperor in the East after
Martianus. He wrote unto Anatolius b. of Constantinople for to examine the
stir risen at Alexandria about the murdering of Proterius and the election
of Timotheus. He governed 17. years and deposed himself placinge in his rowme
Leo the son of his daughter Ariadne and of Zeno, but this younger Leo dyed
immediately and Zeno his father ruled the empire alone. Eua. lib. 2. cap. 8. 9.
17. Paulinus b. of Nola in Italy was of great fame about this time, he gave
all his substance to redeem captives and poor prisoners. Palmer chronic. A
council held at Rome in the time of Hilarious confirmed the Nicene Creed that
such as had Canonical impediments were not to be made priests. tom. 2.
council. Hilarious was b. of Rome after Leo an. Dom. 464. and continewed 6.
years. Palm. chro. Anton. chro. Acephali were a confuse multitude of
heretics without a head which reviled the council of Chalcedon, and said
that Christ had but one nature. Palmer. chron. 458. Arthur king of bryttaine a
noble and a valiant Prince is sarde about this time to be of great fame
throughout the west parts of the world. Seuerus was Emperor of the west, and
abode at Rauenna after Maioranus 4. years. Palmer. chronic. Anthemius was sent
from Leo to be Emperor of Rome, where he continewed 5. years. Euag. lib. 2.
cap. 16. Olymbrius was emperor 7. months. Glycerius was Emperor 5. years,
whom Nepos deposed. Nepos was Emperor of Rome 56 days, whom Orestes deposed.
Orestes made Augustulus his son emperor. Anastasius was b. of Jerusalem after
Iuuenalis one as it is reported that subscribed unto the condemnation of the
council of Chalcedo^ for fear of Basiliscus. Euagr. li. 3. cap. 5. Basilius b.
of Antioch. Euagr. lib. 2. ca. 10. Augustulus the son of Orestes, raygned one
year, he was the last Emperor of Rome of the thousand and three hundred
years since the ^aygne of Romulus. I ^^ough edition and civil wars it fell
out, that the Empire came to naught. many raygned in the west of aequall
authority. Odoacer that succeeded Augustulus, would not call him self Emperor
but king* there was no Emperor of the west the space of 330 years before the
year of our Lord. eight hundred* when Carolus Magnus king of France was by
Leo the 3. of that name b. of Rome crowned Emperor. From that time the
Emperors of the west were called the Emperoures of Germany* Euagr lib. 2.
cap. 16. Math. Palmer. chronic. Ieno succeeded Leo in the empire, a wick^d and
a beastly liver. Basiliseus the tyrante oue^ came him, became Emperor 2.
years, and pro^laimed his son Peter Cnapheus b. of Antioch. He was an
heretic and condemned the counsel of Chalcedo^. He was afterward deposed
by Zeno the Emperor. Euagr. lib. 3. cap. 5. 8. Simplicius was b. of Rome.
after Hilarious Anno Do. 470* where he continewed 15. years he wrote unto Zeno
the Emperor, and Zeno unto hi^ again toutching John b. of Antioche that was
deposed. Palmer. chronic. Euagr* li. 3. cap. 15. Timotheus AElurus was called
from exile, where he had been 18. years by Basilis^us the tyrant, and restored
to the seae of Alexandria. he accursed the council of Chalcedon. Zeno purposed
to persecute him, but seeing that he was an old man, he let him alone, and
shortly after he died. Eua. lib. 3. cap. 4. 6. 11. Peter Cnapheus b. of
Antioche was an Eutychian, he accursed the council of Chalcedon, trobled all
Egypt, and set the religious men by the ears. Euagr. lib. 3. cap. 16. 17. 22.
Idle monks within the province of Alexandria, fell to the heresy of Eutyches,
and to revile the council of Chalcedon. Euag. lib. 3. cap. 17 475. Le^us a
learned man was burned by Honoricus the Arian. Anto. chron. Stephan b. of
Antioch after the deposition of Peter but the Antiochians dispatched him with a
c^uell death. Euagr. lib. 3. cap. 10. Petrus Moggus was made b. of Antioch
after the desease of Timo theus Aelurus but Zeno was offended with it, and
thrust him out. Eua. lib. 3. cap. 11. Petrus Moggus b. of Alexandria was an
heretic. Euagr. 485. Marcus, Caesar. this Basiliscus sent letters every where,
and condemned in them the council of Chalcedon. but he was feign by reason of
the schism that rose thereof at Constantinople to call in his letters, and not
long after Zeno came with great power, and ouerthrewe him, slew him, his
wife and children. This Zeno raygned 17. years, and dyed of the falling
sickness. Euag. lib. 2. cap. 17. lib 3. cap. 1. 3. 4. 7. 8. 29. Dionysia with
Maioricus her son suffered infinite torments for the faith in Christ Auton.
chro. Fulgentius flourished about this time. Palmer. chronic. Hesychius wrote a
learned co^mentarie upon Leuiticus. Conrad. Lycost. A council held at Tarraco
in Spain in the time of Felix, laid down certain canons for the reforma
tion of the clergy. tom. 2. council. Martyrius was bishop of Jerusalem after
Anastasius. Euagr. lib. 3. cap. 16. Felix the 2 of that name was b. of Ro^e
after Simplicius an. Dom. 485. where he co^tinewed 9. years. Euag. lib 3. cap.
18. 19. 20. Anton. chron. Timotheus Basilicus is by Zeno called from exile and
restored to his bishop ricke Euagr. lib. 3. cap. 11. John succee*ded Timothe he
made suit in his predecessors days that the Emperor would grant him the
nominatinge o^ the next incumbent, and swore he would not take it him self,
when the seae was void he gave the electors money, forgot his oath, and became
bishop hi^ self, therefore the Emperor deposed him Euagr. lib. 3. cap. 12.
Honoricus king of the Vandals was an Arian and exiled 334. bishops. Honor.
catalog. heret. But says Anton. chronic. He exiled of the clergy and laytye
to the number of 4975. persons. Euagr. lib. 4. cap. 14. The east churches were
wonderfully infected and at great dissentio^ about the heresies of Nestorius,
Eutyches and Dioscorus. Euagr. lib. 3. cap. 31. From the reign of Augustus (in
the 42. year of whose Imperie Christ was borne) unto the death of Zeno and the
creation of Anastasius there are 532. years and 7. months: from the reign of
Diocletian 207. years and seven months: from the raygne of Alexander Magnus
king of Macedonia 832. years and 7. months: from the building of Rome and the
kingdom of Romulus 1052. years and seaue^ months: from the destruction of
Troie 1686. years and 7. months. Euagr. lib. 3. cap. 29. All the bishops of
Aphricke came together by the commandment of Honoricus the Aria^ where his
heresy was confirmed, and 444. godly bishops exiled. Anton. chron. part. 2.
tit. 11. Salustius was b. of Jerusalem after Martyrius. Eua. lib. 3. cap. 36.
Calandio was b. of Antioche after the death of Stephan he accursed both the
letters of Basilis^us and of Timothe. Euagr. lib. 3. cap. 10. Petrus Cnapheus
after the desease of Calandio was restored unto the bishop rick. Euag. lib. 3.
ca. 16 Petrus Moggus is again restored by Zeno, upon condition that he will
renounce his heresy. Euagr. lib. 3. ca. 12 492. Anastasius succeeded Zeno in
the Empire. He took not only the Empire after him but also his wife. When he
saw the great sedition that raygned in the church he called the people
together and told them he would be Emperourno longer, but the people saying
this quieted themselves, requested him to continewe their Emperor, so he did
and dyed shortly after when he had raygned 27 years three months and three
days. Euagr. lib. 3. cap. 29. 44. Egesippus a great divine flourished about
this time. Sabell. A synod of 70. b. was called together at Ro^e by Gelasius,
where the Canonical scriptures were severed from such as were Apocrypha. tom.
2. council. Palladius was b. of Antioche after Peter Euagr. li. 3. cap. 23.
Gelasius was b. of Rome after Felix. Anno Do. 494. where he continewed 4.
years. ^om. 2. concill. Athanasius succeeded Peter in the bishopric of
Alexandria. Euagr. lib* 3. cap. 23. The monks of Constantinople were heretics
of Eutyches opinion. Euagr. lib. 3. cap. 31. Certain Man^ches were fou^de^ at
Rome in the time of Gelasiu^ they were banished and they^ books burned to
asses. Palme^ chron. Boethius a christian philosopher endured great
perse*cution under Theodoricus the Arian. Volat. A synod met at Epaunis and
decreed that no clergy man should either hunt or hawk: that throughout the
province such divine service as the Metropolitan liked of should be retained.
tom. 2. co^c. Flauianus was b. of Antioche after Palladius but Anastasius the
Emperor deposed him for sedition. Euagr. lib. 3. cap. 23. 30. 31. Anastasius
2. was b. of Rome after Gelasius 2. years. romans 2. co^c The monks o^ Syria
were heretics, cam^ in a heat to Antioch, mad^ there an insurrection so tha^
a great numbe^ of them in ste^^ of earth were buried in the river Oronte^ Euag.
li. 3. ca. 3^ some do write of him that he should command not a Trinity,
but a quaternitie to be worshipped and therefore was ^^itten with a
thunderbolt, and so dyed. P. d^^c. blond. Remigius a bishop of France
flourished about this time. Volat A counsel held at R^uenna in presence of Theo
doricus debated the schism that iose about the election of a b. of Rome and
cho^e Syma^hus Palmer. chron. Six synods were held at Rome in the time of
Syma^hus toutchinge the election of a b. o^ Rome and the preservation of church
goods. tom. 2. council. Helias was b. of Jerusalem after Salustius. Euag. lib.
4. cap. 36. Seuer^ was b. of Antioche after the deposition of Flauianus. before
he was priest he was a counceller and pleaded law at Berytus, after he was
made Bishop he fell into the he resie of Eutyches. Eua. lib. 3. ca. 33 34.
Symachus was b. of Rome after Anastasius 15. years. tom. 2. council. John
succeeded Athanasius. Euagr. lib. 3. cap. 23. Olympus an Arian bishop as he
bayned him self at Carthage, and blasphemed the blessed trinity, was suddenly
smitten from heaven with three firye darts, and burned quick. Palmer. chronic.
519. Justinius a thrac^a^ succeeded Anastasius he favored the counsel of
Chalcedon. He dispatched through wil^s a great number of tyrants whom he
suspected. When he had ^aygned 8. years. 9. months and three days, he
proclaimed Iustinianus his fellow Empe^our, raygned with him four months then
dyed. Vuagr. li. 4. cap. 1. 23. 9. Zosimas and John Chuzubites were famous for
their godly lif and strau^g miracles. Euag. lib. 4 cap. 7. A council held at
Ilerda in Spain decreed that such as slew the child in the womb with
potions and simpersauces should be banished the commumo^ the space of 7.
years, that clergyme^ being desamed should purge them selves. tom. 2. co^c. A
council held at Valentia in Spain dec^eed the Gospel should be read after
the Epistle tom. 2. council. A council held at Au^^lia in the time of Hormisda
decreede that Lent should be solemnelye kept before Easter, the ro^atio^ week
with the ember days about the ascension. tom 2. co^c. A council held at
Gerunda in Spain decreed that every province should observe one order of
diuineseruice that baptism should be ministered only at Easter and witsontide
and at other times if necessity so required: that the Lords prayer should be
said at morninge and evening prayer. tom. 2. council. A council held at
Caesaraugusta accursed such as received the sacrament and eat it not in the
church. tom. 2. council. Petru^ b. of Jerusalem after Helias. Euagr. lib. 4. ca.
36 the general council held at Constantinople wrote unto him what they had
done. to. 2. council. Hormisda was b. of Rome after Symachus anno Dom. 516.
where he co^tinewed 9. years. Anto. chro. Ioh succeeded the former John. Euag.
lib. 3. ca. 23 Seuerus b. of Antioch was of Eutyches opinion, Justinius the
emperor in the first year of his reign caused his tongue to be pulled out of
his mouth, because he reviled the council of Chalcedon, and preached raylinge
sermons. Euag. lib. 4. cap. 4. Deuterius an Arian b. of Constantinople as he
baptized one Barbas he used this form: I baptize Barbas in the name of the
father through the son in the holy ghost. Theod. collect. Brigida a maid,
whose revelations are at this day extant flourished about this time. Palmer.
chron. Paulus was b* of Antioche after Seuerus. E uagr. lib. 4. cap. 4.
Euprasius succeeded Paulus, he dyed in the earthquake which was at Antioch the
7. year of Justinius. Euag. lib. 4 cap. 4. 5. Theodosius was b of Alexandria
after John, Iustinianus deposed him for maintayninge the heresy of Eutyches.
Euag. lib. 4 cap. 9. 11. 36. Benedictus the first fou^der of the order
commonly called S. Benedictes dyed says Volateran. li. 21. Anno Do. 518. He
was the first and the only deviser of a several trade of lif within the
first 600. years after christ and because he presumed to invent a new way
which all the godly fathers before him never thought of I laid him here down
for a schismaticke. and couched him in the catalogue of heretics. 525.
Priscianus the great gra^marian lived in the days of Justinian. Palmer.
chron. The 2. council held at Toledo decreed that all what so ever the clergy
held de iure should return unto the church after their desease. to. 2. conc.
In the time of John 2. b. of Rome. Euphremius a noble man succeeded Euphrasius
in the bishop ricke of Antioche. Euagr. li. 4. cap. 6. John was B. of Rome
after Hormisda an. Dom. 525. and continewed there 2. years and 10. months.
Palm. chron. Monothelitae were heretics which denied that Christ had 2.
wills, a divine and humane. Volater. lib. 17. 528. Iustinianus succeeded Justinius
in the empire. he was covetous, cruel, and careless of that which was good.
the Empress his wife favored the heretical opinion of (...) (...) lie hi^
self fell into a blasphemous opinion which is to be seen in the cataloge of
the heretics* he raygned 38. years, 8. months, dyed and went straight down
to hell as Euagrius thinks. Euagr. lib. 4. ca. 9. 10. 29. 31. 38. 40. lib. 5.
cap. 1. Barsanuphius a religious man was of great fame in the time of
Iustinianus* E^^gr. lib. 4. cap. 32. A general council was called at
Constantinople in the 27. year of Iustinianus the Emperor and in the time of
Vigilius b. of Rome where they condemned the heresies of Anthimus b. of
Constantinople, Se^e^^^ ^ of Antioche* Peter Cnapheia Theodorus and Lo^ras:
allowed the 4. former general counsels: decreed that Marie should be called
the mother of God: and condemned Origin. tom. 2. conc. Euag. lib. 4. cap. 37. A
2. and 3. council held at Aurelia laid down many godly decrees. tom. 2.
council. Domninus b. of Antioch after Euphremius Euagr. lib. 4. ca. 37 Felix 4.
was b. of Rome after John, and continewed 4. years. Anton. chronic. Bonifacius
2. was b. of Rome after Felix 2. years Anton. chronic. tom. 2. council. John 2.
was b. of Rome after Bonifacius 2. years. tom. 2. council. Agapetus was b. of
Rome after John 2. one year Anton. chronic. Siluerius was b. of Rome after
Agapetus one year. tom. 2. council* Zoilus was b. of Alexandria after
Theodosius. Euagr. lib. 4. ca. 11 Theodora the wife of Iustinianus the Emperor
was of Eutyches opinion. Euag. lib. 4. cap. 10. Iustinianus the emperor wrote an
edict but God bereaved hi^ of his life before he published it, where he affirmed
that the body of Christ was not subject to corruption that it was void o^ the
natural affections which appertain thereunto that he eat before his passion
as he di^ after his resurrection: that his most holy body was n^ thing changed
for all the framing thereof in the mothers womb, and for all the natural a^^
voluntary affection Euagr. lib. 4. cap. ^ this is that Iustin^^ whose laws are
much made of throughoute the world. 557. Menas patriarche of Constantinople
flourished about this time. tom. 2. council. The council of Auergne was held in
the time of Vigilius. tom. 2. conc. Macarius was b. of Jerusalem after Peter,
he was deposed for heresy Euagr. li. 4 cap. 36. Anastasius was b. of Antioche
after Domninus. he rebuked Iustinianus for his heresy. Justinius 2. deposed him
upon false reports and as some say because he would not give him money for his
bishopric. Euag. lib. 4 cap. 38. 39. lib. 5. cap. 5 Vigilius was b. of Rome
after Siluerius anno Do. ^39. where he continewed 18. years. Palmer chron.
Anton. chron* Euag. lib. 4. cap. 37. Pelagius was b. of Rome after Vigilius,
anno Dom. 557. where he continewed 11. years. tom. 2. council. Apollinarius was
b. of Alexandria after Zoilus Euag. lib. 4 cap. 36. Anthimus b. of C^^
stantinople was (...) Eutyches the her^ticks opinion, a^^ therefore depo^^ by
Justinian and ^^^demned in the ^^nerall council (...) Constantinople uag. lib.
4. cap. 9^ Andreas an (...) went about (...) trey leading (...) hand a blind
(...) dog, told (...) fortunes but (...) brought them to great (...) by
deceauing them with (...) fables. E^^^^ Ab. Vsper^* 566. Justinius the second of
that name succeeded Iustinianus in the empire. he lived wantonly, fared
deliciously, soulde bene^ices unto ignorant priests. He craftelye compassed
the death of Justinius his cosin^. In the end he fell into a frenzy, uttered
lamentable speeches, and bequ^athed the empire unto Tiberius. he reigned. 12
years and 10. months. Euagr. lib. 5. cap. 1. 2. 3. 7. 8. 11. 13. 23. The 4.
and 5. counsels of Aurelia were called together in the time of Pelagius. 1.
tom 2. conc. A ^. council held at Tours in France. tom. 2. council. John the
3. was b. of Ro^e after Pelagi' and co^tinewed 12. years. to 2. council. John
succeeded Apollinarius in the seae of Alexandria. Euag. lib. 5. ca. 16 577.
Tiberius became Emperor after that Justinius 2. fell into frenzy. he was a
godly man, he raygned 7. years and 11. months. Euagr. lib. 5. cap. 11. 13.
23. A council called at Paris toutchinge church goods, ^om. 2. council. A
council was called at Hispalis in Spain toutching the church goods in the
time of Pelagius. 2. tom. 2. council. Eustochius b. of Jerusalem. Euagr. lib. 4.
cap. 32. Benedictus was b. of Ro^e after John 3. ann. Do. 576. where he
co^tinewed 4. years. tom. 2. council. Palm. chron. 583. Mauricius the Emperor
succeeded Tiberius in the empire. The 3. council of Toledo condemned the Arian
heresy. to. 2. council. The 1. and 2. synods called at Lions for the removing
of schism raised in the church. tom. 2. council. Pelagius 2. was b. of Ro^e
after Benedictus, and continewed 10. years. tom. 2 council. 595. 12. Mauri^ij.
The 1. and 2. synods called at Matiscona reformed ecclesiastical matters. tom.
2. council. John b. of Jerusalem Euagr. lib. 5. cap. 16. Gregorius b. of Antioch
after the depositio^ of Anastasius Euagr. lib. 5. cap. 6. Gregorius was b. of
Rome after Pelagius ann. Do. 590. and co^tinewed 13. years. to. 2. council.
Eulogius succeeded John in the bishopric of Alexandria who as Nicephorus
reports co^tinewed 25 years. Euagr. lib. 5. cap. 16.

Hitherto (gentle reader) have I run over in this Chronographie the
principal things which are ^o be considered within the first six hundred
years after Christ as far forth as these authors ^vhose histories I
translated have continevved their times. Euagrius the last of these
Historiogra^hers ended the 12. year of Mauricius the Emperor and there I
rest with him leaving the times ^ollovvinge (which are wonderfully
corrupted) to such as are disposed to discourse of them. This travel have I
taken that the truth of the purest age after Christ might appear, and the
state of the most ancient churches might be known of such as in these days
seek to overthrow the state, bring the religion to contempt, the Christians
to a lavvelesse securitye, hopinge that by the vievve of orderlye discipline
things which be amiss may be redressed accordingly. I vvish thee health,
knowledge of the truth, fear of God, faith to believe in him, thy souls
health and salvation in the end. Farevvell.

The Index.
A.
ABacuk the Prophet and his life. pa. 528. Abasgi a Barbarian nation received
the faith. page 479. Abdias the Prophet and his life. page 524. Abdus a goutie
man was cured by Thaddaeus. pa. 17. Abel was murdered. pa. 519. Abilius b. of
Alexandria. pa. 46. thirtene years. 47. Abgatus look Agbarus. Ablaatus, b. of
Persia. pa. 380. Aborigines people so called. pa. 501. Abraham talked with
Christ and worshipped. pa. 3 Acasius bishop of Caesarea in Palaestina. pa. 255.
Acacius the martyr was hanged. pa. 376. Acacius bishop of Amida sold the
treasure of the church to relieve prisoners and captives. p. 388. Acesius a
nouatian b. was called to the council of Nice. pa. 223. Achaab the accuser of
Athanasius ran away for shame. pa. 248. Achillas minister of Alexandria of
great fame. pa. 144. Achillas b. of Alexandria. pa. 217. Adaarmanes a Persian
captain was folled of the Romans. pa. 500. Addaeus a traitor is executed.
pa. 491. Addo the prophet and his life. pa. 522. Adrian, look Aelius Adrianus.
Adrianus was beheaded for the faith. pa. 171. Adultery is forbid. pa. 54. 336.
351. Aedesius a martyr was drowned. pa. 163. Aedesius priest of Tyrus preached
to the middle Indians. pa. 240. Aegesippus lived immediately after the Apostles.
page 33. he is alleged. page 45. 46. 47. 53. 61. 62. 70. Aelius Adrianus was
Emperor after Traian. pa. 58. he wrote favorably for the christians. pa. 61.
he reigned 21. years. pa. 62. A^^ius the Syrian and his heresy. pa. 279. 305.
Aetherius a traitor is executed. pa. 491. Agabus a prophet of the new
Testament. pa. 21. 23. 89. Agapius b. of Caesarea. pa. 144. Agapius a martyr
beheaded for the faith. pa. 160. 161. Agapius a martyr was drowned. pa. 163.
164. Agathius Rhetor an historiographer. pa* 502. Agathonica a woman martyred.
pa. 67. Agbarus king of Edessa wrote an Epistle unto Christ. page 16. Agelius a
Nouatian Bishop. page 285. 345. 346. Aggaeus the prophet and his life. page
530. Agrippa King of the Jews page 25. 26. he wrote 62 Epistles. page 45.
Agrippa Castor confuted the heresy of Basilides. page 60. Agrippas b. of
Alexandria. page 70. Agrippinus b. of Alexandria. pa. 85. Ahias the prophet and
his life. page 522. Alamundarus captain of the Barbarian nation Scenetae. page
500. Alarichus is commanded from above to destroy Rome. page 381. Albinus
lieuetenant of Iudae a. page 34. Alcibiades a confessor. page 81. Alcibiades an
heretic. page 81. Alexander b. of Rome. page 58. 83. ten years. page 59.
Alexander a physician comforted the martyrs and was torn in pieces of wild
beasts. page 79. Alexander a thief, yet counted a martyr of Montanus sect.
page 89. 90. Alexander b. of Cappadocia is chosen b. of Jerusalem. page 102.
104. he died in prison. page 114. Alexander was Emperor after Heliogabalus.
pa. 108. he reigned 13. years. page 111. his end* page 469. Alexander a
martyr burned for the faith. page 116. Alexander a martyr torn in pieces of
wild beasts page 131. Alexa^ders two were beheaded for the faith. p. 160
Alexander b. of Alexandria a notable learned man confuted Arius. page 217. 218.
Alexander a godly b. of Constantinople, set him self against Arius. pa. 251.
252. 255. Alexander Paphlagon was martyred by the Arians. pa. 285. Alphaeus a
martyr was beheaded for the faith. pa. 159. Ambrose (not he of Millane) was a
Valentinian heretic, and confuted by Origin. page 105. Ambrose b. of Millane.
pa. 337. 347. Ammias a Prophet of the nevve Testament. pa. 88. 89. Ammon a
confessor. pa. 116. Ammon a married monk. pa. 329. Ammonarion a virgin is
beheaded for the faith. pa. 116. Ammonius a minister martyred. pa. 153.
Ammonius a monk cut of his care because he would not be bishop. pa. 382.
Ammonius a Poet. pa. 365. Ammonius a christian philosopher. pa. 107. Amos the
Prophet and his life. pa. 525. Amphilochius b. of Iconium. pa. 345.
Amphilochius b. of Sida. pa. 436. Anacletus bishop of Rome 12. years. page 46.
47. 83. Ananus an high priest of the Jews of extreme cruelty. pa. 34.
Anastasius b. of Rome. pa. 381. Anastasius a priest of Antioch and a Nestorian
heretic. pa. 394. Anastasius the Emperor. pa. 461. Anastasius a godly
archbishop of Antioch. page 489. Anatolius b. of Laodicea and his works. pa.
142. 143. 144. Anatolius a sorcerer and his execution. pa. 499. Andrew the
Apostle preached in Scythia. page 36. his martyrdom. page 519. his lise. page
532. Androgathius the tyrant and rebel drowned him self. pa. 347. 348. Angelo
a rebel was sawed a sunder. pa. 320. Anianus the 2. bishop of Alexandria, he
ruled the Church 22. years. pa. 35. 46. Anianus b. of Antioch exiled by the
Arians. pa. 290. Anicetus b. of Rome eleven years. pa. 62. 70. 83. Anomoioi
and their heresy. pa. 293. 317. Antemnes and hymns song in the Church. pa.
367. Anterus b. of Rome. pa. 111. Anthimus b. of Nicomedia was beheaded for the
faith. pa. 148. Anthropomorphitae and their heresy. pa. 365. 366. 367.
Antiochus got much money by preachinge at Constantinople. pa. 369. Antinous
the darlinge of Adrianus Caesar was made a god. pa. 61. 315. Antonius Pius was
Emperor after Adrian. pa. 62. he wrote favorable letters for the christians.
pa. 63. he reigned 22. years. pa. 64. Antonius a minister was beheaded for the
faith. pa. 167. Antonie the monk. pa. 242. 329. 331. 333. Antoninus Caracalla
was Emperor after Seuerus. pa. 101. he reigned 7. years. pa. 108. Antoninus
Heliogabalus was Emperor after Macrinus, he reigned 4 years. pa. 108. Apelles
an heretic. pa. 8^. Aphricanus an historiographer wrote unto Aristides of the
concordance of the Evangelists. pa. 9. 10. 111. 112. Apollinarius a learned
writer. pa. 70. Apollinarius b. of Hierapolis and his works. pa. 72. 73. 87.
88. 89. Apollinarius and his heresy. pa. 294. 307. 308. Apollo in Daphne. pa.
309. 315. Apollonia a virgin is burned for the faith. page 115. Apollonius a
Christian Philosopher wrote an Apollogie and was martyred. pa. 91. 92.
Apphianus after sundry torments was thrown into the sea. pa. 161. 162.
Appianus an historiographer. pa. 501. Appion wrote learned books. pa. 94.
Aquila and Priscilla were banished Rome. page 31. Aquila of Pontus translated
the old Testament. pa. 84. 105. Arabians were heretics and their confutation.
pa. 113. Arbogastes a rebel ran him self upon a naked sword. pa. 359.
Arcadius is created Emperor. pa. 345. 360. his death. p. 376. Archelaus the
son of Herod reigned 10. years over the Jews. pa. 9. 13. Archelaus b. of
Cascharum disputed with Manes the heretic. pa. 245. Ares was burned for the
faith. pa. 168. Arianus an historiographer. pa. 502. Aristion one of the 70.
Disciples. pa. 56. 57. Aristides wrote an Apology of the faith unto Adrian.
pa. 59. Aristobulus the prince and priest of the Jews was led captive to Rome.
pa. 9. Aristotle is highly esteemed of heretics. pa. 95. Arius the abominable
heretic, his original and heresy. pa. 217. 218. 219. 227. 228. 229. 251. he
reca^teth. pa. 245. his miserable end. p. 252. Arrabianus a learned writer. pa.
94. Arsacius b. of Constantinople. pa. 374. 375. Arsenius a naughty fellow
took hire to accuse Athanasius. pa. 247. 248. Arsenius a monk. pa. 329.
Artemas an heretic. pa. 141. Artemon and his heresy. pa. 94. 95. Asaph the
Prophet and his life. pa. 522. Ascholius a godly b. of Thessalonica baptized
Theodosius magnus. pa. 343. Asclepiades an heretic translated the scriptures.
pa. 95. Asclepiades b. of Antioch. pa. 103. Asclepiodotus an heretic. pa. 95.
Asinius quadratus an historiographer. pa. 502. Asterius an Arian heretic. pa.
251. Astyrius a noble man sauored the Christians, and bewrayed by prayer and
fasting, the deceyt of Satan. pa. 132. Ater was burned for the faith. pa. 116.
Athanasius bishop of Alexandria. pa. 223. 236. read of him more in the
Chronographie. page 38. etc. Athenodorus the disciple of Orige^. pa. 111. 131.
Attalus a Pergamenian is fried to death. pa. 77. 78. 79. 80. Atticus b. of
Constantinople. pa. 375. 377. 378. 390. 391. Attilas king of Scythia. pa. 421.
Attis an heathen God. pa. 315. Audactus a noble man martyred. pa. 151. 152.
Augustus was Emperor when Christ was borne he reigned 57. years. pa. 9. 13.
Aurelianus was Emperor after Claudius, he persecuted the church of God and
was not able to subscribe unto an edict. pa. 139. 141. Auxanon a nouatian
priest. pa. 235. Auxentius a martyr torn in pieces of vvylde beasts. pa. 164.
Auxentius an Arian b. of Millane. pa. 337. Azarias the prophet and his life.
pa. 523.
B.
BAbilas b. of Antioch died in prison. page 111. 114. Babilas the martyr. pa.
309. 310. Bachilides a godly minister. pa. 71. Banchillus b. of Corinth. pa.
92. Bararanes king of persia. pa. 386. 422. Barcabus a prophet of the heretic
Basilides. pa. 60. Barcoph a prophet of the heretic Basilides. pa. 60.
Barchochebas a blind guide of the Jews. pa. 59. 61. Bardesanes a Syrian and
his books. pa. 74. Barnabas one of the 70. disciples. pa. 15. 19. his
martyrdom. pa. 519. Barsabas one of the 70. disciples. page 15. he was also
called Iustus and Joseph. he drank poison yet did it not hurt him. pa. 57.
Barsanaphius a monk. pa. 485. Bartholomevve the Apostle preached in India.
page 85. his martyrdom. pa. 519. his life. pa. 532. Baruch the prophet and his
life. pa. 530. Basilides the heretic wrote 24. books upon the Gospel. pa. 60.
70 Basilides a soldier was beheaded for the faith. pa. 98. 99. Basilicus an
heretic. pa. 86. Basiliscus a tyrant and his end. pa. 453. Basilius b. of
Ancyra confuted Photinus the heretic. pa. 277. Basilius magnus b. of Caesarea
in Cappadocia. pa. 322. 334. 335. Belissarius a Roman captain. pa. 477.
Benjamin the 6. b. of Jerusalem. pa. 59. Beryllus Bishop of Bostra in Arabia
fell to heresy and was confuted by Origin. page 108. 112. Biblis a woman was
piteously tormented for the faith. pa. 77. Bishops honored. pa. 145. Bishops
persecuted. pa. 146. Blandina a woman of a wonderful patience is martyred. pa.
77. 78. 79. 80. Blastus an heretic. pa. 86. 90. Books of the old and new
Testament, look Canonical scripture. Books of holy scripture burned. pa. 146.
Bonifacius b. of Rome. pa. 381. Bretanion a tyrant and his foil. pa. 272. 274.
Buddas an heretic and his miserable end. pa. 242. Burgonians receive the
faith. pa. 393. 394.
C.
CAiphas an high priest of the Jews. pa. 14. Caius Julius Caesar how he
died. pa. 469. Caius Caligula was Emperor afrer Tiberius. pa. 21. he called
him self a God, he plagued the Jews and reigned not 4. years. pa. 21. 22. 23.
his end. pa. 469. Caius b. of Jerusalem. pa. 86. Candidus wrote learned books.
pa. 94. Calistus b. of Rome 5. years. pa. 108. Canonical scriptures. pa. 36.
45. 49. 50. 73. 84. 104. 109. 110. 137. 138. Capito. b. of Jerusalem. pa. 86.
Caricus a learned man. pa. 103. Carpocrates an heretic. pa. 60. 70. Carpus a
martyr. pa. 67. Carterius a schismaticke. pa. 358. Carterius a monk. pa. 362.
Carus with Carinus and Numerianus was Emperor after Probus. pa. 141. Cassianus
b. of Jerusalem. pa. 85. Cassius b. of Tyrus. pa. 92. Cataphrygian heresy,
look Montanus and his opinion. Cecilianus b. of Carthage. pa. 204. 205.
Celadion b. of Alexandria. pa. 62. Celestinus b. of Rome. pa. 38. Cephas one of
the 70. disciples. pa. 15. 16. Cerdo b. of Alexandria. pa. 47. Cerdon an
heretic. pa. 62. Cerinthus and his heresy. pa. 51. 52. 137. Characes an
historiographer. pa. 501. Chaeremon b. of Nilus fled with his wife into the
desert. pa. 117. Chiliastae and their heresy pa. 136. 137. Chosroes king of
Persia. pa. 509. Chrestus b. of Syracusa. pa. 205. Christ is to be understood
two ways. pa. 3. Christ appeared to Abraham and conferred with him. pa. 3. 8.
264. Christ appeared to Jacob. pa. 4. 8. Christ appeared to Joshua. pa. 4.
Christ appeared in the form of man, and why after that sort. pa. 5. Christ
what time he was borne in the flesh. pa. 5. 8. 9. Christ was a king, an high
priest, and a Prophet. pa. 6. 7. Christ took a reasonable soul. pa. 300.
Christ suffered not the 7. year of Tiberius as some did write. pa. 13. Christ
being 30. year old began to preach and was baptized. pa. 14. Christ preached
not four years. pa. 14. Christ chose 12. Apostles, and seventy Disciples.
pa. 14. Christ vvrote an epistle unto Agbarus governor of Edessa. pa. 16.
Christian religion is not nevve and strange. pa. 3. 7. 8. Christian behavior.
pa. 54. Christians in deed, and the definition of a true Christian. pa. 8.
Chrysostom look John Chrysostom. Clarus b. of Ptolomais. pa. 92. Claudius
was Emperor after Caligula, and reigned 13. years. pa. 23. 31. Claudius 2.
was Emperor after Galienus two years. pa. 139. Claudian the Poet when he
flourished. pa. 422. Clemens Alexandrinus is alleged. pa. 15. 19. 23 28. 33.
52. 85. he was the master of Origin. pa. 100. his works. pa. 103. Clemens the
third bishop of Rome was Saint Paul's fellow labourer. page 37. 46. 47. he
preached 9. years. page 54. he is said to have translated the Epistle unto
the Hebrews from Hebrevve into Greek. page 56. counterfeyt works are
fathered upon him. page 56. his Epistle was read in the Church. page 71.
Cleobius an heretic. pa. 70. Comodus was Emperor after Antoninus Verus, and
reigned 13. years. pa. 85. 94. his end. pa. 469. Confession, the original
thereof, and the rooting of it out of the Church. pa. 351. Confessors. pa. 81.
Confirmation after baptism by the hands of the bishop. pa. 119. Conon b. of
Hermopolis. pa. 120. Constantius the father of Constantinus Magnus, his reign
and end. pa. 153. 158. Constantinus Magnus was proclaimed Emperor. pa. 153.
how he became a Christian. pa. 215. 216. his death and funeral. pa. 252. 253.
Constantinus the younger was Emperor. pa. 252. 254. his death. pa. 255. 272.
Constantius the son of Constantinus Magnus. pa. 252. he was an Arian. pa.
254. his death. pa. 295. Constans the Emperor. pa. 252. 267. his death. pa.
272. Coration a Chiliast was converted by Dionysius b. of Alexandria. pa. 136.
Cornelius the centurion is converted. pa. 21. Cornelius the 4. b. of Antioch.
pa. 70. Cornelius b. of Rome. pa. 114. 118. the Council of Nice. page 222. 223.
224. 225. 226. 227. the Council of Antioch. pa. 244. the Council of Tyrus. pa.
247. 249. the Counsel of Aria^s met at Antioch. pa. 256. 257. the Council of
Sardice. pa. 265. the Council of Jerusalem. pa. 271. the Council of Alexandria.
pa. 272 the Council of Sirmium. pa. 275. the Council of Millane. pa. 279. the
Council of Ariminum. pa. 280. 282. 283. the Council of Seleucia. pa. 287. 288.
289. the Council of Arians at Constantinople. pa. 291. the Council of Arians at
Antioch. pa. 293. the Council of Alexandria called the 2. pa. 300. 301. the
Council of Antioch called the 2. pa. 316. 317. the Council of Lampsacum. pa.
319. the Council of Sicilia. pa. 325. the Council of Constantinople summoned by
Theodosius magnus. pa. 344. the Council of Angaris. pa. 352. the Council of
Cyprus. pa. 368. the Council of Ephesus. pa. 3^^. 41^. 413. the Council of
Ephesus called the 2. pa. 417. the Council of Chalcedon. page 420. 426. 427.
428. 429. 430. 438. etc. the Council of Constantinople in the time of
Justinian. pa. 487. 488. the Cou^cells were summoned by the Emperors. pa. 341.
the Councels that were within the first six hundred years after Christ, are
to be seen in the Chronographie. the Creed of the Nicene Council. pa. 224.
225. the Creedes good and bad are rekoned up. page 291. Crescens was sent of
Paul into France. pa. 37. Crescens a philosopher wrought the death of
Justinius martyr. pa. 67. 68. Cronion was burned for the faith. pa. 116.
Culcianus a persecutor of the christians is executed. page 182. Cyprian b. of
Carthage rebaptized heretics, and is therefore reprehended. pa. 126. Cyrenius
president of Syria. pa. 9. Cyrillus b. of Antioch. pa. 142. Cyrillus b. of
Jerusalem an Arian. pa. 290. he recanted. pa. 344. Cyrillus the godly b. of
Alexandria. pa. 380. 383 414. 444. Cyrinus b. of Chalcedon was plagued for
reuiling of Chrysostom. pa. 375.
D.
DAma b. of Magnesia. pa. 55. Damasus b. of Rome. pa. 336. Daniel prophesied of
the coming of Christ. pa. 5. 10. his life. pa. 529. David prophesied of
Christ. pa. 6. 7. Decius was Emperor after Philip. and persecuted the Church.
pa. 114. he was slain with his sons. pa. 121. 469. Decennius a tyrant hanged
him self. pa. 278. Demetrianus b. of Antioch was married. pa. 131. Demetrius b.
of Alexandria. pa. 92. 97. 101. Dexippus an historiographer. pa. 502. Didius a
minister was martyred. pa. 153. Didius Iulianus the Emperor. pa. 469. Didymus
a monk. pa. 329. Didymus Alexa^drinus a notable learned man. pa. 333.
Diocletian was Emperor after Carus. pa. 141. Diodorus Siculus an
historiographer. pa. 502. Dion Cassius an historiographer. pa. 502. Dionysius
b. of Corinth is alleged. pa. 35. 37. his works are to be seen. pa. 71.
Dionysius Ar^op^g^ta the first b. of Athens. pa. 37. 71. Dionysius Bishop of
Alexandria. page 51. 111. 113. 119. 120. 126. 127. 128. 129. 134. 135. he is
persecuted. page 114. 115. 129. his works are to be seen. pa. 120. 133. 138.
139. Dionysia a woman was beheaded for the faith. pa. 116. Dionysius b. of
Rome. pa. 139. Dionysius was beheaded for the faith. page 160. 161. Dionysius
b. of Alba in Italy. pa. 279. Dionysius Halicarnassaeus an historiographer.
pa. 501. Dios b. of Alexandria. pa. 102. Dioscorus a confessor. pa. 116.
Dioseorus b. of Alexandria and an heretic. pa. 417. 428. 429. 431.
Dolichianus b. of Jerusalem. pa. 86. Domitian was Emperor after Titus, he was
cruel and enemy to God. pa. 46. he feared the coming of Christ as Herod did.
he reigned 15. years. pa. 47. Domninus was burned for the faith. page 164.
Domnus an Apostata. page 103. Domnus bishop of Antioch. page 141. Domnus b. of
Caesarea in Palaestina. page 131. Dorotheus minister of Antioch, afterward b.
of Tyrus. pa. 142. his life. pa. 514. Dorotheus a page of the Emperor
Diocletian. pa. 145. after torment he was hanged for the faith. pa. 147. 148.
Dorotheus an Arian b. of Antioch. pa. 339. 342. Dositheus an heretic. pa. 70.
E.
EAster and the controversy about that feast. pa. 92. 93. 94. 222. 223. 227.
270. 353. 354. 355. 356. 379. Ebionits and their heresy, saying that faith
only did not justify. pa. 51. 105. Ecebolius a sophist was a turn coat.
page 295* 306. Eleazar the son of Annanus the high priest. pa. 14. Eleusius
Bishop of Cyzicum being compelled to Arianisme lamenteth his state page 320.
Eleutherius b. of Rome, page 62. 75. 83. Ellas a christian was burned for the
faith, page 168. Elias the Prophet was persecuted, page 519. his life, page
523. Eliezer the Prophet and his life. page 523. Elissaeus the prophet and his
life. page 524. Elpistus a godly minister. page 71. Empedocles the philosophers
opinion. page 242. Encratits, their heresy and the first author thereof. page
73. Ennathas a christian virgin was burned for the faith. page 167. Ephorus an
historiographer. page 501. Ephrem the 13. b. of Jerusalem. page 59. Epimachus
was burned for the faith. page 116. Epiphanius an heathen Sophist. page 294.
Epiphanius b. of Cyprus. page 368. 370. 371. Eruli an heathen nation received
the faith. page 479. Esaias prophesied of Christ. page 7. 8. his martyrdom.
page 519. his life. page 525. Esdras. page 501. Essaeans. page 70. Euagrius a
monk. page 301. 330. 331. 332. he refused a bishopric. pa. 332. Euagrius a
godly bishop of Constantinople. page 326. Euagrius Scholasticus and his
historye. page. 405. etc. Euarestus b. of Rome. page 54. 83. Eubulus was
beheaded for the faith. page 171. Euclides is highly esteemed of heretics.
page 95. Eudocia a learned Empress. page 383. Eudoxius b. of Germanicia. page
262. 280. Eugenius a robel was beheaded. pa. 359. Eumenes b. of Alexandria.
page 59. Eunomius the heretic. page 279. 320. 321. 325. 326. 358.
Eunomi^utychiani and their heresy. page 358. Eunomotheophroniani and their
heresy page 358. Euodius b. of Antioch. page 47. Euphronius an Arian b. of
Antioch. page 244. Eusebius bishop of Caesarea in palaestina, where he began
his history. page 1. 2. he dedicated his tenth book unto Paulinus. page 184.
his death. page 255. he was no Arian. page 265. 266. 267. Eusebius b. of
Laodicea. page 130. 142. 143. Eusebius bishop of Nicomedia was an Arian
heretic. page 217. 223. 233. he recanted. page 236. he fell again to his
heresy. page 243. 245 he was made bishop of Constantinople. page 256. Eusebius
Emisenus. page 256. Eusebius b. of Vercellae. page 279. 300. Eusebius
Scholasticus, the Disciple of Troylus the sophist was an historiographer. page
305. 502. Eusebius b. of Dorilaeum. page 417. 428. Eustathius b. of Antioch was
deposed for heresy. page 244. Eustathius bishop of Sebastia and his errors.
page 292. Eustathius Epiphanensis an historiographer. page 502. Eutyches the
heretic, and his opinion. page 416. 417. Eutychianus b. of Rome. page 142.
Eutychianus a monk. pa. 235. Eutychius an heretic. page 358. Euzoius an
Arian recanteth. page 245. Exoucoutiol and their heresy. page 293. Ezechiel
the prophet and his life. page 528.
F.
FAbianus b. of Rome was martyred. page 111. 114. Fabius b. of Antioch. page
114. Fadus lieuetenant of Iudaea. page 26. Famine under Claudius. page 23. 26.
Famine among the Jews in Jerusalem. page 38. 39. 40. Famine among the Jews
under Adrian. page 59. Famine in Alexandria. page 135. Famine at Pyruchium.
page 142. Famine caused by Maxentius. page 154. Famine in the time of
Maximinus. page 177. 178. Famine in the time of Julian. page 312. Famine in
Phrygia. page 327. Fasting in Egypt and Alexandria. page 30. Fasting
prescribed by Montanus. page 89. Fasting before Easter. page 92. 93. 273. 355.
399. Fasting after VVhitsontide. page 274. Fasting of Monks. page 329. Fasting
every Saturday. page 356. Fasting wendsdayes and Fridayes. 388. Faustus a
minister was martyred. page 153. Felix lieuetenant of Iudaea. page 31. Felix b.
of Rome. page 141. 142. Felix the second of that name was b. of Rome, and an
Arian. page 284. Festus lieuetenant of Iudaea. page 32. Firmilianus b. of
Caesarea in Cappadocia. page 110. 1^1. Firmilianus a tyrant and a persecutor,
was him self beheaded in the end. page 171. Flauia Domicilla a noble woman
was banished for the faith. page 47. Flauianus B. of Constantinople was
murdered by heretics. page 426. Florinus an heretic. page 86. 90. 91.
Florus a cruel Liuetenant of Iudaea. page 35. Frumentius a Bishop converted
the middle Indians. page 240.
G.
GAd the Prophet and his life. page 521. Gainas the rebel and his end. page
364. 365. Gaius B. of Rome. page 35. 51. 53. 108. 142. Galba was Emperor a
short while. pa. 37. 469 Galen the physician is worshipped of heretics. page
95. Galienus was Emperor after Valerianus and restored peace, he raygned
fifteen years. page 131. 139. Galilaeans and their heresy. page 70. Gallus
was Emperor after Decius. page 121. his end. page 469. Gallus the brother of
Julian the Apostata rebelled and was beheaded. page 278. Galma B. of Amastris.
page 71. Georgius the Arian B. of Alexandria and his miserable end. page 298.
Germanicus for his faith was torn in pieces of wild beasts. page 64.
Germanion B. of Jerusalem. page 102. Germanus was beheaded for the faith. page
167 Gitton a village in Samaria where Simon Magus was borne. page 26. 27.
Gnostici were heretics. page 60. God diversely plagued the old world. page 5.
Golauduch a woman was martyred. page 510. Gomarius a rebel is savved a
sunder. page 320. Gomorha was overthrown with fire and brimstone. page 4.
Gordianus was Emperor after Maximinus and raygned 6 years. page 111. 112.
his end. page 496. Gordius B. of Jerusalem. page 102. Gorgonius a page of the
Emperor Diocletian after tormet was hanged for the faith. pa. 145. 148.
Gorthaeus an heretic. page 70. The Gospel after Marcke. page 28. 57. 84. 104
110. The Gospel after Matthew was vvrytten in Hebrewe. page 49. 57. 84. 85.
109. The Gospel after John. page 49. 50. 84. 104. 110. The Gospel after Luke.
page 37. 49. 50. 84. 110. Gospells were published by heretics. page 50. 51.
103. The Gotths received the Christian faith. page 338. 339. Gratianus was made
Emperor. page 322. his death. 347. Gregorius Neocaesariensis the disciple of
Origin page 111. 131. 335. Gregorius B. of Alexandria and the stir about him.
page 258. Gregory Nazianzen was of great fame. pa. 322. 334. 335. 343.
Gregory the brother of Basil was B. of Nissa. pa. 335. 345. Gregory B. of
Antioch. page 493.
H.
HAnani the Prophet and his life. page 523. Helcesaitae were heretics and
their opinion page 113. Helen Queen of the Osroemians distributed corn in
time of famine. page 26. Helen the mother of Constantinus Magnus fo^d the
Cross at Jerusalem. page 237. 238. Helena a vvitch the yoke mate of Simon
Magus. page 27. Hemerobaptists and their heresy. page 70. Heraclides a Martyr.
page 97. Heraclitus vvrote commentaries upon Paul. pa. 94. Heretics corrupt
the works of ancient vvryters. page 71. Heresies. read in the Chronographie
the catalogue of all the heresies within the first six hundred years after
Christ. Heraclas B. of Alexandria. page 97. 105. 110. Hermes vvrote a book
entitled Pastor which was read in the Church. page 36. 84. Hermogenes an
Arian captain is cruellye put to death. page 259. Hermon B. of Jerusalem. page
144. Hermophilus an heretic translated the Scriptures. page 95. Herod was
king of the Jews when Christ was borne. page 9. 10. Herod Antipater.
page 9. Herod Ascalonites. page 9. Herod shut up under his seal the holy
robe of the highpriest. page 10. Herod burned the genealogies of the Jews to
make him self a Gentleman. page 11. Herod commanded the infantes to be
slain. page 12. Herod is tormented, he seeks to dispatch him self and
dies miserably. page 12. 13. Herod caused the chief of the Jews to be clapped
in prison, and to be slain at his departure, that the Jews might lament his
death. pa. 13. Herod the Tetrarch was banished into Vienna together with his
harlot Herodias. page 14. 21. Herod Agrippa is by Caius Caligula made king of
the Jews. pa. 21. he imprisoneth Peter the Apostle and dier^ miserably. pa.
23. 24. 25. Herodian an historiographer. pa 502. Herodias the harlot of Herod
the Tetrarch. pa. 14. Heron was beheaded for the faith. pa. 98. Heroes b. of
Antioch after Ignatius. pa. 55. Hesychius Bishop of Egypt was martyred. page
153. Hilarious b. of Poetiers. pa. 304. Hippolitus and his works. pa. 108.
Honorichus the Arian king of the Vandals persecuted the christians. pa. 476.
Honorius is created Emperor. pa. 359. Hormisda king of Persia. pa. 50^. Hulda
a prophetess and her life. pa. 527. Hyginus was bishop of Rome 4. years. pa.
62. 83. Hymenaeus b. of Jerusalem* pa. 131. Hypatia a learned woman was of
spite cruelly executed. pa. 384. Hyrcanus an high priest of the Jews was taken
captive of the Persians. pa. 9. 10.
I.
Jacob saw God face to face. pa. 4. he prophesied of Christ. pa. 9. James the
Apostle called the brother of the Lord was the first b. of Jerusalem, and
brained with a club. pa. 19. the order of his martyrdom is to be seen. pa.
32. 33. 34. 37. 519. James the brother of John was beheaded by Herod Agrippa.
pa. 19. 23. 37. 519. his life. pa. 532. Iberians received the faith. pa. 241.
242. Idithum the prophet and his life. pa. 522. Iehaziel the prophet and his
life. pa. 523. Iehu the prophet and his life. pa. 523. Jeremy the prophet and
his life. pa. 526. Jerusalem had 15. bishops from the Apostles unto the 18.
year of Adrian. pa. 59. Jerusalem was won very often. pa. 44. Jerusalem was
called Aelia. pa. 59. 60. Jesus is a word of great mystery. pa. 6. Jesus the
Christ of God, as Josephus witnesses. pa. 15. Jesus was the son of God by
the testimony of Agbarus king of Edessa. pa. 17. Jesus should have been
canonized by the consent of Tiberius in the number of the Roman gods but the
senate would not. pa. 20. Jesus the son of Dannaeus was an high priest of the
Jews. pa. 34. Jesus the son of Ananias cried woe woe in Jerusalem. pa. 42.
the Jews became tributaries unto the Romans. pa. 10. the Jews were plagued
by Seianus. pa. 22. the Jews were vexed by Pilat. pa. 22. the Jews were
banished Rome by Claudius pa. 31. the Jews to the number of 30000. were slain
upon Easter day. pa. 31. 38. the Jews were vexed under Nero. pa. 31. the Jews
were slain under Florus. pa. 35. the Jews were besieged in Jerusalem. pa. 37.
their famine, slaughter, and great misery. pa. 38. 39. 40. the Jews were
searched and ripped to see whether they had hid meat, or eaten gold. pa. 39.
44. the Jews were torn of wild beasts, sold and led captive. pa. 41. the
Jews were plagued under Traian. pa. 58. the Jews which perished, and their
infinite number during all the wars. pa. 42. 43. the Jews were destroyed
under Adrian. pa. 59. the Jews rased certain places out of the Bible. pa. 69.
the Jews rebelled in Diocaesarea, and were all destroyed. pa. 278. the
Jews were utterly foiled with terrible signs from above in the time of
Julian. page 310. 311. the Jews were banished Alexandria. page 382. 383. the
Jews crucified a boy and were punished for it. pa. 384. 385. the Jews in
Creta were deceived by a deuell. pa. 398. 399. Ignatius b. of Antioch was
torn in pieces of vvilde beasts at Rome. pa. 47. 54. 55. the Images of Simo^
Magus and Helena the witch. pa. 27. the Image of Christ. pa. 132. the Images of
the Apostles. pa. 132. the Indians receive the faith. pa. 240. Ingenuus a
confessor. pa. 116. Innocentius b. of Rome. pa. 381. Ioath the Prophet and his
life. pa. 522. Joel the Prophet and his life. pa. 526. John Baptist was
beheaded of Herod the Tetrarch. pa. 14. 15. his life. pa. 531. John the
Apostle preached in Asia, and dyed at Ephesus. page 36. 53. 93. he was banished
into the Isle Patmos in the time of Domitian. page 46. He came from exile in
the time of Nerua page 47. He converted a thief. page 48. 49. His Gospel and
Epistles. page 49. 50. He detested the presence of Cerinthus the heretic. pa.
64 He raised one from death to life. page 90. His life. page 532. John the
elder and his tomb. page 56. 57. John the 7 B. of Jerusalem. page 59. John a
blind man of singular memory and rare gifts in preachinge. page 173. John
Chrysostom B. of Constantinople. pa. 361 362. 363. 371. 375. 376. John a
rebel and his execution. page 390. Jonas the prophet and his life. page 526.
Joseph the carpenter is both the son of Heli and the son of Jacob. page 10.
11. Joseph the 14 B. of Jerusalem. page 59. Josephus a Jew vvrote of Judas
gaulonits. page 9. Of the miserable end of Herod. pa. 12. He gives a
testimony of John Baptist and of Christ page 14. Of the sedition between
Jews and Grecians at Alexandria. page 21. Of the crueltye of Pilate. page 22.
Of the miserable end of Herod Agrigppa. page 23. The calamity of the Jews.
page. 31. 32. 35. That Jerusalem was plagued for the death of James. p. 34. The
destruction of Jerusalem and misery of the Jews. page 38. 39. 40. His
opinion of the wicked Jews. page 39. Of the signs foreshewing the
destruction. page 41. 42. His works are to be seen. page 44. 45. Joshua saw
Christ. page 4. Iouianus was proclaimed Emperor page 312. His death. page 317.
Irenaeus B. of Lions is alleged. page 27. 46. 48. 51. 52. 55. 62. 63. 69. 72.
83. 90. 91. He was a Chiliast. page 57. He is commended. page 82. His works.
page 84. 94. In his youth he saw Polycarpus. page 91. He reprehended Victor B.
of Rome. page 93. Irenaeus Gramaticus wrote an Atticke Dictionarie. page 301.
Irene the daughter of Spiridion. page 234. Ischyras forged unto him self
letters of orders* page 247. Ischyrion for the faith was beaten to death with a
cudgel. page 117. Isdigerdes king of Persia. page 380. 385. 422. Isidorus was
burned for the faith. page 116. Isidorus a peleusian. page 420. Ismael the
highpriest of the Jews was deposed. page 14. Judas Gaulonites an heretic*
page 9. Judas a Galilaean. page 9 Judas the brother of Christ. page 47. Jude
and his Epistle. page 34. 50. Jude the 15 B. of Jerusalem. page 59. Jude a
learned writer and his books. page 101. Judges ruled Israel. page 9. Iulianus
B. of Alexandria. page 85. Iulianus B. of Jerusalem. page 86. Iulianus was
burned for the faith. page 116. 171. Julian is made Caesar. page 278. He is
proclaimed Emperor. page 295. He fell into Apostasy. page 297. His miserable
end. page 311. His phisiognomie. page 313. Julius B. of Rome. page 258. 259.
268. 269. Iuppiter Philius an Idol. page 175. Justinius martyr flourished a little
after the Apostles He is alleged. page 26. 27. 51. 61. 62. 63. 68. What moved
hi^ to become a Christian. pa. 61. His Martyrdom pa. 67. 68. His works. pa.
69. Justinius the Emperor. page 471. Justinius the second Emperor of that name
page 490. His end* page 496. Iustinianus the Emperor. page 474. His herosie
and death. page 488. 489. Iustus the 4 B. of Jerusalem. page 54. 59. Iustus B.
of Alexandria. page 59. Iuuenalis B. of Jerusalem. page 396.
L.
LEo B. of Rome. page 426. Leo the Emperor. page 433. His death. 438. Leonides
the Father of Origin was beheaded for the faith. pa. 96. Leontius an Arian B.
of Antioch. page. 273. Leui the twelf^ B. of Jerusalem. page 59. Libanius the
Sophist. pa. 295. 309. His inconsta^cie and co^futatio^ of him. pa. 312. 313.
314. 315. Liberius B. of Rome. page 278. 324. Licinius the Emperors raygne,
cruelty and end. page 153. 216. Linus was B. of Rome twelve years. pa. 36.
37. 46. 47. 83. Longinus a rebel was beheaded. page 465. Lucas a captain of
the Jews. page 58. Lucianus minister of Antioch was martyred. pa. 153.
Lucianus vvrote an Apollogie and was martyred* page 176. Lucifor a godly B. of
Caralitanum. page 300. Luciferian heresy of Lucifer the B. which fell
through impatientie. page 304. 343. Lucius a Martyr. pa. 69. Lucius B. of Rome.
page 125. Lucius a godly B. of Adrianopolis was imprisoned and choked up with
stinch* page 273. Luke the Euangeliste vvrote a Gospel and the acts. pa. 37.
He is said to have translated the Epistle unto the Hebrews from Hebrevve into
Greek, his life. pa. 533. Lupus Presidente of Egypt plagued the Jews. pa.
58. Lycus an heretic. pa. 86. Lysanias the tetra^che and the son of Herod.
pa. 13. 14.
M.
MAcar was burned for the faith. pa. 116. Macarius b. of Jerusalem. pa. 235.
Macarius a Monk. pa. 330. 331. Macedonius an Arian b. of Constantinople. pa.
258. 260. 261. 273. 285. he was deposed and so raised a sect after his name.
pa. 293. Macedonian heresy. pa. 305. Macedonius b. of Mopsuestia. pa. 262.
Macedonius the Martyr was broiled to death. pa. 307. Machaerous the prison
where John the baptiste was beheaded. pa. 15. Macrinus was Emperor after
Caracalla. page. 108. his end. pa. 469. Magnentius a tyrante dies miserablye*
pa. 272. 278. Malachias the Prophet and his life. pa. 530. Malchion confuted
Samosatenus heresy. page. 139. Malchus a Christian was torn in pieces of
vvild beasts. pa. 131. Mamaea a Godly Empress the mother of Alexander the
Emperor sent for Origin. pa. 108. Mambre the oak grove where Christ talked
with Abraham. pa. 3. Manca the heretic whereof the Maniches are called and
his heresy. pa. 142. 242. his miserable end. pa. 245. Manichaeus, look Manes.
Marathonius an old heretic. pa. 293. Marcella a woman was burned for the
faith. pa. 98. 99. Martianus an heretic. pa. 103. Marcion an heretic. pa.
62. 70. 74. 86. Marcellinus b. of Rome. pa. 142. Marcellus b. of Aneyra in
Galatia fell to the heresy of Samosatenus. pa. 251. 264. Marcus Turbo
ouerthrewe the Jews in battaill. page 58. Marcus Aurelius Verus, look Verus
the Emperor. page 53. Marcus Aurelius had rain through the prayers of the
Christians. He favored the Christians. His Epistles are extant. page 82. Marcus
b. of Arethusa and his learned Creed. page 275. the Marriage of Paul. pa. 52.
the Marriage of Peter. pa. 52. the Marriage of Philip. pa. 52. 53. the Marriage of
Cheremon b. of Nilus. page 117. the Marriage of Demetrianus b. of Antioch. page
141. the Marriage of priests allowed of. page 234. 255. the Marriage of Spiridion
b. of Cyprus. page 234. the Marriage of Priests detested of an heretic. pa.
292. the Marriage of Ammon the Monk. pa. 329. Maria the daughter of Eleazar
killed her own son to eat in the famine at Jerusalem. pa. 40. Marinus a
soldier was beheaded for the faith. pa. 131. Maris bishop of Chalcedon an
Arian. page 223. 246. Mark the Evangelist upon what occasion he wrote his
Gospel. p. 28. he was the first that preached Christ unto the Egyptians. pa.
28. the first b. of Alexandria. pa. 35. his martyrdom. pa. 519 his life. pa.
533. Mark of the Gentiles the first b. of Jerusalem. pa. 60. 85. Mark an
heretic whom Irenaeus confuteth. page 62. Mark bishop of Alexandria after
Eumenes. pa. 62. Martianus the Emperor. page 425. his end. pa. 433. Martyrs
who properlye may so be called. page. 81. Martyrs and Martyrdomes, look
persecution. Maruthas b. of Mesopotamia preached unto the Persians. pa. 380.
Masbothaei were heretics pa. 70. Mathevve and Luke the Evangelists are
thought to disagree. pa. 10. Matthan begat ^acob the father of Joseph. pa. 10
11. Mathias one of the 70 Disciples was chosen in the rowme of ludad the
traitor. page 15. 19. his life. pa. 533. Mathias the 8b. of Jerusalem. pa. 59.
Maturus was beheaded for the faith. page 76. 78. Mauric^us the Emperor. page
500. 501. Maxentius the tyrant and his impiety. pa. 154. his miserable end. pa.
179. 215. 216. 469. Maximilla the prophetess of Montanus hanged her self. pa.
86. 88. 89. Maximinus the 7 b. of Antioch. pa. 72. Maximinus succeeded
Alexander in the Empire and persecuted the Church of God, but continewed no
longer then three years page 11. His end. 469. Maximinus the tyrant and his
impiety. page 153. 154. 155. 156. His miserable end. pa. 182. 215 Maximus wrote
learned books. page 94. Maximus was beheaded for the faith. page 131. Maximus
B. of Antioch. page 139. Maximus B. of Jerusalem. page 271. Maximus a tyrant is
executed. page 347. 348. Maxis a wicked tribune and a persecutor. page 167.
Mazabanes B. of Jerusalem. page 114. Melchi begat heli the father of Joseph.
page 10. 11. Melchisedech a figure of Christ. page 7. Meletius B. of Pontus.
page 144. Meletius of whom the Meletians are called and their heresy. page
219. 220. 227. 228. Meliton b. of Sardis wrote an Apollogie of the Christian
faith unto Verus the Emperor. pa. 63. 70. His works. page 72. 73. 93.
Meltiades B. of Rome. page 204. Menander a Sorcerer and his opinions. pa. 50.
51. 70. Menas Patriarch of Constantinople. page 486. Menedemus was burned for
the faith. page 326. Mercuria a woman was beheaded for the faith. page 116.
Meruzanes B. of Armenia. page 120. Metras after torment was stoned to death for
the faith. page 115 Metrodorus a Christian was burned to ashes. pa. 67. Micheas
the prophet and his life. page 524. Miltiades an heretic. page. 87.
Miltiades a learned writer wrote an Apollogie. page 88. 89. Mithra an heathen
God. page 298. 34^. Modestus a learned writer. page 70. 72. Montanus the
heretic. page 73. 81. 86. 87. He hanged him self. pa. 88. 89. 90. 282. Moses
testifies of Christ. pa. 3. 4. He conceived a mystery in the word Jesus. page
6. Moses a minister of Rome was martyred. page. 119. Musanus a learned vvryter.
page 70. his works. page 73.
N.
NAamanes a Saracen. page 503. Narcissus B. of Jerusalem. page 85. his
miracles. page 101. 102. Narcissus b. of Neronias was an Arian. page 273.
Natalius an heretical b. repented him self and became a confessor. page 95.
Nathan the Prophet and his life. page 521. Naum the prophet and his life.
page 528. Nectarius a noble man was chosen b. of Constantinople. page 344.
346. Nemesion a martyr, page 116. Nepos b. of Egypt was a Chiliaste and
confuted by Dionysius b. of Alexandria. page 136. Nepotianus Constantius a
tyrante and his end page 272. Nero was Emperor after Claudius. page 31. his
cruelty. page 35. he raygned 13 years. page 37. his end. page 469. Nerua was
Emperor of Rome after Domitian. page 47. Nestorius b. of Constantinople and
his heresy. page. 393. 394. 395. 396. 412. 413. 414. 415. 416. Nicocles the
Laconian sophist. page 295. Nicolas of whom the Nicolaites are called. pa. 52.
Nicomas b. of Ieonium. page 139. Nicostratus an historiographer. page 502. Nilus
b. of Egypt was burned. page 153. 172. Nouatus a priest of Rome and his
heresy. page 117. 118. 119. 335. 336. 391. Nouatian heresy. page 233. 391.
O.
ODed the prophet and his life. pa. 522. Onesimus b. of Ephesus. page 55. 73.
O^estes Liuetenante of Alexandria contended with Cyrill and was vvounded of
the Monks page 383. Origin and his zeal being a child. page 96. 97. he was
made a Catechiser. page 97. he was the disciple of Clemens. page 100. he
gelded him self. pa. 101. he vve^t to Rome. pa. 104. he studied Hebrew and
gathered together the tra^slations of the old Testament. page 105. he vve^t to
Arabia. pa. 107. he vve^t to Antioch. pa. 108. his works pa. 109. 111. 112.
113. his life out of Suidas. page 121. his lamentation. pa. 122. 123. An
Apollogie for Origin. pa. 370. Osius b. of Corduba in Spain. pa. 220. 235. 265
277. Osee the Prophet and his life. page 524. Otho was Emperor a short
while. pa. 37. his end. pa. 469.
P.
PAchymus ^. of Egypt and a martyr. pa. 153. Palladius a monk. page 332.
Palladius a swift post. page 387. Palmas b. of Pontus. pa. 92. Pambo a Monk.
pa. 330. Pamphilus Martyr. pa. 144. 153. 164. 165. 168. 169. Pantaenus was a
Catechiser in the school of Alexandria, and the Master of Clemens
Alexa^drinus. page 85. Paphnutius b. of Thebais. page 223. 233. 234. Papias b.
of Hierapolis. page 28. 54. his works. page 56. he was an heretic. page 57.
Papylus a Martyr. page 67. Patermythius was burned for the says. page 172
Patropassians and their heresy. pa. 264. 323. Patrophilus b. of Scythopolis.
page 256. Paulinus b. of Triuere in France. page 279. Paulinus b. of Tyrus.
page 184. 185. Paul was called from heaven to be an Apostle. page 20. he was
martyred at Rome under Nero pa. 32. 35. 36. 519. his Epistles. page 36. he was
married. pa. 52. his life. pa. 533. Paulus Samosatenus and his heresy. pa. 94.
139. 140. 141. 263. 323. Paulus a notable man was beheaded for the faith. pa.
166. Paulus a godly b. of Constantinople. pa. 255. he was stis^ed in
Cappadocia. page 272. his corpse was carried to Constantinople. pa. 345. Pausis
an Egyptian was beheaded for the faith. pa. 160. Peleus b. of Egypt was
burned. pa. 153. 172. Perjury is punished. pa. 102. Persecution. pa. 23. 32.
33. 35. 46. 47* 53. 63. 64. 65. 66. 67. 68. 69. 72. 73. 75. 76. 77. 78. 79. 80
81. 96. 97. 98. 99. 101. 111. 114. 115. 116. 117. 128. 129. 130. 131. 146. 147.
148. 149. 150. 151. 152. 153. 159. 160. 161. 162. 163. 164. 165. 166. 167. 168.
169. 170. 171. 172. 173. 175. 176. 273. 274. 284. 285. 298. 305. 306. 307. 310.
319. 320. 322. 326. 327. 328. 329. 332. 333. 386. 476. 493. 519. Persia
received the faith. pa. 38. Pertinax the Emperor and his end. pa. 469. Peter
the Apostle was imprisoned by Herod Agrippa and delivered by an Angel. page
23. he met Simo^ Magus at Rome in the time of Claudius. page 27. he was
crucified at Rome about his later time after he had preached in other
contreyes. pa. 35. 36. 519. his works. pa. 36. he was married and his wife
martyred. page 52. Peter b. of Alexandria was beheaded. page. 144. 153. 176.
Peter the Emperor Diocletians page after sundry torments was broyled to
death. pa. 148. Peter the successor of Athanasius in the seae of Alexandria.
pa. 328. 340. Petirus a monk. pa. 330. Petrus Apselamus was burned for the
faith. page 168. Peucetius a persecutinge Magistrate is executed. pa. 183.
Pharisees and their heresy. page 70. Phileas b. of Thmuis was beheaded. page
150. Philetus b. of Antioch. pa. 108. Philip the tetrarch. pa. 13. 14. Philip
one of the seven Deacons preached in Samaria, baptized Simon Magus and the
Eunuch. pa. 19. 20. Philip the Apostle rested at Hierapolis. pa. 53. 93 his
martyrdom. page 519. his life. pa. 532. Philip the 9 b. of Jerusalem. pa. 59.
Philip b. of Gortyna wrote against Marcion. pa. 71. 72. Philip was Emperor
after Gordianus and a Christian. pa. 112. his end. pa. 469. Philip a Priest of
Sida wrote a book to the confutatio^ of Julian the Apostata and entitled it
the Christian history. pa. 392. Philo Iudaeus a man of great fame was sent
in Embassy from the jews of Alexandria unto the Emperor Caligula. pa. 21. he
is alleged. pa. 22. 28. 29. he talked with Peter the Apostle at Rome. pa. 28.
his works. pa. 30. 31. Philoromus governor of Alexandria was beheaded for the
faith. pa. 150. Philosophy is studied and commended page 105 106. 107. 308.
309. Philumena an heretic the Prophetess and yoke mate of Apelles. pa. 86.
Photinus b. of Sirmium and his heresy page 262. 264. 274. 275. 277. 323.
Pictures of Simon Magus and Helena the vvitch page 27. Pierius a minister of
Alexandria. page 144. Pilate was made President of Iudaea the 12 year of
Tiberius. page 13. he certified Tiberius that our Savior was risen from the
dead. page 20. he plagued the Jews. page 22. he slevve him self. pa. 22. 23.
Pinytus b. of Creta. page 70. Pinytus b. of the people G^o sij. pa. 71. Pionius
was burned for the faith. page 67. Pior a Monk. page 329. Pius was b. of Rome
15 years. page 62. 83. Placitus b. of Antioch. pa. 256. a Plague in
Alexandria. pa. 134. 135. a Plague throughout the world. pa. 182. a Plague in
the time of Maximinus. pa. 178. Plinius Secundus a Liuetenant was sorry that
the Christians were persecuted and vvrote thereof unto Traian. page 54.
Plutarchus a Martyr. pa. 97. 98. Pneumatomachoi and their heresy. pa. 293.
Polybius b. of Tralleis. pa. 55. Polybius an historiographer. pa. 501.
Polycarpus b. of Smyrna wrote an Epistle unto the Philippians. page. 54. 55.
64. 93. he was at Rome with Anicetus. pa. 63. he met Marcio^ in the face. page
64. his Martyrdom. page 64. 65. 66. 67. Polycrates b. of Ephesus wrote unto
Victor b. of Rome. pa. 53. 92. 93. Pompei besieged Jerusalem and sent
Aristobulus captive to Rome. pa. 9. Pontianus b. of Rome. pa. 108. Ponticus a
young man of 15. year old was martyred. pa. 80. Pontinus an heretic. page
86. Pontius a learned man. pa. 103. Porphyrius an Atheist wrote against the
Christians and disputed with Origin. page 106. 229. Porphyrius the Servant of
Pamphilus martyr was burned for the faith. pa. 170. Potamiaena a virgin was
burned for the faith. p. 98. 99. Pothinus b. of Lions is tormented, put in
prison and their dies. pa. 78. Primus was b. of Alexandria 12 years. page 58.
59. Primus b. of Corinth. page 70. Priscilla the Prophetess of Montanus. pa.
86. 89. 90. Priscus a Christian was torn in pieces of wild beasts. pa. 131.
Priscus Rhetor an historiographer. pa. 502. Probus was Emperor after
Au^^lianus* pa. 141. Proclus a Cataphrygian heretic. page. 35. 53. 108.
Procopius was beheaded for the faith. page 159. Procopius a tyrant dies
miserably. page 320. Procopius Rhetor an historiographer. page 502. Promus was
beheaded for the faith. page 168. the Prophets saw God with the cleansed eye
of the mind. page 3. Prophecy was in the Church after Christ. page. 69. 82.
83. 88. 89. Proterius the godly b. of Alexandria was cruelly slain. pa. 433.
Protogenes a godly b. of Sardice. page 265. Psathyriani and their opinion. page
357. Ptolomaeus a Martyr. page 68. 69. Ptolomaeus a confessor. page 116.
Publius b. of Athens and a Martyr. page 71. Publius b. of Jerusalem. page 85.
Q.
Quadratus had the gift of Prophecy. page 55. he vvrote an Apollogie of the
Christian faith unto Adrian. page 58. 59. 88. 89. Quadratus b. of Athens. pa.
71. Quinta a vvoma^ after torment is stoned to death. page 115. Quintus fell in
persecution. page 64.
R.
REpentance of a thief. page 49. Rhais a woman was burned for the faith.
page 98. Rhodion the disciple of Tatianus, a learned writer. page 86. Rome is
called Babylon. page 28. Romanus had his tongue pulled out afterward stifled
to death. page 159. 160. Romulus Subdeacon of Diospolis was beheaded for the
faith. page 160. Rufus a Disciple. pa. 55. Ruffus a Liuetenant of Iudaea
destroyed the Jews in Jerusalem. page 59. Rugas a rebel was slain with a
thunderbolt. pa. 400.
S.
SAbellius heresy. page 126. 264. Sabinus a President of Maximinus the
persecutor. page 174. Sabinus a Macedonian heretic. page 224. 229. 260.
Saduces and their heresy. pa. 70. read the Chro. Sagaris a martyr. page 72.
93. Salome the ^ister of Herod. page 13. Samaritans and their heresy. pa. 70.
read the Chro. Samosatenus the heretic, look Paulus Samosatenus. Samuel the
Prophet and his life. page 521. Sanctus Deacon of Vienna was beheaded. page
76. 77. 78. Saracens received the Christian faith. page 339. Saturnilians were
heretics. page 70. Saturninus of Antioch an heretic. page 60. 74.
Sclaunders raised upon the godly. page 60. 69. 76 77. 102. 116. 176. 177. 246.
247. 248. 250. 26^ 272. 369. 504. 505. Scriptures, look Canonical Scripture.
Secundus b. of Ptolomais an A^ian. pa. 224. 227. Sedition in Alexandria. pa.
135. Seianus vexed the Jews. pa. 22. Seleucus was beheaded for the faith.
pa. 170. Semeia the prophet and his life. pa. 5^2. Sennecas the tenth bishop of
Jerusalem. page 59. Septuagints translation of the old Testament. pa. 84. 105.
Serapion b. of Antioch and his vvork^. pa. 90. 103. Serapion was thrown from
an high and his neck broken. page 115. Serapion an old man received the
eucharist of a boy. pa. 119* Serapion Deacon of Constantinople. page 362.
Serapis an Heathen God. page 238. 349. 350. Serenius Granianus a noble man
wrote unto the Emperor in the behalf of the Christians. p. 61 Serenius was
burned for the faith. pa. 98. Serenus was beheaded for the faith. page 98.
Seven Deacons. page 19. Seventy disciples. pa. 15. 19. 517. 533. 534. etc.
Seuerus the heretic of whom Seueriani. pa. 74 Seuerus was Emperor after
Pertinax. page 94. he persecuted the church. pa. 96. he raygned 18. years. pa.
101. Seuerus the heretical b. of Antioch had his tongue pulled out. pa. 472.
Siluanus b. of Emisa was torn of wild beasts. 153. 176. Siluanus b. of Gaza
was beheaded. pa. 153. Siluanus a tyran is executed. page 278. Simeon Cleopas
was b. of Jerusalem after James. pa. 45. 47. He was crucified being a hundred
and twenty years old. page 53. 70. Simeo^ dwelled in a pillour. p. 419. 420.
436. 511 Simo^ the son of Camithus was an highpriest. p. 14 Simon Magus was
baptized of Philip. page 19. he came to Rome and was there taken for a God. pa.
26. 27. read more of him in the Cronography. Simoniani are called of Simon
Magus. pa. 70. Siricius b. of Rome. pa. 38. Sisinius a Nouatian. pa. 346. 375.
376. Sixtus a learned ma^wrote of the resurrection. p. 94 Socrates b. of
Laodicea. page 142. Socrates Scholasticus history and life. pa. 213. 214 he was
the scholar of Helladius. page. 349. where he led his life. page 358. Socrates
the Philosopher why he was condemned. page 308. Sodom was overthrown with
fire and brimstone. pa. 4. 42. Sodom how it lies now. page 42. Solomon
spoke of Christ in the person of wisdom. pa. 4. Sons by nature and sons
by the law. pa. 10. Sophonias the Prophet and his life. pa. 526. Sophronius
b. of Pompeiopolls withstoode the Arians. page 288. 289. Sosthenes one of the
seventy Disciples. pa. 15. Soter b. of Rome. page 70. 74. 83. Spiridion b. of
Cyprus. pa. 223. 234. Stephan one of the 7. Deacons was stoned to death. pa.
19. 97. 519. Stephan b. of Rome. page 125. Stephan b. of Laodicea. page 144.
Symachus b. of Jerusalem. page 86. Symachus translated the old Testament. He
was an Ebionit. pa. 105. Symachus a learned Senator of Rome. 348. Synerus an
heretic. page 86. Synesius b. of Cyrene. page 420. Synods in Alexandria and
Egypt. page 30. Synods at Antioch. page 139. 140. 141. Synods, look
Counsels.
T.
TAtianus a learned man. page. 68. he fell into heresy. page 73. 74. Tatianus
for the faith was broiled to death. p. 307 Telesphorus was b. of Rome 11 years
and dyed a martyr. page 59. 62. 83. Tertulian a learned father is alleged. pa.
20. 35. 47. 54. 82. Thaddaeus one of the 70. Disciples was sent by Thomas the
Apostle to cure Agbarus. page. 15. 16. 17. 19. Thalassius a noble man is made
b. of Caesarea. p. 402 Thebulis fell to heresy because he was not made bishop.
page 70. Thecla a woman was throwe^ to wild beasts. p. 160 Thelymidres b. of
Laodicea. page 120. Themison a montanist. pa. 88. 89. Theoctistus b. of
Caesarea. page 107. 110. 131. Theodorus b. of Egypt was martyred. page 153.
Theodorus a confessor. pa. 310. Theodorus was burned for the faith. pa. 326.
Theodoretus an historiographer. page 411. 501. Theodosia a Christian virgin
was drowned in the seae. page 164. Theodosius Magnus the Emperor. page 342.
his death page 359. Theodosius junior the Emperor. page 376. 377. his virtues.
pa. 388. 389. his death. pa. 424. Theodosius b. of Synada a covetous man. pa.
377. Theodotio^ translated the old Testament. pa. 105 Theodotus a montanist.
pa. 81. his miserable end page 88. Theodotus a Tanner and an heretic of
A^^^mons sect. pa. 95. Theodotus a Physician and b. of Laodicea. pa. 144
Theodulus was crucified for the faith. page. 171. Theodulus for the faith was
broiled to death. pa. 307. Theognis b. of Nice was an Arian. pa. 223.
afterward he recanted. pa. 224. 236. he fell again to heresy. pa. 243.
Theonas b. of Alexandria. page 144. Theonas b. of Marmarica was an aria^. p.
224. 227 Theophilus b. of Antioch. p. 70. his works. p. 72. Th^philus b. of
Caesarea in Palaestina. page 92. Th^philus a confessor. pa. 116. Th^philus b.
of Alexandria. page 361. Th^pompus an historiographer. page 501. Th^phrastus is
highly esteemed of heretics. p. 95 Th^^ecnus b. of Caesarea. page 131.
Th^^ecnus Liuetenant of Antioch was an inc^unter. page 175. his execution pa.
183. Th^^imus b. of Scythia would not condemn ^^gens works. page 370. Th^^as
a Sorcerer called him self a Prophet and w^^ beheaded. page 26. Tho^^as the
Apostle. page 15. 16. 17. 19. 36. 532. Thr^^as a martyr. page 90. 93. Tibe^^^
the Emperor would have Canonized Ie^^s for a God. he reigned 22. years. pa.
20. 21 Tibe^^s the 2 Emperor of that name. page 496. Timo^us was beheaded for
the faith. page 160. Timo^e was the first b. of Ephesus. page 37. Timo^eus b.
of Gaza was burned. page 160. Titus ^as the first b. of Creta. page 37. Titus
^^e son of Vespasian was made general cap^^ine against the Jews p. 37. he
sighed when he sa^ the great slaughter of the Jews. p. 39. he p^^eledged the
books of Josephus. p. 45. he was ^mperour and reigned 2. years. page 46. his
en^* page 469. Tobias the host of Thaddaeus in Edessa. page 17. Tobias the fifth
b. of Jerusalem. page 59. Tra^an w^^ Emperor after Nerua and raygned 19.
year^s. page 47. 58. Tymaeus b. ^f Antioch. page 142. Tyrannus b. ^f Antioch.
page 142.
V.
VAlens b of Jerusalem. page 86. Valens Deaco^ of Aelia was beheaded. p. 169
Valens b. of Mursa was an Arian. page 246. he recanted. page 259. 272. Valens
the Arian Emperor. pa. 318. his end. pa. 340. Valentina a Christian maid was
burned. page 166 Valentinianus a godly man was fellow Emperor with Valens.
page 318. 337. Vale^tinianus the elder was proclaimed Emperor page 3^7. he was
sti^led to death. page 358. Valentinianus the younger was made Emperor by
Theodosius. pa. 390. he was slain. pa. 432. Valentinus an heretic. page 62.
70. 74. Valerius Gratus President of ludaea. page 14. Valerianus was Emperor
after Gallus and a persecutor. page 128. his end. page 469. Vegetius Epagathus
a martyr. page 76. Venus the heathen goddess had a te^plein Aphac^ page 239.
Venus Idol was set up on the s^pulchre of Christ. page 237. Verus the Emperor
succeeded P^us. He was a persecutor and reigned 19. years. page 64. 85.
Vespasianus the Emperor. page 37. 46. Victor b. of Rome. page 92. 93. Vigilius
b. of Rome. page 487. Virgins vowing chastity. page 29. Vitellius the Emperor
and his end. pap. 469. Vlphilas b. of the Gotths translated the Scripturs into
the Gotthicke tongue. page 338. Vlpianus was wrapped in an ox hide together
with a dogg^ and a^ snake and drowned in the seae. page 163. Vowed chastity by
compulsion among the heathens. page 29. Vowed chastity forbidden. page 71.
Vrbanus b. of Rome. page 108. Vrbanus a cruel persecutor falls into extreme
misery. page 165. Vrias the Prophet and his life. page 530. Vrsacius b. of
Singidon was an A^^an. page 246. he recanted. page 259. 272.
X.
XYstus was b. of Rome ten years. page 59. 83.
Z.
Zachary the son of ^ehoida and his life. p. 524 Zachary the prophet and
his life. page 530. Zachaeus the fourth b. of Jerusalem. page 59. Zachaeus was
beheaded for the faith. page 159. Zambdas b. of Jerusalem. page 144. Zebinas
was beheaded for the faith. page 167. Zebinus b. of Antioch. page 108. Zeno
the Emperor. p. 438. 448. his death. p. 461 Zenobius minister of Sidon was
s^urged to death page 153. Zenon a confessor. page 116. Zephyrinus b. of Rome.
page 94. 95. Zosimus a Disciple. page 55. Zosimus b. of Rome. page 381. Zosimus
an Ethnicke reviled Christian^ty and was confuted. page 468. Zosimus an
historiographer. page 502. Zoticus Otrenus a minister. page 87. Zozimas a godly
man. page 473.
Laus Deo.

