ORPHEUS His lourney to Hell
WHen as the world in her first ^olden time,
fruitful in cuerie blessing did abound:
when Floras pride was always in her prime,
and Winters wrath did ner' offend the ground
But without labor every thing increased,
And pleasant summers seasons never ceased.
No harsh aspect of heavens restless frame
did alter earthly creatures in their kind:
Each savage beast and bird that time was tame,
and all the world accorded in one mind.
For then dissension was a thing unknown,
And seeds of envy and debate not sown.
When as old Saturn had in peace disposed,
his seepter and his glorious throne in heaven:
And in their several kingdom had enclosed,
each of his children and by portions even,
Making all several kings in several places,
Divided to them all his gifts and graces.
Then did great Jove in peace succeed his Sire,
and Neptune bridled in the lawlesle seas:
Pluto in hell amidst a world of fire,
keeping tormented souls from rest and ease,
Orerules the hagges that in those dungeons moyles,
And to the Ghosts imposes endless toils.
In this contented time was Orpheus borne,
composed of purer mettell than a man:
Made mortal by the Gods in Natures scorn,
that earth might witness how the heavens can
Enclose in Elementall shapes celestial things,
Whose life from quintescence of heaven springs.
This pure composed shape the Gods endued
with their own virtues, else had it been shame,
That he whose body from the heavens issued,
should have a soul forged in a baser frame.
Thus did the Gods agree for to combine
A heavenly body and a soul divine.
This was that Orpheus, whose delightful stringes,
drew to their silver sound the senseless trees:
That stilled the music of the bubbling springs,
and staide the streams to hear his harmonies:
That made the savage beasts forsake their pray,
And gently come to hear sweet Orpheus play.
The craggie rocks that walls the Oceans bound,
where Neptune keeps his watrie regiment,
Rose from their flinty roots to hear him sound,
and whilst he sang seemed for to stand content.
The fishes left the seas to live a shore,
Which never heard of Musicks name before.
Thus lived be long the wonder of his time,
whose heauen-borne music won (...) love of all
Aspiring honor taught his fame to clime,
and made him live secure from thought of fall.
Till Fortune that orerules the state of kings,
Did oreturne him, as she does other things.
The pleasiing poison of self-killing Love,
at last made entrance to his mayden-heart:
Where once being anchored, never would remove,
but with sweet tickling wounds there bred his smart.
Yet did his wish prevail, his hope's effected,
His Love found love, and never was rejected.
But as it is in things being soonest grown,
whose flowered blossoms every blast decays:
And never stays the Autumn to be mowne,
but floorishes and falls within few days:
So is it in love, which being quickly sproong,
Dies oftentimes when as it is but young.
Euridice, the flower of flowering Thrace,
whom Orpheus often in his ditties praised,
She that had all perfection in her fa^,
and at her face made every thing amazed:
For love of her Orpheus incurred this pain,
Though she with love requited love again.
Being thus agreed in love, and both contented,
the day was pointed for their marriage right:
When most assured they soonest were prevented,
and sundred by unconstant Fortunes spite.
So by the means of a malignant power,
Their joys began and ended in an hour.
The marriage day being come, and all things fit,
and Hymeneus rites now done and ended:
Home they return, and at their banquets sit,
with pleasures such, as to such meetings tended.
And when at home was ended all their sport,
Then to the pleasant Meades did all resort.
Where as the Maids by custom came in thronges,
when any Maid was married from their train:
And there they spend the time in sport and songs,
that other may do so to them again:
Where some were dancing hand in hand in ringes,
And others sit to hear how Orpheus sings.
Here Orpheus warbles on his trembling stringes,
for to delight Euridice his joy:
She sometimes dances, then sits down and sings,
and woman like begins to kiss and toy,
Thus these two sporting in each others sight,
Thinks every hour a year till it be night.
When as the weary horses of the Sun,
began to hie them down unto their rest,
And now their masters journey almost done,
they end their toylsome labor in the west:
Home hies these lovers with a full intent
To change these sportes to other merriment.
And as they footed ore the pleasant meades,
like to the Huntresse, and her maiden train:
A Serpent sliding from amongst the weeds,
sting'd fair Euridice, and with that maine
Expels her ayerie Spirits from the wound,
And leaves her chill-cold body on the ground.
Nor would th'impartiall Destinies permit,
her woeful soul to take her last adieu:
But greedily they seize themselves on it,
which down unto the Stygian streams they drew,
Where they appointed her for to remain,
That she might weight upon Proserpins train.
Which when the Thracian Poet had perceived,
how suddenly Furidice was gone:
With madding fury sometimes raged and raued,
and then with tragic tunes begins to moan,
Sighing that his Furidice was dead.
Before she knew the pleasure of his bed.
And sitting there by her poisoned wound,
saving the skarlet blood that issued forth,
Moisture ouer-deare to dew the ground,
or quench the thirst of this unsatiate earth:
Wishing or she were here with him again,
Or he with her in the Elizian plain.
Thus till pale death from her vermilion cheeks,
Had drawn the untainted mixture of her hue,
Distressed Orpheus with his sorrow seeks
her now decaying beauty to renew:
Till when he saw that all his hope was vain,
He took himself unto his harp again.
Where in a mournful Anteme he bewailes
the sinister occasion of his birth;
Till his dividing voice with tears now fails,
and cannot echo to his other mirth:
But with sad looks and dumb demeanes he brings,
His countenance correspondent to his strings.
Unto whose music flocks the neighboring hills,
the shadie groves, the pleasant murmuring springs,
And all the plains with company now filles,
as beasts and birds, fish, foul, and other things,
And when as every one had taken his seat,
Thus Orpheus gius his sorrows to repeat.
You freeborn people, from inthralling bands
of liberty, depriving Loves estate:
Now mutually come all and ioyhe your hands,
and help your Orpheus to bewail his mate.
Weep for Euridice that loved me well,
Whose beauty now fades and decays in hell.
Vnheady rulers of this wretched clime,
you Gods I mean, whose hands directes our helm,
Why did you sort my days unto this time,
and in this sea of sorrow ouerwhelme:
The prosperous beginning of my life,
By this unjust diuorcing of my wife.
Ah could your cruclty inact this deed,
to mixed sweet beauty with deformity:
For all my merits, render you this meed,
the injurious rape of my Euridice?
Shall she attend grim Pluto in his den,
That was beloved of Gods, admired of men?
Have thou forgot to love great Saturnes son,
or did thou envy Orpheus in his love?
Remember how thy self have been orecum,
leaving the Synod of the Gods above,
To dote on one, whose beauties greatest grace,
May not compare with sweet Euridice face.
Then in remembrance what thou sometime wert^
see the distressed estate wherein I am:
And if it rest in thee to ease my smart,
for pity, pity Orpheus misery:
And if she have not passed the Stygian maine,
Ah, call her back to live with me again.
So shall thy name eternized by my skill,
be honored for this memorable deed:
And never shall my warbling harp be still,
but every where thy worthiness shall spread:
Till by my means the world resound thy power,
And thou shall bid me cease and sing no more.
But if it be too late for to recall her,
and that already she has passed the flood,
Where grisly Futies, fiends, and hagges inthrall her,
whence she can not return to do me good:
Then hence forth shall my strings surcease to sound,
And I will leave to sing till she be found.
You woeful trees that witness of my mones,
with hanging tops and teare-distilling shows:
You silver streams, huge hills, hand rocks and stones,
that have been witness to my weary woes:
Here all together take your last farewell,
Your Orpheus goes to seek his love in hell.
And if the griesly furies will attend,
the mournful music which mean time I Will make:
If Pluto will but suffer the to spend
some solemn sonnets for my Loves sweet sake,
Then happily may the gentle Queen of Dis,
For pity sake restore me to my bliss.
This said, he roused him from the tender grass,
which mourned in Sable to hear Orpheus weep:
And in a melancholy mood does pass,
unto the place that leads down to the deep,
Where was innumerable ghostes before,
Hasting for passage, down to Charons shore.
And through the yrksome shadow of black night,
he treads the fatal way to loath some hell,
By many noisome vaultes deprived of light,
where none but. Furies, bugs, and torturs dwell.
Until he came down to the Stygian banks,
Where as the silly ghostes attend in ranks,
There by the shore, poor Orpheus sits him down,
and gins to tune his mournful instrument:
Whereas the souls do flock about him soon,
to hear the sequel of this strange event.
And he with heavy looks and countenance pale,
Recites the process of our former tale.
Thus (quoth he) for my Love have I for sooke
the Thracian fields and company of men:
And for her sake this journey undertook,
to ugly grim-fac'd Plutoes smokie den:
Where if I chance to meet with my delight,
These pains will be requited with her sight.
But if I miss of my Euridice,
and cannot find her out amongst the fields:
Which the black Judges of that monarchy,
unto such separated lovers yields,
Where they in solitary passion spend
Their weary days, which never shall have end.
Then will the heavy burden of despair,
clog down my vital spirits to the ground:
And my poor heart been split in two with care,
let my poor soul escape that fatal wound.
And in that heavy plight poor Orpheus shall
Quite loose his comfort, labor, life and all.
By this bad Charon landed all his freight,
and set them safe upon the other shore:
And with all speed returned thither straight,
to load his boat again, and carry more.
Where when he saw them clustering altogether,
Began marueil what new ghost was the^ come thither.
But when he looked on Orpheus, viewed his face,
and every circumstance had only eyed:
He told him that he might not pass that place,
and to transport him flatly he denied.
Had not the Poet with a pleasant strain
Quenched the fierce fury of his wrath inflame.
Then he whose ears inured to hear the cries
of painful souls in endless miseries:
Whose concaue feet and fiery flaming eyes,
fixed on no subject but deformities.
Amazed to hear him stand as one that is dead,
Or changed to stone at sight of Gorgons head.
Such was the force of Musickes Art in him,
as tamed this savage brood of hellish kind:
Enchaunted all his body lim by lim,
and turned his savage unrelenting mind.
And where before he kept him from his charge,
Now he entreats him to accept his barge.
And rowing him ore to the other side,
courteously helps to conduct him a shore:
Protesting solemnly until that tide,
he never helped such passengers before.
Whence Orpheus looking to the Sulphurish flame,
and foggy smokes ascending from that pit:
Often times repeates his Lovers pleasing name,
wishing himself might by her rest and sit,
Where they with Lovers songs, and sweet tuned rhyme,
Might spend the course of everlasting time.
The came he to the rustie gates of death,
whereas the tripple headed porter dwells:
Who being amazed for to see him beneath,
sends from his hollow throat such thundering yels,
As summoned all the Furies at his calls,
To leaves their taskes and haste unto the walls.
Now in this place no suceour does remain,
to help him in or rid him out their claws:
Save for to fall unto his harp again,
and by that means break open the brazen jaws
Of gredie hell, that there in darkness holds,
More then large heaven in his compass folds.
Then gins the Poet tune his silver strings,
whose heavenly harmony had power to move:
Hills, trees and stones, beasts, birds, and other things,
both men on earth, and all the gods above,
To see if it would come to this event
Among the black people of this regiment.
You that do triumph over Deaths success,
and in vnbaylable strong bands detaines
The souls of wretched Lovers in distress,
tormented midst a world of endless pains;
For fair Proserpines sake, your lovely Queen,
Hear me recite my sorrows yet but green.
I That amongst my Ditties woonted was
to sing the motion of eternal heaven:
How all the Planets in their circles pass,
and at their times make up their motions even.
Must change my style, and taught by proof to sing,
Prove the effect of Love, a fickle thing.
The solitary wood which I freqnented,
whereas the Syluan Gods admit'd my name:
Both Gods and woods together have lamented
th'v ntimely proof I tasted of the same:
And all agreeing in my tune do sing,
How Loves effect is an unconstant thing.
The whilom desert plains where nothing grew,
now fertile by the means my music made:
Gin now again for sorrow to renew
their old accustomable weary trade.
And witness what a cause I have to sing,
How Loves effect is an unconstant thing.
I loved Euridice, the fairest face
that ever heavens eye did look upon:
Or ever sprang from elementall race,
or ever human tence were fixed on.
Whose timelesse death with tears make Orpheus sing,
That Loves effect is an unconstant thing.
Unconstant Less to him that loved thee well,
made thee Commander of his lives estate:
To leave him so, and choose the Prince of Hell,
and thus reward his love with thankles hate.
Thy folly makes me now with sorrow sing,
The effect of Love to be a fickle thing.
Yet to regaine my losses come I here,
to plead for mercy at grim Plutoes seat:
Who when he sees my weight of woes appear
and hears me all my sorrows to repeat,
Will in his justice say, well may I sing,
That Loves effect is an unconstant thing.
And you the watchful keepers of these ports,
afford but me the entrance to those plains;
Where every day so many Ghosts resortes,
and I will for requital of your pains,
To heaven and earth, and all their creatures tell,
How gently I was entertained in hell.
Wlth this the cruel Porter was content,
to give him entrance through his brazen door:
Where when he was, the Ghostes incontinent
came flocking still about him more and more.
And they that whilst they lived had hard his longes,
For the like pleasure all of them now longes.
To whom the gentle Thracian not denies,
but for the better he might get his right:
With his accustomable harmonies,
he gluts their longing senses with delight:
And makes them all, both Ghostes and Furies say,
Would they might ever more hear Orpheus play.
Thus pleasantly they pass the foremost portch,
and now amongst the tortures enter in:
Where some in scalding metal fry and scortch,
the tender superficies of their skin.
Others do freese to death, yet never die,
Whose pains and lives must last eternally.
All these and many other torturing kinds,
the force of his sweet music did alay:
And cheered again their now dead drooping minds,
that in these torments thus tormented stay.
And whilst he sung, forgets their former vain,
The one his nature, the other all his pain.
Then came he near a place where he might see,
a gliding stream, that swiftly runs away:
Over whose banks does hang a broad branched tree,
that with much fruit her boughs to the earth did sway.
Under whose shade in water to the chin,
Poor Tantalus is forced to labor in.
Ready to starve for food, poor soul he stands,
and yet the fruit hangs round about his head:
But when he strives to catch them with his hand,
they are conuayd from him with sudden speed.
And when he hopes to quench his thirst with drink,
Then does the water settle down and sink.
By him Ixion on a torturing wheel,
continually is racked and torn asunder:
His body yet decays not any deal,
but still indures those pains, which is a wonder,
That being racked and tortured in this rate,
His body should continue in one state.
There lies Promotheus fastened to the ground,
upon whole heart a greedy vulture feeds:
And where he feeds new flcsh grows in the the wound,
and so his heart and hurt do daily breed.
And Sisiphus by him does make his moan,
Wearied with laboring up the tumbling stone.
To whom when Orpheus came and began to sing,
their pains surceast, and they were something eased:
Whose harmony effected such a thing,
as there withal the Furies seemed well pleased.
And all agreed there with one consent,
To spend that day in hell with merriment.
Then Tantalus his stream did run no more,
the tree hung still, and stirred not from his head,
And he forgot the thirst he had before,
and thanked Orpheus for his so good deed,
In this releasing him from that pain,
Which many years before he did sustain.
Then Sisiphus his rolling stone stood still:
Ixions pains began for to decrease:
Promotheus Vulture having eat her fill,
from tyring of his heart strings began to cease.
And all the tortures cls that hell contains,
Did then surcease their plagues and diresul pains.
And followed Orpheus to the Cypres trees,
vndet whose shades the weary Soldiers rest;
Who sorting there themselves in companies,
with everlasting quietness are blessed.
And in their conterence there again revive
Th'exploytes they did, when as they were alive.
There was old Priam and his fifty sons,
that for their countries honor were suppressed:
The Greeks, whose names in every Poem runs,
there spend their quiet days in peace and rest,
And he whose love did win the Carthage Queen,
Venterous Aeneas rest upon that green.
There gins the Poct once again relate
the weighty cause that drew him to that place:
In every word lamenting his est^^
that he was borne to suffer (...) grace.
He that had every creature at his call,
Should now stand need for to be helped of all.
You that have tried (quoth he) Loves hard event,
and the unconstant kind of women's sect:
And you whose time in weary wars was spent,
which Love and Lovers passions did neglect.
For pity sake help, for to cure my pain,
By getting my Euridice again.
And in your judgmentes view my heauic plight,
that have aduentur'd this so dangerous toil:
To view the monuments of endless night,
that yields no other thing save rape and spoil.
And tell me then, if that for all my pain,
I be not worthy of her love again.
Your toils that whilom you sustained above,
was pleasure unto these I here abide:
And all your dangerous quarrels for your love,
compared with mine, may all be set aside.
Yet could the world devise a greater pain,
I would endure to get my love again.
My Love, the sweetest Love that ere suruiued,
wonder of heaven, and the same of earth:,
Untimely death unjustly has deprived,
and would no longer let her hear my mirth.
For her sweet sake what would I not sustain,
If I might so recover her again.
For Love thy brother Iour for sooke,
his glorious high celestial seat:
And to a Feere himself betook,
that with his Daned he might treat.
And did himself confuse and say,
Quod Amor vincit omnia.
Apelle, Learnings greatest friend,
for Daphnes sake came from above:
And doted on her, to this end,
he might on earth enjoy her love.
And was the first that ere did say,
Quod Amor vincit ownia.
Thus Love that enrers at the ele,
and sleely steals down to the heart:
There does engender fantasy,
whose issue breeds, or joy, or smart.
Perforce enforces all to say,
Quod Amor vincit omnia.
This fancy has set me on fire,
and furiously inflames my breast:
Feeding my soul with fierce desire
of her whose thought denies me rest.
And make me sing both night and day,
Quod Amor vincit omnia.
Whose fair Idea thou have have got,
To bear Proserpine company:
Keeping her close that I might not
look on my fair Euridice,
Which now with sorrow makes me say,
Quod Amor vincit omnia.
She stands thee here in little steed,
for thou have many Millions more:
Then with her love supply my need,
and I will sing thy praise therefore.
And whilst I live still will I say,
Quod Amor vincit omnia.
Plead fair Proserpine for her sake,
who in her prime of love decayed
And on her some compassion take,
which was a wife, yet di'd a maid.
For thou know well what joy is bred
Enjoying of a Lovers bed.
Fortune and Love unconstant friends,
agreed unto our marriage day:
And furdred all our Loves pretends,
with what within their power lay:
Until we had both wooed and wed,
Then Fortune snach'd her from my bed.
And in despite of Love detaines,
Euridice within your power:
And me afflictes with Lovers pains,
which are increasing every hour.
Because she knew not what was bred
Within a Lovers loyal bed.
In that enclosure breeds delight,
the pleasing soul of sweet content:
Contented best to spend the night,
in such soule-pleasing merriment.
As thou can witness well, is bred
Within a loyal Lovers bed.
Where all Elizian joys do dwell,
incircled there by Cupids charms,
And more delight then I can tell,
engendered in a Lovers arms.
Because I tried not what was bred,
Within a loyal Lovers bed.
But that instinct of Nature tells,
the hidden pleasure of that place:
Where more delightsome daliance dwells,
then in the gazing on her face.
There are the liuelle pleasures bred,
That longs unto a marriage bed.
Of this fair mark did Orpheus miss,
and lost the pleasute of that sport:
Been come unto the gates of bliss,
I could not get into the fort:
For my Euridice was dead,
Before I could enjoy her bed.
With this the Poet ouer-cloyd with grief,
no surther could extend his misery:
But with sad tears seemed to implore reliese,
to rid him from this woeful ecstasy,
At whose sad tears the fearful god did grant
That he should have her with this covenant.
In all his weary journey up again,
he should no once look back unto his love:
But from the speaking to her should resraine,
until he came up to the world above,
Which if he did, then should he all his life,
Enjoy her body as his married wise.
But if fond jealousy should make him doubt,
and he look back to see his Loves sweet face:
Before he were from his vast kingdom out,
and past the fatal limmits of that place.
Then should his wife be snatched away again,
And he should nere the like good tutne obtain.
Which courtesy the Poet gently took,
and with contentment did accept this thing
Expecting her with many a lingering look,
the cause that drew him the there for to sing.
Till at the length as the grim-God commands,
Euridice was rendered to his hands.
But intercourse of speech was there forbidden,
he might not welcome her with loving words:
And with a duskie vale her face was hidden,
that no transparance from her eyes affoords.
He was commanded to eschew the place,
And she had leave to follow him apace.
Thus both together these two Lovers go,
with this restraint of mutual conference:
Whose sad demeanes the witnesses of woe,
showed discontent, but that with patience
Men must of force obey the Gods decrees,
Though they extend unto their injuries.
Long thus they traneill'd in this discontent,
Each wishing of the other to hane sight:
Until their journey now was almost spent,
and they might see a glimmering of the light:
For they were wel-nigh come unto those bounds,
That parts Anernus and the upper grounds,
Where jealous thought that in a restless mind,
breeds disconted passions mixed with feate:
Was urging Orpheus often to look behind,
to see if his Eursdice were there,
Until remembrance of his promise told.
He might not venture for to be so bold.
Ost was his faltring tongue about to speak,
and call his sweetest Love by her sweet name:
But being half afraid least he should break
the Gods behests, and so incur his shame:
With much ado his speaking does refrain:
Although (God knows) it was unto his pain.
But longer can he not forbear to see,
if she did follow him along or no:
Such was the effect of burning jealousy,
that would not let him any further go,
Before he had satisfied his longing mind,
In looking if his lover were behind.
And at the length boldly assayes to try,
turning him back to her, whom he so loved:
When she was snatched from him by and by
and from his sight immediately removed.
And he himself left to himself again,
Because he did not from this thing refrain.
Grieuing to see himself thus ouershot,
and all his labor sort unto that end:
Leaving that cursed place, he homward got,
there fully bending of himself to spend
The future remnant of his single life,
In scorn of pleasing Love, or loving wife.
And in inuectiue Ditties day lie singes,
the uncertain pleasure of unconstant Love:
How many woes a woman's beauty bringes,
and into what extremes this joy does shoue
Poor foolish men, that ere they be awarre
Will rashly ouershoot themselves so fatre.
There gins he sing of secret Loves deceites,
and women's fawning fickle company?
The outward golden show of poisoned baytes,
that draws so many men to misery.
And for an instance sets himself to show,
One that had suffered all this pleasing woe.
Whose songs did sort unto such deep effect,
as draw men's fancies from their former wives:
VVomens vain love beginning to neglect,
and in the fields with Orpheus spend their lives:
With which sweet life they seemed so well content,
As made them curse the former time the'ad spent.
At which the women not a little grieve,
to see their conquering Captain thus ore-botne:
They gin devise how best they might relieve,
their fading glory being almost worn.
Which by no means they hope for to atchieue,
As long as Orpheus does remain alive.
Which to prevent in solemn wise they cite,
^^eir company together all in in one:
Where every busy head will needs indite,
a means how they might get poor Orpheus gone,
longst whomeat length the oase was thus decid^
that Orpheus of his life should be deprived (...)
Where jealous thought that in a restless mind,
breeds disconted passions mixed with feate:
Was urging Orpheus often to look behind,
to se^^f his Euridice were there,
Until remembrance of his promise told.
He might not venture for to be so bold.
Often was his faltring tongue about to speak,
and call his sweetest Love by her sweet name:
But being half afraid least he should break
the Gods behests, and so incur his shame:
With much ado his speaking does refrain:
Although (God knows) it was unto his pain.
But longer can he not forbear to see,
if she did follow him along or no:
Such was the effect of burning jealousy,
that would not let him any further go,
Before he had satisfied his longing mind,
In looking if his lover were behind.
And at the length boldly assayes to try,
turning him back to her, whom he so loved:
When she was snatched from him by and by
and from his sight immediately removed.
And he himself left to himself again,
Because he did not from this thing refrain.
Grieuing to see himself thus ouershot,
and all his labor sort unto that end:
Leaving that cursed place, he homward got,
there fully bending of himself to spend
The future remnant of his single life,
In scorn of pleasing Love, or loving wife.
And in inuectiue Ditties day lie singes,
the uncertain pleasure of unconstant Love:
How many woes a woman's beauty bringes,
and into what extremes this joy does shoue
Poor foolish men, that ere they be awarre
Will rashly ouershoot themselves so far.
There gins he sing of secret Loves deceites,
and women's fawning fickle company?
The outward golden show of poisoned baytes,
that draws so many men to misery.
And for an instance sets himself to show,
One that had suffered all this pleasing woe.
Whose songs did sort unto such deep effect,
as draw men's fancies from their former wives:
VVomens vain love beginning to neglect,
and in the fields with Orpheus spend their lives:
With which sweet life they seemed so well content,
As made them curse the former time the'ad spent.
At which the women not a little grieve,
to see their conquering Captain thus ore-botne:
They gin devise how best they might relieve,
their fading glory being almost worn.
Which by no means they hope for to atchieue,
As long as Orpheus does remain alive.
Which to prevent in solemte wise they cite,
their company together all in in one:
Where every busy head will needs indite,
a means how they might get poor Orpheus gone,
Among whom at length the oase was thus deci^
That Orpheus of his life should be deprived
And thus they all agreed in one consent,
(...) some occasion to procure his end:
When to the place they flock incontinent,
whereas he used his woeful days to spend,
And finding him alone without his train,
Upon him fall they all with might and maine.
And with confused weapons beat him down,
quenching their angry thirst with his warm blood:
At whose untimely death though heavens frown,
yet they defend their quarrel to be good,
And for their massacre this reason render,
He was an enemy unto their gender.
Which done, to rid him quite out of the way,
him and his Harp they into Hebar fling:
Upon whose stringes the gliding streams do play,
and for his soul lamenting Dirges sing.
Till to the watrie Oceans greedy womb,
They carry him for to go seek his tomb.
But then fair heavens in their due regard,
pitying his end that so had spent his days:
In justice thus his merits do reward,
unto their ever memorable praise.
Thus they determined all with one consent,
For to draw up his heavenly Instrument.
And place it in that Crystal monument.
the everliving registrie of fame:
The golden startie spangled firmament,
where in remembrance of the Poets name
(...) renew his memory,
(...) date out lives eternity.
FINIS.

