HONI SOIT QVIMAL Y PENSE
royal blazon or coat of arms
AT a general assembly of the Justices of the Pea^^ Essex. ss.
(...) B^ntwood the xiiijday of May In the sixth yea^ (...) sovereign Lord
^ames by the grace of God King of Eng^^^^ (...) Ireland, defender of the Faith,
etc. and of Scotland the (...) there being present, ^ William (...) his
Majesty's Justices of Peace of the said County (...) of (...) in the same
County Alehous-keeper, is admitted and allowed by the said Justices to keep
common Alehouse, or tippling house, in the house wherein he now dwells at (...)
aforesaid, and not elsewhere in the said County. Provided always that if the
said (...) shall not well and truly observe perform and keep all and singular
the Articles hereafter mentioned, that then this license shall presently cease
and be void.

The Articles.
1 First that the said (...) shall at the general Sessions of the peace to be
holden for the said County of Essex next after the Feast of Easter next
coming after the date of these presents, or at the general assembly of
Justices for that purpose, next after the said General Sessions, where five
Justices at the least, whereof two of the Quorum, shall be present (if he shall
so long continue his Alehousekeeping) bring in this his License, there by the
Justices to be seen, and consideration by the^ to be had whether he shall be
found fit to stand or not. And if he shall be then found fit and allowed to
continue for one whole year longer: Then that he fail not yearly after at
the said General Sessions of the peace, or such general assembly of Justices,
(If he shall so long continue his Alehousekeeping) to present this his license
to the said Justices to be allowed or disallowed, as before said.

2 Item, that he shall not permit or suffer any playing at the cards, dice,
tables, quoites, loggets, scales, bowls, or any other unlawful game or games
in his house, yard garden or backside, but shall keep good order and rule in
his said house.

3 Item, that he shall not harbor in his said house, barnes, stables, or other
where any Rogues, Vagabonds, sturdy beggars, Masterles men, or other suspected
person or persons whatsoever.

4 Item, that he shall neither sell nor utter any Beer, Ale, or other victual
upon the Sab^oth day, or Holiday during the time of divine service or Sermon be
it in the forenoone or after noone.

5 Item, that he shall neither dress nor cause to be dressed, nor willingly
suffer to be eaten in his said house, any flesh in the time of Lent, or upon
any day now observed as a f^she day.

6 Item, that he shall not suffer any person or persons other then his own
household servants, to sell or utter any Beer, Ale, or other victual in his
said house by deputation, or by color of his license.

In witness whereof the Common seal appointed for licenses for Alehousekeepers
in the said County of Essex is to these presents set, Dated the day and year
first above written.


