QVESTIONS OF PROFITABLE AND PLEASANT CONCERNINGS, TALked of by two old
Seniors, the one an ancient retired Gentleman, the other a midling or new
vpstart frankeling, under an Oak in Kenelworth Park, where they were met by
an accident to defend the partching heat of a hoate day, in grass or
Buck-hunting time called by the reporter the Display of vain life, together
with a Panacea or suppling plaster to cure if it were possible, the principal
diseases wherewith this present time is especially vexed.

printer's device of Richard Field ANCHORA SPEI

LONDON Printed by Richard Field, dwelling in the Blackfriers by Ludgate. 1594.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE ROBERT DEVORAX, EARL OF ESSEX AND Ewe, Vicount of
Hereford, Lord Ferrers of Chartley, Borchier and Louaine, Master of the
Queens Majesty's horse, Knight of the noble order of the Garter, and one of
her Majesty's honorable privy Counsel. Your honors most bounden O. B. wishes
long and happy life, with increase of honors.
RIght honorable, having found this book of profitable concernings and
pleasant delights, collected by the diligence of some one, who it should seem
over heard the matters, at such times as they were talked under an Oak in the
park at Kenelworth, some few years past: I thought it my duty, meeting with
the substance thereof, to dedicate them unto such a principal worthy as your
honors self, who have always hitherto bin found flourishing and budding forth
to all virtues, in such forward sort, so as the world has conceived an
undoubted hope, you will always hold green and lasting in the increase of
them, without suffering any rottenness or corruption of vices at any time to
approach you. Further, because the principal subject of matter herein
contained sets out the notablenesse of such former worthies, as have through
the perfection of virtues absolute in themselves, delivered successively the
fullness thereof over unto their posterity, it could not but mean your worthy
self, especially when I called to mind the example of your honorable father
deceased, who in his life time ataining to the tipe of virtues worthily
acquired, through the full and entire possession of them, was no doubt in
himself sufficiently able to deliver the^ over as peculiar and proper
blessings to his worthy offspring, so that now they are found no less excellent
and effectual virtues in your self and the rest of his succeding children,
the^ they were in his antecedent self. Withal I most humbly beseech your
honor, not to think I presume hereby to add any forces to your strong
virtues, which are already sufficiently known and magnified, even of them that
are best able and most worthy to judge: but rather being privy to my own
vnworthinesses, only desire to show, that there neither is, nor hereafter
shall be, any ability to do duty hidden in me, which for lack of diligence I
would leave unperformed: Neither go I about to think that it is possible for
me to express that which belongs to the due desert of your incomparable
virtues. A matter also superfluous for me to do, considering that even as the
shadow follows the body, so glory and renown associateth the excellent parts
of noble and well deserving men. The principal thing right honorable that I
had herein to regard, was that the matter might fall out fit and beseeming the
dignity of your worthy self, whom I have bin bold to choose as patron to
present the argument of this book unto: wherein I confess I have not so
thoroughly observed my charge neither, but have wittingly faulted therein also,
foreknowing as I do, that your honor can spare no hours from the utility of
commonwealths matters, to bestow so much as one look upon the unworthiness
hereof. Yet for their sakes, who undoubtedly if they will, may reap benefit
hereby, I have made bold to hope your honor will vouchsafe to enable it,
wherein you may according to the words of the Gospel having enough your self,
receive at my unworthy hands that also, whereof you have no need. If your
honor for their sakes vouchsafe to agnise my dutiful endeuoures, it will
prove such a sufficient rejoicing unto me, as shall bind me for your so great
favor and pardon, daily to pray for your honors increase and growth up to all
the happinesses your heart can wish. Beseeching almighty God further, that as
mighty Gedeon received strength and furnishings, of all necessary aids and
means to prevail and overcome his enemies the Madianites, at the time of his
faithful serving and calling upon God under an Oak in Ephah. Even so under
the service and command of our gracious and never fading green Oak, planted
and watered by the hand of God, to be the shelter of us all under her
favorable aids, your honor, together with such other worthies, tried and
approved partakers in all adventures, may bring under the enemies to God and
our Christian peace: so that in the end also, God blessing your labors, you
may build up an altar of peace for the behoof of this land, as Gedeon did
under his Oak, which he called Jehovah Salom, the God of peace.

Yours honors most bounden, O. B.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
SIthence the world is become so stomack-fallen to abhor all meats, I have
thought good to commend unto the sa^, this Panacea or supl^g plaster, to cure
if it were possible all diseases. The drench you may imagine to be made by the
Pithagorians Academickes, Peripateticks, Epicureans and the rest, wherein if
the curious vain of every appetite be not fitted, yet the assay and taste
thereof cannot hurt, because the entire and whole thing which should have
brought loathsomeness with it, is not at all offered here. The Authors of this
medi^e, fearing that if they should have filled up their speeches with copious
words, to every satisfying, through it mellow ripeness, it would have died at
the first revealing, as many other more worthy and better approved things have
done. Avoiding also by continual process all tediousness, thorough which
they should have bin combersome to themselves, tyring in like manner others
with an entire thing, have therefore taken the way, briefly to cut off all
copious speaking, least the matter should have proceeded more infinitely, the^
either their leisure or the matter required: contenting one another with the
bare sense of things, on purpose to continue life in the matter, knowing it
notwithstanding to be subject to withering as all other things are. Abhorring
besides, as it should seem to argue any thing to a trial through painted
guile or supportation of Art. Now howsoever the matter frames, I may hope not
to purchase the grudge or envy of any, meddling not at all therein farther then
may beseem the uprightness of a reporter: yet therein also as becomes me,
entreat the readers especially Gentlemen and the better sort, in whom there is
always to be found humanity and moderation, not to enterpret things to the
worst, but rather to pardon falts which all men are subject unto: to whom I
commit the correction of my self, so far as I have offended, if they may
please to vouchsafe the pains, knowing that they will at the least allow me as
great a liberty to confess my own ignorance, as to justify other men's
knowledges. Now for the envious and ignorant, I desire to have it taken of them
as a tale told to deaf men, but to the wise and indifferent, I hope it may
prove a song sung in a wood, that had a profitable echo. For whose sakes also
I had thought to have compassed out this matter with another meat wand, but
that the multitude of precepts should have bin thereby obscured, a fault and
hinderance to have made open and plain things less known.

THE DISPLAY OF FOLLY.
Huddle. SEe you neighbor Dunstable what hot spurring there is made after the
Buck over yonder land? were it with you and me as it has been since each knew
other, we could not behold such sport thus far of, but rather so far as
might become us, keep way with the foremost. Dunstable. Sir then was then, and
now is now, they that cannot do as they have done, must content themselves with
what they may do: pleases it you therefore to give over the game in the plain
field, and to let me tie up our horses to yonder bough, reposing our selves
awhile under the shade of this goodly green Oak. Hud. I readily consent to
your indifferent motion. Dunst. Because it is unwholesome and not altogether
safe to sleep in this wild wood, let me beseech you to discourse such matters
as our experience may delight us to remember: withal, voutchsafe I pray you,
to report the news of London, for thence I vnsterstand your maistership is
lately come. Hud. With a glad will, but ere we enter into them, let me first
tell you what I latest heard, which proouing true will equally glad us both.
This noble Earl is not come hither to take an honorable recreation only, as
heretofore he was wont, but purposes withal to keep a standing house here
the whole year thorough. Dunst. But that I fear the contrary, how should I
rejoice at these glad tidings. Hud. My self in like manner hold the matter
doubtful, knowing the special imploiments her Majesty has daily to make of
his most approved good services being still as he has been always so
excellent a becoming states pear, that his worthiness cannot but carry him
from us to matters of far greater consequence. To say truly, our untoward
deseruings have merited no such benefit from him for longer then we are
receiving good turns at his hands, or in hope of his pleasuring us, no longer
can we stay our tongs from cursing, banning, and ungracious deprauing his
noteable parts, whereof we are most unworthy to judge, yet always take upon us
singular skill and knowledge: were it therefore but our ingratitude only, then
which hell has not a more ugly vice, it alone were sufficient to discourage
such hopes of our good as from the rich treasure of his honorable bounty
otherwise might likely descend unto us. Our malignant hearts are bent toward
this Gentleman like as the double devoted Jews were against our Savior
Christ, whom they worshipped and reverenced so far, as miracles and their
own gain might stir them up to admire him, further they would not have to do
with him, until the time came they were able to betray, lay violent hands, or
crucify him. Now this good Earl, his Chimneyes smoke, to prepare
wherewithal to cram and fat up our swine bellies, now we wonder at him, and
term him noble Gentleman, honorable Lord, wise counsailer, and the
princeliest subject any realm Christened has or had in our memory. False
hearted hirelings ca^ we say thus while Beef and Brewesse lasts then, with
false black breath, boiling from out a venomous stomach blast the sweet
blossoms of his fruitful virtues, which even now had almost bin made
profitable unto us, had we not put forth our snakish toungs tipped with the
poisonfull hissing of slander and detraction. But now I long to hear the
faults you have observed in my long speech, hoping you will deal plainly in
manifesting them unto me. Dunst. Since it is your pleasure to stay your
discourse with a desire to hear my plain eloquence, I rather blame you for
speaking too little against that which is so worthy reproof, then otherwise
think much or that you over said in the Earl his praise. To say truly, such
are our gross manners, not caring what we say so we say somewhat, and somewhat
we must say, else could not the world take knowledge of our sufficiencies,
which serve us much better to find wants in other men, where they are not,
then to feel the burden of our own extremities, lying heavy upon our
shoulders, ready to break our weak backs. For my part, I mean to turn that
cursed speaking you named into hearty prayer, that it may please God to further
this noble man his purpose and desire, both to this whole countries benefit,
and also to the encoraging of other noble and worshipful Gentlemen, who
accompany him in love and good will, to do the like by his example, where they
dwell. A thing so much discontinued and so far worn out of fashion, that
unless by some notable man it be reduced and set up again, the old ancient
patterns lost and gone, I fear me, it will hardly or never catch the right
shape again, men have swarued so much to the new cut, wearing all on London
fashion, where they never think on their poor countries, save on quarter rent
days only. Hud. Though you spared me on the maine which stood in your way, you
thought to nick me on the bye, not set for you. The oversight I made in
comparing the Jews dealings with God and Christians their behavior toward
man, that mistaking you would not see, though too apparent to a curious eye:
but free and tolerable things to be used or laid aside, according to the
occasions and discretions of men, those you launched at even out of your reach,
presuming for that you shadowed your self under the couerture of a formal
figure, finding fault with your self to escape undiscovered, marching with
your colors flying: therein you use me as the blind Spaniard his boy served
his master, who to make a lurching fault himself, was content not to find his
masters little digression from the law himself had made, as if a little
breach in the one not found fault with, should give the other a liberty to
offend at large. The outside of your coat never gave me cause to suspect any
such lining: besides, what your ancient patterns and fashions should mean, I
cannot easily guess. My years being some few more then yours, me thinks I
should remember from as long a time as you. The while I have hued, things have
bin gained and bettered by wiser skill and sufficienter knowledges, whereby to
raise more profitable and convenient uses out of things, as may appear in
matters almost of every sort. Heretofore had men attained unto any little
smattering or small maisterie in arts or understandings above the rest, they
straight thought it a point of their deepest skill to hold others back from the
reach thereof, purposely to have the more ignorant to dote upon them, else
could not the masters of balductum ceremonies, have climed up by crafty
conueiance, to sit in thrones above Emperors and Kings. I suppose by your
ancient patterns and fashions, you mean apparel and hospitality, wherein to
my small power I will do my good will to take away the error of your mislike,
beginning first at apparel. Amongst sundry sorts of men there have always
been diverse kinds of attires, according to the humors degrees and abilities of
the wearers, the shape and fashion being ever in the or dainers choises to
please themselves according to the device and conceit of best becoming. Therein
this present age has rather surpassed, to their commendation, fitting nearer
by Tailers shapes and garnishings, with better proportioning and setting out
garments, to their bodies, then the Rutterking Tailors of the old stamp,
whereunto you would have fashions brought back again. You might as well
appoint men to go naked or loosely attired, which they have done, as not to
allow them that must were clothes, to fit their bodies according to their own
mind and fantasy. Had you found fault with too costly apparel, where
neither the degree nor place requires it, or with too fantastical or
superfluous wearing, where half the stuff would suffice to make a far more
seemly garment; or had you spoken against their follies, who fet envious
patterns to outvie and undo one the other, by trying maisteries in fashions,
who should bcare the prodigal bell away: which time and cost had bin better
spent in the emulation of virtues acts, who should have deserved best in deeds
of marshall prowess beseeming fortitude: therein had I agreed with you: but
through the have you made to find out these, not so worthy your displeasure,
such have also escaped you. I rather think you wanted words to express your
good conceit, not accustomed to speak in such things, then any ways come
short of judgment to discern aright in greater difficulties. Dunst. Surely
you favor me rightly; for it was my meaning to show the dislike I had of such
as wear more on their backs in one day, then their fathers did in their whole
life time. Hud. Now I dare undertake by your weighty words, you mean such as
wear more armor on their backs in one day, or are girte with more wounds and
stripes then their Fathers were. Dunst. Nay rather, I speak against that
excess, where commendable Farms which were wont to maintain and bring up
honest tennants and their children, over and above the rent, are dashed upon one
suit of apparel together with one days unmeasurable expenses. Hud. I
perceive you could be content to dwell rent-free, upon the grudge you bear
hereat, all the days of your life. But now to your patterns of housekeeping, I
will see to fit you better therein, for I know that troubles you most, and
gives you least cause of offense. Know you how all fathers that leave their
heirs lands, charge the said livings? First the mother her carrying away a
iointer, moueables and furniture of the house, that must needs be one
hinderance why the son should not begin where the father left: then paying
out of brothers and sisters portions, is also a hinderance to make him less
able to keep house and port equal with your ancient pattern. Now again,
besides lands and goods, perhaps he wants the offices and entertainmets from
his prince, which his father was assisted by, in that ample manner to do that
you so hastily require. But put the case all Noblemen and Gentlemen were in
better sort able to maintain housekeeping after this fashion, then any
ancestour they had, I will show you sufficient reasons, and those profitable
also to the common wealth, to have such lavish housekeeping forborne. When you
had these prodigal spendings, for custom sake, they neither knew why nor
wherefore, a progeny of voluntary or rather wilful beggars were thence
outrraised, the swarm and rabble whereof by continuance have defamed and
slandered the whole nation, besides the general and particular hurts they do
in the places where they are yet in that sort maintained. Is one Gentleman be
able to show you half a thousand thus bred and continued, from one descent to
another, for many hundreds of years, it is like England has some greater
store of these straw companions. It were much for me to say, that the first
brawle of them came from this occasion: because of the likelihood, I will
venture to think they did and show you my reasons: First their breeding and
customarie aboade in one place, excercising one self kind of life; then the
commodiousnesse of a wastefull house, to fcster them up in that free and
liberal sort, without exception to any that would help away with beef and
mutton, as much at their commandment, that would in this sort come to take
it, as at theirs whose breeding and growing it was of. For it is more likely
they took their beginning from houses thus wantonly kept, then from a farther
fetched devise of Abbeys and Priories, whose benefacting that way extended
chiefly to their supposed children and Paramoures, inhabiting Milles and
out-granges within their belles ringing, whither by outleaps they made their
Sabbath days iourneys: their cherishing was only of such, to do to have, as
the Scot says, an ease for a pleasure. Again, such as were fallen by
casualties or burdensome occasions of many children into poverty, former
times, I must confess, had greater respect in time to see to them then we
have, who lightly always by charitable contributions restored the^ back
again, and in time, to an estate ere they could catch a habit or delight
therein: a matter better pleasing no doubt to the parties relieved, then the
other contemptuous custom of wilsull begging. Now whether it be likely that
vnmeasurale house keepings were the occasions to draw loytering disposed
persons from labor to ease, and from one entising degree to another, till it
had fully possessed them to erect a habit or faculty of slothful beggars: the
first degreebeing in themselves through this provision, other members of their
like sort and quality, as the rogue and vagrant beggar, indeed have proceeded
from the number and superfluity of the first kind: now I say the better
consideration hereof to judge, I refer to your self. Dun. Through your
gentle teachings, I begin to perceive an approved error, in ouerdoing, as well
in things that have good purposes and intents, as also in matters grounded
upon mischiefs, carrying an outward show of holy and religious deeds. I
confess, Monasteries and Priories were not so likely to have bin causes
hereof, as the other dissolute houses, where refreshings were without respect
or partiality. The Moncks and Abbots of my knowledge, cut large shiuers of the
loaf for which they never sweat, to make themselves strong in the peoples
favor and opinion, or else spent their whole gettings upon unlawful children.
Yet notwithstanding by your favor, you have not attained unto the full of my
meaning and desire herein. Hud. I confess I have not, for the fight of beefed
beggars that thronged so thick in my way: but now I have got past them, I will
go near to meet you on your own bawlke. Your desire is to have houses kept to
bear the Lord of misrule company at Christmas, spending then upon Hick and
Stephan, who have no need of it, what would maintain a seemly family more then
half a year. Such may well be called the Lord of misrule his guests, who
besides excessive ouer-eating and drinking themselves, spoiling by misuse that
they cannot devour, leave behind them also such unmannerly annoyances, called
beastialities, that the Nobleman and Gentleman that has thus crammed his
quoistrels, must of necessity forsake their house and housekeeping, till a
good wind blow away the unpleasant savors their Christmasse Poulcats leave
behind them. Thus besides excessive cost and trouble by the fruits of this
careless hospitality, their houses are lest in worse case then common Innes
or ostelries. If it be a sheepshearing feast, master Baily can entertain you
with his bill of reckonings to his Master, or three sheapheards wages, spent
on fresh cates, besides spices and Saffron pottage. So that the Nobleman and
Gentleman should have nothing come in clearly to them at any season, if your
ancient patterns might be rightly observed. I know your meaning is not to have
the Hockedame waited on by them, who for the most part let their lands to
halfes, or else convert all into rent. The entertainment one of them gives unto
another cannot be that you call so hotly upon: for those fashions you have a
homely term I list not to remember you of. Dun. The money your maistership
has spent in learning and travel, is every penny better bestowed then other.
Now I plainly see, let an ignorant man be never so wise, or of never so great
experience, but if he meet with a man of gifts and bringing up, his presuming
to know all things proves plain ignorance, and mere mistaking. Once to day
I took my self to know as many ways to the Church as master Vicar himself,
but now I see Plowmen are no preachers. I have a Son that has cost me many a
quarter of corn, on whom for this days work I will bestow one Peck of pure
grain, which touched no chafe this many a day, to buie him more learning; and
though I am not able to breed a Gentleman, I may perhaps, as well as some of my
neighbors, bring up one. Hud. I marvel how you stumble on the Church and the
Minister: this hot weather and our long talk should rather have put you in
mind of the Butler and the Butterie. Besides I cannot bethink me what virtue
should be in your peck of pelf, especially to alter nature; my self withal
the proof I could make, could never find the skill to cause a barking
mongrell to become a true questing Spaniel. To be plain with you, I never
think an Ape more diformed, then when he strives by borrowed skill, to put on
that which nature cannot grace: nay rather those things are most ugly, which
are forced and done in spite of nature. Every one to whom Mastership
belongethis not a Gentleman, what purchase soever his father makes, unless he
can procure blood to alter kind: that you cannot give your son, because you
have not attained unto it your self. The notabilitie hereof proceeds from
chivalry and marshall prowess, where for princes right, and commonweales
saftie, through worthy adventures of blood and life, purchase is made at the
dearest price and rate. Therefore as there cannot be a greater cause amongst
men, then the Prince and commonwealths business, nor a greater matter then
blood and life, to be powered out and parted withal, of necessity the greatest
and principallest respect and regard has ever been had thereunto. Dunst. By
your favor sir, there are no such laws yet made to prove Soldiers
Gentlemen: or if there be, it is left out of their style in all that I can
read or understand of their profession. Hud. If you speak ignorantly, I am
contented to help you over the style; you seem not able to clime, but if you
play the Fox with me, grapes are no meat for you, especially of my reaching
unto you. Because I have some doubt of your words, and no cause to mistrust
your self, I will declare my mind herein more sully. You know how all that
are put to learning prove not learned, neither all degrees of learning of like
estimation: no more are any to be counted Gentlemen, unless they were so
before their degrees taken in Arts. Likewise, all that follow the wars prove
not Soldiers, nor all that prove Soldiers, take not their degrees at arms:
neither those that take degrees, all of one account or worth. For as there are
diverse kinds of virtues to make virtuous, so are there diverse degrees of the
virtuous, according to the sorts of the virtues they have attained The most
rich and excellent virtues were principally acquired and gotten by princely
deserving men, the renown of whose glorious deeds has rightly gotten unto
themselves just pre-eminence to guide and go before the rest, as hereafter I
will plainly show you. In their power and Majesty only therefore it is to
nobilitate, commend unto honor, and to make Gentlemen, and not in your peck of
drossie ointment, though made of the Quintessence of old Angels. Gentlemen bred
in the wars, and those that come of them, you see are not made, for it is no
proper speech, to say that is made, which is bred; neither can art or reason
help to make it good. Dunst. Without offending you with my rude answers, let
me ask you this mannerly question. Do you mean those that are begotten and
borne in a Camp, to be only Gentlemen of blood, or how otherwise I beseech
you to show me? I have heard this matter often debated, but never fully agreed
upon. Hud. Because you have already heard it doubtfully handled, and at no
time discust, it may in like sort become me to give place to some doctor of the
Civil law, to whose profession it especially appertains to know the
certainty of all worthy antiquities. Dun. It fits me not to importune you,
otherwise I should receive a great good turn at your masterships hands
thereby, for my son takes great delight in petegrees of Gentlemen, and has
some skill in quartering their coats. God willing he shall one day weight upon
you to better his knowledges, if it may please you to accept of his
unworthiness. Hud. Bring him with you on Sunday next to dinner, where you
shall be sure of a Pigge for your son his welcome, therein I mean to prove
his skill, how he can head and shoulder the same; the jaws and ears he shall
bestow upon you after he has quartered them. The head so spoiled, he shall
charge his quadrate trencher with. Dunst. I thought I should make you merry
with my mistakings, I now and then catch a word or two from my son, which for
lack of due placing, marreth all in the making. Hud. You shall in earnest (if
you list to carry it with you) hear what I can do in your son his Art. The
Pigs head shall be upon a Spit couchant, the tongue pendant, the brains dormant
in the sauce poinant. Now for a supporter or crest, because of the quadrufoile
in his bare head, there shall be a recompense made by purchase of the back
ribs and chinebone. All these thus put together, must of necessity conclude
somewhat, especially in a morning fasting. Dun. Most of these terms my son
has by heart, and will talk them to a glass window I have, when many times
it is my fortune to ouerheare him. According to your saying also he has often
confessed unto me, that his wit and memory have served him best to those
purposes in a morning ear he have eaten any thing. But still I am to put you
in mind of my former desire, wherein I am persuaded you are able to satisfy a
much better man then my self. Hud. Rather then to give cause to hinder our
exercise of speaking, I will do my best to content your mind herein, hoping
you will not put my ignorance upon me as a reproof, neither return a bolt
weakly shot, strongly upon my ownehead. It should seem there were ignorant
times wherein men lived in full plenty so abundant, that they needed not at
all to search out or care for, more then the use of necessaries already in
their own possessions. In progress of further time, while they were thus
lulled in their soft delights, their ordinary provision through their numbers
increasing, began as it were to abate and grow empty, well toward a want on
the sudden: now the way to supply the same, was not so ready as the necessity
grew urgent; whereupon some few, or rather one above the rest, stirred up by a
more ready motion, and better resolved spirit, put forth himself with purpose
rather to seek remedies where they might likely or possibly be found, then
securely to stay themselves upon deceaueable means. These few thus quickening
their dull senses, by the instigation of that quahtie which is ever least
subject to base neglect, to prevent that which was like to ensue, they ranged
into the world like companions and fellow adventurers in the behalf of
themselves and the rest; whose cogitations for want of stabilitie of courage,
could neither respect nor take in hand, any thing beyond the slow custom of
gross ease. These worthies, I say, thus trusting to their bold and confident
courages, set up their rest, either to follow and acquire that which should
become profitable in a community to the whole society and company, or never
to return back, or once to think of the sweetness they had tasted by their
former variety and plenty. God, who ever prospers the most worthy portion
of his grace, which sets forwards it self to virtuous and industrious
acquirements, presented in short time unto their view, helps before that time
unknown, but yet not without danger, nor so succesfull, but still they should
work themselves into the possession of them, by hardy, painful, and manlike
endeuoures. After they had through this good gift and enclination of Fortitude,
bin brought to the discovery and knowledge of these likely means, by exercise
and progress in this virtue, they dared withal to adventure, and with a
voluntary courage set upon difficulties, which ere that time for want of
proofe-making in themselves, they had not mastred. Setting at the first,
fierceness against fear, and extremity against extremity, and so by the
aiding hand of God easily conquered into their obedience and use, first wild
and forcible creatures, then others that were under the maisterie and command
of them, before that time the matter of their spoil. These worthies thus
returning with profitable relief to their droanes at home, who notwithstanding
their own deffects, were yet able to conceit and admire the excellency of
the conquerours by their atchiuements, most moderately on the sudden they
extolled and lift them up beyond the credit and belief, that they could be
less then Gods in comparison and distinction of doings, being brought on at
the first by these motions and affections of joy, there was no doubt in
continuance they would be settled in opinion to receive and reverence them for
no less then Gods in deed. After, by this support of courage, they had gone
thorough and accomplished matters sufficiently behouefull for the common
bearing out of necessities; they then cast another about presently with
themselves, how to increase and make permanent their young and new begun world
strongly resolving with themselves afresh, that now it was no less expedient,
with laws and manners to fashion them how to live, then before it was needful
to seek out necessaries to maintain life. After they had entertained and
taken into counsel the prudent and considered virtue, you may then think they
gained by degrees, into matters which have been in differently from one time to
another delivered over, as may appear by the benefits we have received from
them which were immediately before us. Now amongst those that were thus provoked
and prepared through the force and faculty of Fortitude, after they had
exercised their desires upon such hard and laborious things, as before I showed
to be out of their powers, there was also in the company of these few, one
principal man, whom I would have you to understand, in the sight and beholding
of the other did that above the rest, whereunto they were rather ministers of
aides and obedient helpers, then any way able to equal: to whom they did both
in their expedition abroad, and also ever after in all places, for his chief
worthiness, attribute duty unto. This princely worthy, being more entire and
fully possessed with the height of virtues, whether by the benefit of nature, or
by the special indument of Gods grace, with absolute parts, he by all their
consents had princely powers set upon his shoulders, and by general voices,
was chosen and instituted their Duke and leader, to go before them in all
manner of concernings, as well of war and conquest, as also to be their
vpholder, conseruer, and commander in all matters of civil institution and
derection. Now after all eyes were fastened on him, and all hearts bent at his
devotion, such as would not forsake their retchlesse sloth, but still have
wrapped themselves within the spoil of others labors, such at the length by
his assignement, were appointed places to serve in, according as every one was
spirited, disposed, or more or less apt to perform and discharge trust and
services to be committed unto them. Dunst. Surely Sir, you have spoken so
darkely, that for the thick spleigh of boughs and broad leaves of this tree, I
cannot discern your meaning. Huddle. Think you I go about to deceive you with
darkness of words? If a field be said to have eyes, a wood may likewise have
ears. But whether you hear me not, or list not to believe me, the likelihood
hereof shall carry me to credit the same, knowing that matters of less proof
and more unlikely truth, have been received from worse grounds and beginnings
then this comes from. But you may see how the love I bear you has carried
me to clime unknown hauntes, and such difficult paths, as there are no
steps or traces left me to follow; therefore you may say, it is like to
prove a hard journey to a weak traveler. Dunst. Now I better remember my
self, I have read many stories agreeing with your worthies in their notable
deeds and exploites, done by courageous and bold attempts. Huddle. I will not
seek to win you by extremity of speeches, but leave you to the liberty of
your own better conceauings. To keep whole the understanding of the matter, I
will come to that which shall neereliest agree with that I said before. After
this principal Worthy was enthronized by others, himself was also addicted
and disposed, for the better conservation of all things in order, in the
integrity of his judgment and discernings, to consider with rewards and
dignities such deseruers and beautified minds, as himself had seen forward
by ready and fervent dispositions, placing and crediting unto them for their
tried and approved services, such degree of trust and superiority, as might
both stand in stead toward a recompense of their travails, and also the more
encourage them to go on with him in perfecting things necessary to uphold
societies and vocations, whereunto he had lately sorted the whole people.
Afterward, such of all sorts as had defected and come short in sufficiency, to
perform matters and places committed unto them, so as the rest received loss
and hinderance by their fault or negligence; such injurious deceivers were
deposed, thrust down, and disfranchised, as persons unfit to become the strong
virtues and properties beseeming men ever after compelled to exercise weak
things, and withal enjoined to live out the rest of their days in the company
and conversation of women. What occasion soever notwithstanding urging the use
of them, such were never recalled nor suffered to execute duties amongst men.
Dun. That you may perceive the warmth my belief has caught through your most
excellent description, I will open unto you my conceiving of your speeches, by
the process whereof I gather, you mean to derive Kings and Princes from the
most especial deserving worthy, who from successor to successor, have still
added ornaments of rare excellencies: to the intent that those who from time to
time have issued from them, might through their clear and shining perfections
be discerned to have issued from such noble, famous, and renowned progenitors.
Proving further withal, that such high prowess and meritorious parts never
fading, but ever more and more increasing, have long sithence through the
dignity and glory of notable deeds by the hand of God, been exalted into
throne and Majesty wherein they sit, having in themselves through him
sufficient power and ability enough to nobilitate and make famous whomsoever
they may please to nominate, appoint, and choose. Hud. I think it has bin the
warmth of gentle blood, which beating within your breast, has thrust out this
formalitie you indent your words withal: could my consent help toward it,
you should be made a gentle master Scriuener, for your orderly frame of words
are so well suited, that as me thinks you have much amended the old pattern
you began with in the morning. If you mistake me in sense also no worse
hereafter, it shall not repent me to talk of this fashion yet a while longer
with you. Dunst. Though of my self it sounds not well, yet without brag be
it spoken, there be Gentlemen of blood in this country that sit not so high in
the subsidy book, neither are rated in furnitures and setting out of men to
the wars in sort as I am. Hud. Herein you deceive me little. I ever took you
fitter for the land then the sea. How can you prove a good merchant, that are
not willingly pleased with the venture of a little without grudging, to gain
infinitlie and continually? I doubt me if her Majesty's most gracious
providence exceeded not the beneuolent respects you bear even to your self,
you could not so quietly have increased your ability, nor brought your wealth
to that plenty, you now enjoy it, but might have been endangered to have lost
somewhat of that you have long sithence through her safe government and
defense, laid up hoords, robbing the commonwealth of the due uses they were
made and should serve for. There are too many both unmerciful and most
unthankful men, who repine and are more troubled with the departure of a from
their superfluity and abounding plenty, then other good men are from their
reasonable and competent abilities, which they readily show to the uttermost by
their good intents. I partly know them you stretch your superlatiue degree of
comparisons at or if I do not, thus much generally I can say of all Gentlemen,
that their forwardness to have such things in a readiness for themselves, if
need should so require, and with setting out their sons in services already
past, that if you should be rated, as they becommingly prepare themselves, you
would think your self robbed of that you bestow in that sort, of and for the
safety of your self and your goods. I confess you want no ability with the
foremost to perform necessary services, could your willing heart consent to
the same, as I said to your own good. I trust for Subsidies, Gentlemen's lands
and their other values are more readily discerned, and far more serviceable
then your buried pelse, laid up for the devil and his kingdom of darkness.
Had you the lamentable experience but of one days wars, which God keep us
from, you would then call for twenty years subsidies, and bring them in as
willingly as you now bury and obseure them from the service of the realm For
all your complaining, I doubt not but once in the year you squit out a
commodity to ingrate upon the Gentleman's necessity you mean, with buying
either his whole years wood-sale, his croppe on the ground, or some other
out-lying commodity, that shall go near to defray your whole years charges,
the marriage of your children excepted. Dunstable. Had I thought your
maistership would have taken my free speeches in so ill part, which concerned
only my self and my ready ability, to forward to my power my Prince her
occasions and services, I would have forborne to have uttered my mind, wherein
I only grieved, that any should exempt themselves or forbear to extend their
uttermost help and endeavor in such good works. My intent was not to repine
at my own easy charges, especially to perform so necessary a duty. If it
please you to forget my foolish speeches and scattering questions, beginning
where the matter brake off, you shall favor me; in that I have a special
desire to hear at the full, you having so notably entered into the declaration
thereof. You left at absolute virtues, which are the gifts of nature, and
accompany Gentlemen from their birth. Huddle. Sithence by your desire I am put
in mind of complete virtues, which are said to be in Princely descents of
blood from the beginning, and at their entrance into the world: I am contented
there to begin again. All creatures in manner that bear life, have also at
the first an inclination toward a very near similitude of the nature from
whence they came: by which I prove the perfections that are in parents,
descend wholly and without change, steps, or goings on, in like manner and sort
to their children, as they were endued therewith themselves, but if the parent
want the perfection thereof himself, his child may attain unto it, but not
by natures benefit, for that the foregoing one had not the entire possion
thereof in the time of his life. It is evident to every understanding, that
absolute virtues neither decrease nor increase, for look what is perfect in it
own fullness, the same is able to enriche and fortify what it affects, and
naturally inclines it self wholly unto: it never decreasing, as I said,
because of it perfection it can be no less in the succeeding child, then it
was in the proceeding father, so that the virtue most excellent in the one,
shall be the same without exceeding or diminishing in the other, admitting no
mediocritie, reaches at the first the uttermost point of the virtue which was
of that integrity in the former Worthy. That virtue which wanted perfection
in the progenitour, his offspring may attain unto: but it is not his proper and
peculiar blessing, as it should have been, had it not wanted perfection in the
other. Because the one wanted the full and entire possession thereof, he cannot
deliver it over by descent in blood. Dunsta. Belike then, if the worthy
progenitour had attained to the tipe of all perfections, his worthy offspring
had at the first immediately been seasoned with that most precious liquor,
according to the influence into the former vessel. Hud. Yea undoubtedly, but
the mystery of the perfection celestial, which you rightly termed a most
precious influence, it is too divine to dwell upon earth, or to be discust by
mortal sense and understanding: but the next unto that omnipotency, are Kings
and Princes, because they receive their blessings from God directly, without
other benefit or additament whatsoever. Dunst. Then I pray you Sir, how do
diverse without the benefit of this generous blood, attain to such ripeness
as may make them worthy high place and dignity in the word? Huddle. Through
forward inclination and disposition, taken with the love and desire to immitate
such serviceable virtues as they have seen approved and rewarded in others,
whose more properly at the first they were, and so upon just cause, are both
received and held worthy men. In the first virtuous man, I showed you even
now, after his good speed was seen, and the way known, how he did great
things, others were stirred up to have pleasure and delight in the like, yet
such also as were better endued, and of a more ready motion then the rest. For
all could neither be incited by example; nor forced by compulsion to needful
and concerning duties, to the pleasuring of themselves. Dunst. By this
reckening, wisdom to forethinke is not the least help both to seek and also
to become great places attained unto. Hud. All my speeches have tended to that
end and purpose, Yet first I showed you, how bold courage did rouse and waken
men from out the cradle of security, before they were assisted by
consultation: even then also had they failed of resolution to enterprise and
break through disficulties, such also as perhaps were repugnant unto reason,
and above that wit could persuade to be possible, then all had fainted, and
nothing had been atcheiued. Now wit, art, and counsel, which you spoke of
right now, might have served them to prolong their plenty, and to have held
them still in ease, to have leslened and made away by devise, some of their
superfluous and rising numbers; but the strong virtue was first, and it
prevailed to best purposes and blessings. Dunst. Now sir I beseech you, speak
somewhat of the defects that were found in them that never came forward. Hud. I
have promised so to do. You may imagine, that while the sun is oppressed and
surcharged with clouds, her virtue of comforting is for the while hindered;
but when she has out wrought them, and broken thorough the black prison, her
light is then clear, and her operations effectual. Likewise, whilst
wantonness, belly cheer, and other entangling delights, held men back from
the use and knowledge of themselves: till I say, the maisterfull spirit had by
maine force, spoiled and driven away all impediments, they could purchase no
freedom nor rest contented, unless they were able also to make a through
conquest of themselves, then which there could not be a greater victory.
Dunst. A fair and a virtuous generation of worthy men, fit to take example at.
Hud. The princely worthy, that had been the cause of the beginning and
discovery of all these things, through his search and aduenturous inquiry,
after I say he had laid these fast knowledges, sufficient both for their own
foundation, and also for continuing their succeeding posterities, making
always the end of one discovery, the beginning of another, and after himself
for all these benefits had been deservedly crowned and holden in due honor and
regard of the rest, at once he amended all their estates, bringing the number
of such as were out of order, into order, by provision as aforefaid, of such
necessaries acquired, as nothing but the justice and displeasure of almighty
God could bereave them. Now to iumpe with your desire, I will directly show you
who were the pecora campt, to whom for their unwillingness little or nothing
was possible. You must also remember, how at the first I told you, few by
nature and their own ready inclination were warlike, yet by instruction and
imitation, shaking off and expulsing the first disease called sloth, many were
fashioned and instituted, by the desire they had to follow the discipline of the
first worthies. Notwithstanding all this, there remained a sculke of such, as
neither care nor castigation could amend or make able to entertain other
purpose or desire then at the first. Besides, to increase their number and
sort, there were diverse whose courages abated, degenerating and declining by
immoderate and intemperate contrarieties, thorough which they corrupted and
lost their first blood and estimation, differing in a manner altogether from
the good resolutions to virtues, which at the first, either themselves or their
ancestors had been raised unto: who rather then fail, by erudition and
tradition, for the honor of their own first virtues, were desirous to have
had their posterity assumed and admitted unto them. To make along tale short,
and the rather, because the evening star has made the air temperate and fit
for us to travel, you must still note the number that always subjected
themselves so much to inordinate liberty, that no decree could demonstrate
unto them any thing sufficient to respect a more civil and perite life; but
that they would repose themselves upon pleasures, which they desired still to
hold, as their defense and fafegard, to keep and defend them from the perils
of their life. Playing the tyrants thus with themselves, suffering baseness to
bear all the sway, according to beastly fantasy and licentious appetite, such
never came at all forward to better themselves, neither by reputations for
virtues, which they were careless to possess; nor for desire they had to
purge or segregate themselves from the soft vices they were first infected
withal: neither yet were at all moved with the felicity they saw the reformed
to live in: nay the commandment and reprehension that was used for their
amendment and bettering prevailed not in them. Now comparing the number of
those who never admitted excellencies, with those that fell away and decreased
their worthy parts and qualities, without respect or care to put on again the
habit and dignity of well doing, you may well find the cause, why so many
unworthy, are at all times found amongst so few blessed and happy men, who are
endued with excellent dispositions of themselves, to do and to distribute good
and wise things. Dunst. I pray you sir suffer me yet to ask you this one
question more, whether you think courage or counsel the more beneficial
virtue, to advance and set forward actions of greatest moment? Hud. I am
content to understand you by your meaning, and so answer to that I think your
desire is to know, which of the twain should be the first or more principal
virtue to become great things. If wit should be of more force then courage, who
should keep the Woolfe from the door? the fold alone cannot defend the sheep,
neither one sheep help another. If courage were not the prevailing virtue,
wit would persuade him not at all to go to the wars, and suffer there all
indurances, depriving us of such laudable things, as we might else at ease and
in safety enjoy. Wit can teach, it is more safe tarrying at home, sleeping in
a whole skin upon a soft bed, then to lie in a waterie ditch abroad with
bleeding wounds. Wit can show you, that it is better to stand by a fire of
straw, making Malt in a dry house, then to suffer cold, thirst and hunger
under the wide open welkin. Wit taught Ulysses rather to counterfeit madness,
and to choke himself with his country smoke; then to change sweet and
prosperous pleasure for the sour adversities that are suffered in the wars.
Wit waiting upon courage, that is a consonant thing to compass and make all
undertakings fortunate. Fortitude shall have much to do, to make wit shake of
his fear, forget his trembling motions, and to put on the armor of all
proofs, called military boldness: but when that is once on, with more ease
he shall be taught the skilles and knowledges which belong to the tollerating
and sufficient doing hard and difficult things. After this, besides wit must
also have constant persuasion, to dare to enterprise, and in person himself to
go against dangers. Wit thus girt, it is good conferring and counselling with
him in the field: but if naked wit be principal man there, the Drum and
Trumpet must sound and strike up false alarms to dance base daunces: first on
a little forwards, at the first he cries, then by and by retire: the rest must
be danced backward, which is called a base dance, especially in the field.
Naked wit can bid others be bold to fight, and run away himself, he can give
counsel, and direct to begin well, but when there is most need to go forward,
defecteth even in his own precepts, such tyrants can lead men into the field
for their own good, under the standard of wit. To such fair wars I think a
man might entreat your company. Dunst. Alas Sir, hard lodging and bad diet
would be as good as a murdering piece to kill me out right. Yet for one day I
could be content to see fashions amongst them with a quarter of a cold Pig, and
an Aquavita bottle under my girdle. Hud. Nay, I can assure you, the wars and
a cold stomach will never agree: at these years, you and I will pray from
them that may. To martch in Armor, and to go under the weight thereof, would
break our bones, being, as they are, cold, dry, and marrowlesse. Dun. My
son tells me, it is nothing now a days to be a soldier, for they never
come to pitched fields, as they were wont in our old English wars, when the
division of houses was. Hud. Is your son a Fencer that ways to; I think he
be an universal man. But I pray you what ward has he to bear of a Musket
bullet? it must needs be with his legs, for his hands I know are not Pistol
proof. Dunst. I confess those gunnes are devilish things, and make many men
run away that other ways would not turn their heads. But when I said a
Soldier, I meant the General or commander in the wars. He tells me many
times he could discharge the place himself, though he never saw an enemy in
the face. Hud. Not unlike, but show me I pray you, wherein the commanders
office consists, according to that you have heard your son report.
Dunstable. Marry sir, in ordering and ordaining the field, and in well lodging
his camp, near rivers and places defended from contagious noisome winds. Hud.
What shall then be the Lord Marshall his place under him, if his Generalship be
thus employed* Dunst. He says Hanniball supplied both the romes himself, and
made the offices one: he always when he came to join battles and prepare his
fights, bestowed his footmen upon hills and places of advantage, and his
horsemen in the plains and even valleis beneath. Hud. If young Hanniball your
son were chiese in the field, his footmen should be Astronomers or wisards,
to know when they should not fight, then from the hills to give signs to the
horsemen to be gone, and fly away together, and so your son his host should
consist of a running camp. Though I was never worthy to bear the name of a
companion in the wars, yet under his conduct I could be content to refuse the
offer of a very good place and office. Dun. What office is that, and why? I
pray you sir let me know. Hud. No entertainment could tempt me to be master of
his carriages, to carry and recarrie hills and dales, winds and waters;
besides I know the great library that has cost you so many quarters of Corn,
must also wait upon his remoues. If that fleet up and down with him, well he
may loose an eye with poaring upon his Puerilis, but with climing the Alps as
Hanniball did, for catching an ill humor in that sort, I dare put you in
comfort and be his warrant. Dun. May it please you sir to take a hard lodging
at my house to night, for I see by the Moons leap into her waterie circle, if
we sit long here, unwholesome dewes will be sent down upon us. Hud. Not now I
thank you, I have such business with my Lord that I cannot, when I come into
the country again in winter, it is like I will bid my self upon this
warrantise. Dunst. I have a case of some extremity, wherein I would be glad of
your worships counsel, might I be so bold to crave it. Hud. Tomorrow in the
morning when my Lord is gone forth again to hunt, I will be ready for you, and
as glad of your company as to day. Dunst. God keep you Sir, as it becomes
me, I will wait upon your coming abroad in the morning. Hud. Good night
neighbor.

The end of the first days meeting.
THE SECOND DAYS MEETING.
Huddle. TO make payment of my promise, I have ouerslipped an opportunity with
my Lord, but I hope to recover it with my better diligence the next day. Dun.
It is a busy harvest day also with me, and I might ill have been spared from
my work folks, who will make it noone till it be night, with drinking,
singing, and lazing themselves in the shock: but I had rather loose their whole
days work, then to have missed your worship, who so friendly remember me to
your hinderance. Hud. I perceive they sing well that work well with you, but
this fair day will make them labor like Bees to gather in your harvest. Dun.
That servant is too wicked and careless, who will take his hire and leave his
work in this season, especially when it is a sign of health to labor. Hud. I
doubt not but you are wise enough to reward them according to their deserts.
Dunst. I pray you sir, hear you any further news of the good Earl his
abiding here still amongst us? Hud. There is nothing known to the contrary;
they that would have it so, hope as they did, but how it will fall out, the
sequel must show. Dunst. How happy a thing were it to the commonwealth, if
me^ of prise would live in their countries to keep the unworthy back. But the
negligence of them that are and should be worthy, encourage others to take
their places, and suffer them so greedily to catch up, what they carelessly let
fall. Should you but see what market crosses, some men's houses are made with
baskets to present all manner of things that every season affords, you would
think it more then time to wish better men in their places: false custom has
made wantons of those that are of no desert nor need* on purpose to bereave
them that want, even of that they bring up and should live by. Nay the foolish
world is made more afraid, and stand in greater a we of these proud takers,
then they are of God himself, by which idolatry they are become more
religious toward men then to their maker. Should such men not perform to
their belly Gods a Michaelmas sacrifice of Honey, they would think their Bees
would die in their Hiues, or fly away and forsake them at swarming time. If
not of Brawne and all manner of wild foul at Christmasse, their young stores
would become foul, and die of the kernels ear winter pass. If not of Veales
and Lambs at Easter, their cattle should rot and die of the murrion or
read-water. If not of Pigeons and green Geese at Whitsontide, their young
flights should be starued in Catlock moon, and their stubble Geese fly over
their houses at Lammas, and be no more seen. If not of Cherries, Strawberries
and Pears at Midsommer, let them look for Caterpillars and Summer-winds, to
blast and destroy their fruit ere Autumn come. Would God these widows mites
might serve their turns, then could we go to the pillars and poll our selves
according to good father Tyndall his counsel. But there is that which far
exceeds this, wherewithal at this time I am not a little troubled, but to
recite it were needless, because it is bootlesse. Hud. If you grow fine on the
soddaine, sparing to utter your self to me, who am no ways like to prove a
dangerous man unto you, this days meeting shall soon take end, and so still
safely think to my self what I had thought boldly to have uttered unto you,
and the rather at your own desire. Dunst. If you give me leave sir, it shall
soon appear unto you, that my own grief and no distrust in your fidelity,
has caused me to take a new breath in the matter. We can no sooner bring up
our sons to man's estate, but with costly maintenance we are feign to make
presents of them also: look what would have served their turns five years at
home according to their births and friends abilities, must be spent in one
year on proud rags, to ruffin it out in the company of their betters.
Besides, when we have spent our selves thus upon our yonkerie, even to that
which would have proved honest portions for them to have lived all their life
thorough: now begins our woe betide, they come home with conditions
purchased at too dear a rate. To mend all in the end, their silly mothers make
up the matter with their fo^d kockerings, stroking them with foolish words on
this sort; My Sam and my Ierom, you shall go no more a serving, but tarry at
home with your father and mother. A son I have come home this other day from
serving, with clothes all torn, his purse monilesse, and himself no doubt
graceless. He had not bin two days with me ere he fell upon his younger
brothers, the true consorts of my labors, them he outragiously beat, reuiling
besides his mother and me with such rakehelly words, and hellish oaths, that I
feared more then in a tempest, the downfalling of my house on our heads. Not
withstanding all this, to make my grief more restless, his unreasonable and
inportunate mother lies at me night and day to make over and commit unto him a
little farm that I have forsooth for his preferment in marriage, justifying
after her fashion all his vices, which she would have me allow for virtues: the
ruffianly brawles with his brothers she terms manhood, his horrible swearing,
hoate and hasty stomach: his outfacing and wording at me, audacitie and manly
boldness; saying the rude hinds his brothers cannot tell how to give a
Gentlman his due, that has bin abroad and learned manners and fashions. By her
leave he shall show his behavior in some other place, where such fashions are
in request: with me they shall have no allowance, nor himself from me longer
maintenance. Better I were now and then to suffer his remiss mother to mistake
a quarter or two of corn, to buy the knave a coat with, then to have him Lord
it out thus under my nose, and I to sweat and swinke, to maintain his
lozelrie. Huddle. This you take in so ill part, is not worth your lament nor
complaint. If you consider the old bondage and vassalrie men of your condition
were wont to bein, you should find, that to bestow a son thus upon a
gentleman, to have him brought up, were a pledge of your good will to the
master for the man his good, and no such heinous matter as you make it,
neither is the place as you impute it, the cause or occasion of your son his
faults; for there can no Gentleman be of other mind, but that he had rather
his man had many good qualities, then one evil condition. Your sons climbing
follies, to equal or rather exceed them he should not strive withal, in
costly apparel and lavish expenses, is also blameworthy in your self,
setting proud feathers higher in his top at the first, then you are able to
reach and pull down again when you would. Had you said, the taking of gifts
and bribes, to pervert and hinder the course of justice had been a matter of
common sorrow, and is wont to be withstood and helped by the presence and
authority of the honorable, their countries ancient benefactors, next and
immediately under the Prince, then had you been of the mind I would have you
with me to be in, by such reasons and examples as I am ready to yield you.
Gifts are said to draw a curtain between truth and the prudent light and
understanding of the just, and to make crooked the straight and plain
testimonies and sentences of the righteous. If bribes have truth once in chase,
light she not on a strong covert and sanctuary, such an one as is nobility,
to refuge the wronged, it is odds after many wrinches and pinches given her in
the course, she will also be gathered up and spoiled by her fierce pursuing
enemies, which by craft and subtilty, can both gain cope, and take the simple
harmless wretch in their cruel gins and merciless snares. Golden blocks
thrown in the way of justice, her Chariot is in great danger of ouerturning.
They therefore that think to do justice, should not so much as look upon
gifts, which are said to put out the eye of equity. The sellers and buiers
thereof, are not worthy to be trusted in a commonwealth, much less fit to hold
place and dignity in the same. In Romes best flourishing days first justice
was sold, then Rome it self was offered to be sold. Two insatiable buiers we
are sure of, that is to say, craft and power. Now from viperous matricide
sellers, good Lord deliver us. But I hope there are none who would be content
to see the tender bowels of their natural parents lie bleeding before them:
but rather trust to God, that all our English nation in general will imitate
the fidelity of our Noblemen, who I am persuaded are all of worthy Fabricius
his mind. He having a great mass of treasure sent him from king Pirrhus,
freely without any conditions to do good or hurt and in the time of his want
also, refused the same utterly setting more by his honorable freedom to be
beholding to no state or Potentate but his own, then he did of all the wealth
of Egypt at which denial or virtuous spectacle, the king admiring, concluded
it to be as easy a matter to alter the sun from his course, as to change
Fabricius from the strict observance of honeslie. Besides their strong
resolutions that way, I hope they be Argus eyed to behold from the Beacons and
watch towers of their wisdoms, that no rage of rebels shall enter the realm
at unawares, to endanger her throane, that is the welfare of us all, through
whom under God we are vpholden. Further also I doubt not, but if any such
serpents come creeping in to disperse their venom, and to infect this sweet
soil, which is full of God and her benefits, they will be as wise as Dedalus
was, with laborinths to intricate and enclose them, so sent from greater snakes
then themselves to endanger our christian peace. Lay they all on one heap, or
were they suited alike, the way to beware them were more easy But some time
they lie lurking in fine penny grass, where they are suteably clad to beguile,
for green can hardly be descerned from green. Other-whiles they lie enclosed
in caves and dens, where they tarry to mew their old skins, which by running
through brambles and briers they having once shed and put off, then become they
youthful, and frolic it abroad, drawn forth by the comfort of the least
breath of a warm wind or small sunshine. When they have thus dissolved the
ycie limbs before congealed and benumbed in their frozen dens, then are they
fit for the company of them, who cannot live unless they be fed with poison.
There they play the serpents indeed, creeping at the first into the hearts of
such as under the color of devotion, they can easily draw into abuse,
supplanting allegiance at the first dash. When they have abused such with the
infection of conspiracy, to them they draw forth their commission, whereat
there hangs the autenticall seal of Rome. The first words within the
escript, are murder and rebellion. In the next clause is contained plenarie
remission, and forgiveness, to any that can flesh themselves in the sacred
blood of her gracious Majesty, or any that be especially near unto her.
Within this same writ notwithstanding, the unsatiate legates are named
Catholics and pretensaries to reform religion, through cruelty to be
exercised upon the anointed of God. In the next clause following, there is a
charge to bind by oath all to be ready, and at all points furnished, to
recover into obedience such as are fallen away from the statutes and ordinances
of the sea Apostolic. After that, goes on the last point, under whom they
must serve; that is to wit, under the Archstanderd-bearer of Antechrist, the
king of Spain and his deputies. Dun. I trust the joyful crown that God has
given her Majesty, through her true fear and love of him, shall continue her
triumph in godly and plenteous peace, to fill the whole land still with her
benefits, notwithstanding helles sting, and its roarings against her. Hud. Yea
God doubtless will ever let them want somewhat to disapoint their wicked rages,
which their commission cannot supply, notwithstanding their parcialities and
factions: as appeared by the omnipotent hand of God from heaven, overthrowing
and bringing to naught their Giant-like devises; through the strength and
greatness whereof they threatened the firmament, and thought to have supplanted
the very foundations and ground-workes of heaven. Because you may remember how
God confounded the devises of those that put their confidence and trust in
themselves, and their own right hands, because, I say, you saw how they were
scattered and dispersed into diverse nations, flying before the face of the
winds, no man forcing them, I will therefore forbear to speak of the
notablenesse thereof, not taking upon me to be able or worthy to judge wherein
the secret determination of the Almighty alone prevailed. But now to tell you
what they want and seek for chiefly amongst us, as also to what conclusions
their drifts tend: know you that they hunt the authority of great persons, by
them to bring in a ravening monster upon us, to work our confusion by a beast
of confusion, if there could any such be found that would undertake to bring in
hungry rauenours to possess with cruelty what they blessedly enjoy. By the
judgment of God hitherto, we have seen what their unnaturalness has wrought
against others, and what they have caught for themselves. Du Belecue me, til
now I had little thought their religion had te^ded to murder and rebellion.
Hud. As though the devotion of Rome had at any time other patience then to
overthrow by all tyranny and cruelty. They hold no other cou^sailes to amend
any thing that is amisle in religion, but presently poisoning, or other degrees
of confusion, are either purposed or executed upon them that stand against
them. How open a thing is it to every understanding, to believe that they who
go about, or wish to change the Queens most excellent Majesty from the
religion she has always preferred before the safety of her life, that the
same men have not concluded and determined her death, according to the endeavors
and abilities they were of. Now I hope you see by this commission, how the
fellow catholics that were, are become fellow soldiers, and from Jesuits,
traitors, and seedmen of sedition and conspiracy. Their harmles desire to
instruct the ignorant, and to bring back again those seduced stray sheep,
that had wandered forth from the fold of Rome, that is also laid a sleep and
changed. I remember how they dallied out the matter like Chaucers Friar at the
first, under pretense of spiced holiness. Dun. I beseech you sir, express
your conceit of that Friar. Hud. This holy man came sick to a chapel of ease,
where one of his good dames dwelt, who had wont to bestow the best room and
cherishing in her house on him. She seeing this drooping pulier thus distressed,
pity ran soon into her gentle heart, offering to him at the first the
choice of such things as she had in a readiness to eat. Amongst the rest a
Hen was named, presently to be killed for him. A Hen quoth the limmeter,
nay good dame, God defend she should be done to death for so sinful and wicked
a wretch as I am; the liver of a Hen gentle dame, will suffice me; for alas I
am a poor wretched underling, and no provincial man, neither warden of my
company. At the first these celestial seeds-men meant no hurt to the Queens
most excellent Majesty nor her realm; but that which was more dear unto her
to hold, as I said before, then her life, that they would seek to pull from
her without offense Dunstable. Thanks be to God for her godly resolution. Happy
is that bird that has her nest so shut up and fenced in, that no destroyers
can enter to spoil her and her tender loving ones. What considerations or
hearts carry they, that desire to subject their Sovereign to foreign
Pottentates? Or how should it come to pass, that the bonds of breeding should
bind less, then the corrupt promises and rewards of other nations? Woe worth
such wicked proselites that have made themselves strangers and aliens from
their own countries, suffering themselves to be won to other religion and
obedience, then that which God and their Prince commands: subiecting
themselves to two tirants, that go about to crush and grind to powder all the
nations of the Christian world, thinking none meet to possess them but their
own merciless selves. What worse or more blusterous devils can there be, then
such as forsake their religion with detestation, for a deadly some of money?
Hud. Have you forgotten, how Judas Iscariot for the couetise of money, of his
own accord, betrayed his master? Dunst. No verily. Hud. Then think that men
may be drawn by means where they want true breeding, and right bringing up;
especially when there is so busy a counsel held abroad about the matter in
the devilish convocation house of Bishop Caiphas at Rome, whither the Scribes
and Pharisees swarm daily, crying; Let us murder her, she is not for our
purpose. Besides, thither resort Pilate his servants also, who at any
conditions, are ready to be hired, to lay violent hands on the Lords anointed
marked for his principal members and defenders of his infallible truth.
Nothing but murder will quench their insatiable thirst, as appeared by the
Iacobines most irreligious sacrificing of the Christian King Henry of France
last deceased; the day of which horrible deed doing, is hallowed, and called at
Rome the day of the gladness of their hearts, where they mingle and confer
devilish counsels with our men, whom they keep there, with itching hands and
tickling fingers already stirred up to attempt violence against her, whom God
of his goodness thus far has made invincible against all terrors, promising
still to keep his beloved safe from the danger of all practices and
conspiracies whatsoever. Dunsta. I pray you sir recite your example of Judas,
which I partly remember, yet understand not the matter so fully as I am
persuaded you are able to teach it. Hud. Judas you know, in title and
profession, was a familiar household servant with the Lord; but in affection of
heart as appeared a wild enemy. He wanted no cherishing at his Masters hand,
neither at any time received displeasure of the Lord, whereby to conceive ill
opinion or to bear grudge, malice, or evil will toward him: yet ravening
covetousness so gripte him at the heart, that he ran headlong through
covetousness into traitorisme. These Romish Jews so rejoice when they can
meet with a tragical Judas, that will venture to play a desperate part, to
put out both his own eyes, in hope to take away a little sight from another,
and that against Gods eternal determination. Such is their malicious hatred
against God and godliness, that they are never without men, especially chosen
to betray unto death the sacred person of her whom all ages and times shall
repent the loss of, whenever God in his justice shall visit our sins with
that universal scourge and infliction. Dunst. Me thinks the thought hereof in
their bitterest furies should renew love, and prick the consciences of them
that go about any such attempts, so as they should not be able to continue in
their madness, yea the whole frame and workmanship of nature should tremble at
so horrible a deed of unnatural cruelty. Hudd. Had her most excellent
Majesty carried a meaning to have entertained displeasures sought and brought
home unto her, how might she have dilated and enlarged her kingdoms in
circuit, upon just causes and worthy conceiuings? But almighty God, who
delights not in shedding of Christian blood, has exercised her heart in
harmless thoughts, defenceable delights, and aiding powers, graciously
contented with honors and kingdoms deserved, not at all disposed to any small
things usurped. Thus you see, whither the zeal of my heart has carried me to
matters of an other sort. Had it not been for marring my Lords sport, and
thereby to have endangered your self a leasing, long ere this you would have
hallowed me in from my counter-hunting. Dunst. Your words have so drawn the
consent of my heart unto them, that even this busy harvest time, I could be
contented to lose a weeks work, and take it for the truest hunting I was at
any grass time in my life. I think I shall never forget your Friar Ferret and
his close hunting to the liver at the first, without ruffling a feather of his
dames Chick. Had I bin the good man, I should have coapt off the knaves privy
tithes, for censuring my house with his relics. Huddle. Had you the like care
to your soul, as she had, you would beware to offend such holy men. But you
are one of those that had rather live well I perceive, then to have the Popes
blessing. Dunst. Were I not cast into heaviness with grieuing at my ungracious
son, I could match your old Friar with a new limmiter of later days, but my
mind is so carefully set upon him and his unreasonable mother together, that
unless I be aided through your worships good counsel, it will hasten my
death, but especially his mother, her fond importunacie makes me restless
both night and day. Hud. If it be equinoctium with your wife now, it will wear
away, as the nights and days grow longer or shorter. But I think you mean
the virtuous spirit within you, which is said never to cease working in good
me^. Other rest it appears you want not, for meat-health, and sleepe-health
you seem to have, else could not your stomach distribute nourishment to such
parts as show to be fresh and well liking within you. Dun. The hope of my
restoring, is under God in your worship. Hud. To ask me counsel, is to seek
help of a sick Physician: nevertheless, such as it is, it shall not be wanting
to my good friend* Me thought you were in mind to turn off your son. Dun.
Yea surely, and so I think it best still. Hu. Do you take it by casting him up
to all hazards, by such masteries to calm his rough qualities? or rather
thereby shall you not raise a greater tempest of evils more like to ouerwhelme
him, making him thereby a clean alien from virtue, and so of a prodigal child
to become a graceless Caine? Surgeons that mean well to their cures, where
the flesh is severed by a green wound, or blow new given, rather seek to
close up that tenderly which is already torn, the^ cut the same out wider or
longer, to make the patient further off from help and restoring. Tailors in
like manner do not mend one pain by rending more, but rather stitch up that
they found first broken. Clouterly Tinkers only mar where they should mend.
When fire is all out in your house to a little spark, you do not by and by
stamp your foot, or cast water upon that which remains, but rather seek to
repair the same, by adding such succors and increasings as may renew that
little. There is also a certain spark or seed of virtue ever remaining in
man, in spite as they say of the devil, unless reprobacie have ouer-run all.
Seek to find that in your son: with good looking to and wise handling, it
may take deeper root then at the first, and so by the blessing of God, bring
forth both branches and fruits of virtue. Dun. Your worships voutchsafing
strong and friendly aides to my weak cogitations, oppressed with wearisome
doubts, have put me in more comfort then I fear me I shall find cause to hope
for in him. Hud. Let it not repent you to play the wise father, gaining him by
little and little your self. If you had a hay barn, or a mault-house crased,
or leaning too much to the one side, you would not in a rage pull it down and
burn it, but rather underprop it with studs and timber crouches, till you were
better able to build it up again. Can you not with the same patience use
remedies and means to support your sons infirmities till you may frame them
better to your mind? Though you cannot at the first make him good, do your best
to abate his evils; then seek to provide how they also may do the least hurt.
One while use the authority of a Father, another-while the command of a
Master, at another time the love of a friend. Thus you shall have cause to
hope better of him by holding in his cheeks, with the snaffle and raines in
your own hands, then by sending him to seek wild adventures with this short
pasport; Go be packing and see thou hang thy self quickly. Dun. Surely sir, his
own conditions are like enough to be his warrant to Newgate, and from thence
without a pasport he shall be safe conducted to Tiburne by a sort of honest men,
who will not stick to cut down the hangman and him both for their coats. For me
to seek virtues in vice his storehouse, it were foolish to believe, and
dangerous to follow. He that has catc^t a liberty to live at his own lust,
little thinks that the authority of a father belongs to him. By that he
eats, drinks and sleeps at my cost, so far hereckoneth me to be his
father but farther he neither esteems nor regards me. Sithence his peevish
mother will not suffer my black Ox to tread on his foot, I will send him
where he shall be glad to draw in the black Ox his yoke. I hear there is a
press forth for men to serve the Queen, God willing I will make suite to our
deputy Lieutenants that he may be one: for it is the best free school I can
find to prompt wit into a braggard fool. Hud. Neighbor, I am beholding unto
you for your ready speeches, not borrowing you phrases abroad amongst
flatterers you tell me it is foolish to believe, and dangerous to follow my
counsel, it is marvel you lest out your proverb, how every man can rule a
shrew save he that has her. The difference betwixt you and me this while has
not held, whether he were my son or yours, nor and if I were in your case, it
must of necessity follow I should be of your mind. By the like mistaking you
may nextly charge me to bolster out your son in his misdemeanors against you
his Father. Because we are in a Park, I will use a hunting term, and so make
away the game thus, wherein your self shall still be judge. See therefore in
few words what I go about, which is to have you consider, whether it be better
in time to foresee, then after to sorrow without remedy. My self am also a
Father, and know the effects of nature. Therefore though the case be your own,
see you prove not partial nor wilful, playing Demia his part, to be extreme
against reason. Further, in truths behalf I conjure you not to be conceited,
thinking nothing well said or done, but what your self do or devise. It is not
your ridling with the one Ox his treading, and the other Ox his drawing, that
must cast a father headlong into a rage against the son, but rather it
fitteth you better, discerningly to look upon him with your own clear eyes,
and not to behold him with your wife her weak and glimsing sight, nor with the
worlds dazeled shadows, but I say, behold him in a pure and right
understanding of your own; then may you examine in differently whether your
son have that in him you never had when you were of his years: or whether in
your conscience the same might not have chanced unto you, provoked and misled
by the like unworthy occasions. Then add a regard also to the possiblity and
likelihood of remoouing them by your jurisdiction and example, imposing always
upon him things conformable to his nature. If a Physician can cure a sick man
well may you recover a whole man. Wise Physicians never give the sick patient
any kind of medicine without choice but rather seek chiefly to match their
medicine to the quality of the sick his disease. Wherefore think not to frame a
rectitude of life in your son, by applying unto his nature inconveniences.
Dunst. Where a matter is thus plainly set out, a blind man need not err in
judgment, unless he will be false to himself. I am bound not only to thank
your worship, but rather compelled to reckon you the disposer and author of my
sons and my health. Where you conditioned with me to look upon him with my
own eyes, thereby I am put in mind to think him present, and to stand
directly before us: for no child can more nearely resemble a father in outward
lineaments, then he does me. His better conditions according to your
declaration in the Gentleman of blood, are I think bred with him also, he has
them so rightly from me: but his evil behauiours, they at no time had custom
or privilege in me. Yet I must confess, there wanted no pronenesse in my own
dispotion and ready mind, to have entertained or ventured on the like: but
such a diligent father I had to keep me upright from swaruing, as I am
persuaded was not easy to be found. His manner of fashioning and subiecting me
favorably unto him, to introduct and make me afterward to stand in his good
opinion, was of this sort. Had I been complained of for doing shrewdnesses in
the time of my waggish youth, himself would chearefully have excused my
negligence, had not my fault bin too manifest an evil Thorough which he would
also take occasion to breath such good things unto me, as my tender years
might best brook. Showing withal, what he misliked in others, and what he
required at my hands, together with the honesty he would have me respect. By
which the love he held me in was more, then an awe to hold me back from
committing what might discredit me unto him. In his absence likewise, another
profit was also coming toward me, by directing his servants to note unto me,
the evil fame that such of mine acquaintances were of, as had robbed by the
high way, made ruffianly frayes, or through any other ryots, had outraged
against law. They were in like sort commanded, to set out to the uttermost
unto me, the notoriousnesse of such young men's parts, as had prodigally wasted
their patrimonies, extinguishing thereby their succeeding posterities, robbing
besides their ancestors and themselves of worthy name and fame. Those abject
and contemptuous wickednesses thus demonstrated unto me, fashioned such a form
of obedience and fear to beware in me, that I thought my self straightly
bound in duty, to show the news hereof to my Father at his home coming, to
glad him, with my mislike of all such crimes, as the obligations and pledges of
my own weldoing, by my detesting them, thus accused and condemned unto me, who
could by no color of excuse be purged. This would have stricken such a present
joy into his heart, to hear me give sentence of such impenitent castawaies, as
witnessed his no small favor and grace toward me. Notwithstanding all this to
observe me thoroughly, that no fraud or guile might be intended, by ill
disposition against my well doing, through his indulgencie, when I faulted in
deed against these prescriptions, without translating his accustomed
countenances or outward affections toward me, he would wisely and profitably I
must confess for me, conspire with my Schoolemaister to give me the uttermost
rigor of his justice. Which done, I bewraying by my looks whose hands I had been under, my father straight in my sight, and hearing, would so rebuke and
take up the false Grammarian for admitting such smart figures into his school,
that I thought my self ever after past whipping, till the next examining day,
then my fathers pardon came ever after my execution. Now sir, when I grew up
nearer unto man's estate, he let me have all such things in my power, as were
fit for me to be trusted withal: Even then also himself, carrying a respect
unto such things as he thought might miscarrie and perrish for want of
experience and governance in me. Thus continually I was held in such love and
delight in him, that so long as I might, and while he lived, I could never
find in my heart to depart from him. But had not the good temper of your
sharp counsels, opened a cranney in my flinty forehead, the sweet and
pleasant thought of these things, had been lost in me for ever, they being as
fast locked up in my forgetful and dull head, as the marrow within my boanes.
Huddle. You do well to show me my faults, and the difference in comparison
between you and me. The heart of a fool flies out at his mouth, but the
mouth of a wise man is locked up in his heart. Notwithstanding, I am well
enough pleased and contented, to be open breasted to my good friend; concluding
this matter thus: sithence you cannot like a God, diue and look into your
son his heart and meaning; by the light of reason have recourse to that you
may see. Dunstable. Your worship has seasoned my heart with most wholesome and
expedient teachings, so as now I find that part of my mind whole, sound, and
fit to be pierced, which even now for the soreness and grief made by a
fresh wound, I could not suffer nor abide to be touched or come near. Huddle.
It is your pleasure to attribute unto me more then I deserve, but to give you
your due right, I have not talked with a man this great while, that was so well
furnished with sufficient matter, in himself contained, to repare all his
preiudices and hindrances. Dunstable. Now Sir, I would I might put you in
mind of your London news, for I am sure according to your accustomed manner,
you have frequented and used the ordinaries where they are to be heard, and
those of all sorts. Huddle. I confess I have delighted and taken much pleasure
in such places: and the rather, for their companies sakes, which were the
occasion of my so doing. Now they be worn away and gone, my fantasy to
frequent such houses and ordinaries, has also ceased: yet this last term,
through some certain occasion, I was at one. But my entertainment there
pleased me not so well, as that I could be entreated or invited thither again.
Dunst. Why I beseech you sir, are they not ordered in meat and attendance after
the seemly sort they were wont, or else are not the company pleasing unto you?
Hud. To say truly, there wants no performance in those that keep them: and as
for the company that use them, there can be no more choice Gentlemen, to
accompany and delight the best Lord in a land. Yet it was my ill hap the time I
was there, being a mere stranger to the whole presence, to be set upon, by one
who was crept in, under the countenance of some young master, that was
desirous to try what sport a Canarie bird could make for a blancht Almond,
(at his own finding fed with husks.) Had his discretion been any thing, his
wit might have been tolerable. Dunst. It is very likely, such free places must
sometimes be pestered with such persons of necessity, to offend some on
purpose, to delight other some, making also a shifting living of their base
profession. I remember Terence says, that refreshing by meats, drinks, and
other money costs, will make a bold Parasite impudent. And Plautus says; God
have mercy hunger-starued belly for such forlorn jests. There can hardly be
found a more insufficient fault, that may concern one man to another, then for
him that has wit, to make himself mad with outrageous folly, offending them
that give no cause. How do they pull their meat out of the fire, that so
confirm themselves fools for one days dinner? Now you being a stranger unto
him, and without offense in your self, I can but marvel, how Adam Meri mouth
his voluntary could run upon you. Hud. The principal matter I think was,
he found himself strong to set upon, and my self of least show in the house,
and so the weakest to resist. Dunst. What a miserable thing is it, for one that
has wit, to give himself leave grosely to offend; or for a man to do hurt
with commendable things marring a good wit, with a rebrobate tongue? I long to
hear how he could pick out his commodity from out you, whether by prepared
matter on purpose devised against some one that used the place and was wanting,
or how otherwise I beseech you to show me. Hud. I can conjecture no other
thing, but the very contempt of me in comparison of himself. For without my
speaking to him, he began to praise the Satin of my cloak, the same you saw
me wear yesterday at my Lords: saying, it was very durable stuff, and as he
thought by the fashion, not unmade this hundred of years, neither of my own
bestowing on my self, but rather left me as an heyre-lome from my ancestors.
To this I gave no ear at all, to show how unwilling I was to match my self
with such a vice upon the stage, with him to become guilty of offending the
Gentlemen, who deserved better to be pleased at my hands, for good show of
courtesies by salutations given me at my coming in amongst them.
Notwithstanding my giving back and forbearance, at the first entrance of
dinner he carrowst another full mouthed jest unto me, remembering in his cup,
the yeoman of my wardrobe, whom he said had deserved the lease of a very good
farm, for his well looking to the monument on my back. Then to satisfy the
Gentlemen, that I had deserved to have no such counterfeit badge pinned on
mysleeue, I answered as near unto the property of his speech as I could (not
having had to do with the like Hare-headed fellow before) that it was not only
necessary to have a good thing, but also expedient to use it well. By occasion
of which speech, altogether against my will, he was trained into a vain of his
own idle and lewd speaking: insomuch, that a Gentleman by whom I sat,
offended with the tediousness of his indecent communication corrupting honest
behavior, whispered in my ear, that it was a monstrous thing to see so young
a man want his teeth. Whereat I meruailed not a little, knowing by the others
continual gaping he could not choose but see them. To take away my doubt, and
to stop his lavish proceeding in odious speaking he said: that Pies and Dawes
did chatter, and make an irksome noise in the time of their feeding, but men,
who were endued with reason, to moderate the use of things was not the custom
amongst them, in such offensive sort to exercise their toungs. He being by this
caveat put out of the pace wherein he was wont to poast without a guide, became
dumb, and as it were tired at the instant. Dunst. Such a waspe I have heard
Ihon Pace was, whose rending of jests within the listes cost his flesh much
torment in earnest: yet he remained all one man for the whip could not come at
that by racing the flesh, which through custom was crept into the bones. Dun.
If he could have iuggled withal, there had bin some pleasure and delight to
have been taken in him Hud. If that would make you merry perhaps he could both
do that, and run upon a roape also. If you list to make experience, it is
possible you may meet him on Salisburie plain, to play fast and loose with
your Bristowe-faire budget. Dunst. For my part, I had rather hear tell he were
fast tied up where I could wish him then in any place let loose where I may
have to do. Had there bin none by laughing to have supported his gross
rudeness, who are as good as commissions sealed to such companions, himself
would never have been so palpablie gross especially having such a wit as you
allowed to be in him even now. But I pray you sir, was not his coat made of
Scogging his fashion? Hud. I protest I understand you not. Dunstable. Not to
come out at the back door upon you, in plain meaning, of this sort and fashion
was always Scogging his coat made. Whatsoever shape or stuff the rest of the
garment had, the sleeves were always one extreme shot the other exceeding
long, which gave the world to understand, he was never without a long wit, and
a short discretion. Besides him there are diverse yet of my knowledge. who make
it their full felicity to scorn any man his sufficiency, whosoever iumpe not
rightly with them in all their lofty tricks of wastefull consuming. But this
Parasite, without displeasure to you, meant to make some Gentleman in the
company his own, for whom he prepared himself to be laughed at. Without
doubt, me thinks Gentlemen in deed should suffer no such beastly wits to make
gain of them. I have heard there are a sect and company of them, who have a
special resorting place, called Scorners hall, where there are created
Masters, wardens and other inferiors, all of one liuerie and fraternity.
Hud. It cannot be chosen, but their rents come in very easily. Dunst. I will
show you what prefferreth them, and how men of this faculty are chosen to
office. Huddle. I think I can save you a labor, unless it be otherwise with
them then in all other companies, for they are preferred and chosen as they
follow one another in time and ability of gettings. For my part, I see not why
plenty of scoffs and iestes should not make free, and promote to office, any
forrainer in this faculty. Dunst. Well sir, you need no guide to beat your
paths, who can chalk out your own way so perfectly your self: yet it shall
not repent me, to stir the stearne in a calm, to keepefresh a more worthy
Pilote, to bring the ship into a safe port when a storm shall arise. Hud.
The year goes about, ere you can bring the Bride from out her tyring house.
Dunstable. At once to bewray the simpleness of my meaning, without colors or
imbrodering, when the principallest of this mystery has been collocated in
the highest dignity, as to have sitten in scorners chair, then all
fantastical young green wits, must of necessity congratulate him a far of,
solemnly inuiting him to dinner and supper taking especial heed they neither
Tom, Jack, nor Wat him, as they do other apprentises in their liberal Arto,
for it is very penal in the stabbing law. Hud. I take them notwithstanding
their Sprusenesse, by your leave, for no better then good every days fools,
so being none of their counsels, not subject to their babbling benches. Dunst.
May it now please you to be put in mind of your London news, which my
scattering questions have all this while hindered? Hud. Since I have consented
unto you in your other desires, I will not refuse to satisfy you therein also.
There is a most strange report made unto the world, of a Gentleman his manner
of life and death, lately deceased in the City, the copy whereof I have
here, and must be feign to recite the sainevnto you, my ragged writing being,
as it is, so troublesome to read. Dunstable. I pray you Sir, first show what
sort and quality he was of, and also his name, if I may be so bold to desire
it. Huddle. His parentage not of the meanest, in living rather equal with the
best, then inferior to many within the degree of Gentlemen. His name I hauenot
heard recited, but for sect and conversation, a mere Epicurean Atheist.
Dunstable. How kept he his lands? was he any waster or spender of them? Huddle.
Surely he lessened not the quantity of his heritage, but his dissolute and
voluptuous spendings, were many degrees worse then the wasting of Patrimonies.
Form the exercise of virtues, great sums and massies of treasure are
oftentimes laudably dispended. His minner of carriage was exceeding haughty,
himself hollow within, of small discretion, yet of great pride to aspire
upwards, to matters too great and tempestuous for him to weeld or become:
placing his whole felicity in the practices or rather devises of new and
strange pleasures, having never in any part of his life bestowed time in the
doing deeds of arms, nor at any hand willing to hear or allow the praises of
any man's notable virtues. Dunst. How could such a one recreate himself, being
so absolutely il, as neither to use good parts, nor to endure the praises of
worthy men? Little could such a Sathanist want of reprobacie, to live thus in
contempt of God and man. Me thinks he should also be at defiance with nature,
and so place his delights in strange, prodigious, and monstrous things. Hud.
You have not much mistaken the condition of the man: for every one has a
chief desire to some one thing or other, wherein the delight must be
entertained, either in matters worthy or unworthy to be beloved. Dunst. It is
odds, the vggly vices that were like to be in him, even hastily started his
soul from out his body, before the natural and appointed time of her
departure. Hud. You have spoken herein more wisely then perhaps ye be ware of:
no doubt there are diverse things within a man, which appear not, like as
natural causes do, that shorten, and as it were murder nature untimely. Look
as water the enemy to fire, quenches the same when she comes at it, so does
disorderly government, laying surfeit upon surfeit, till evils be multiplied so
far in a man's body, that remedies there can be found none, because the little
spark of life is so overwhelmed and raked up under a huge heap of diseases.
For after distemperature has ingendered disease, and surfeit nourished it,
continually using the same custom of wasting and consuming blood, disease
comes to be so confirmed, that no medicine can come at the first cause, to
take away or thrust the grief out of the body. Look when the stomach is made
heavy by violent occasions, appetite ceasing, the blood of life must also
perish and decay: so death unnaturally purchased untimely destroieth life.
Dunst. These good teachings God willing, shall prove counsels to me, not to
oppress nature with unruly and continual feeding, or by ouerdoing otherwise
to her prejudice. Hud. What you come short of me in knowledge I perceive not,
your words I see are of a physical conjugation, which because you pretend
ignorance, I will help you to decline. Unruly governance, you shall perceive,
was the confusion and certain pouring out of this Gentlema^s life. For they
that make no discreet choice of the meats and drinks they take, neither of
the exercises of their bodies, but suffer immoderate sleep, and
super-abounding diet, to kill the quick dispositions of their constitutions,
which should have been nourished by the moderate use of those refreshings: let
such riotouse wasters of themselves, look for no help from the Physicians to
linger out their days, but rather untimely death, or continual helpless
sickness. Dunst. Your words put me in mind of this old proverb; Either a
fool or a Physician. He that prodigally with greedy lust, follows sensual
appetite, surcharging nature with continual superfluities, him I take to be
the fool thus meant. He that can ordinately moderate his respects, by due
governance, bridling his appetitious desires, and insatiable pleasures,
contrary to this largeness, him I take to be the Physician. There is also
another deadly delectation, which I think, breeds both fools and
Physicians: by that sweet bait without auoidance, we are tickled on to
untimely death, unless by wholesome preparatiues of continency, we meet and go
against that sore desease called lechery. By her the seed of life's best
digested substance and marrow goes from us, which should feed life, according
to our first creation and nature. Hud. Take heed, whilst you think to speak
wisely, you err not in greater matters, the^ those we were in hand with. There
is another intellect, of far more worthy creation in man, that was first
fashioned, ere that carnal fleshly gross matter was co^pact, who brought with
it a perfection beyond our understanding and reason, which sees all things in
us, and her self not seen at all of us: yet through the vigor of her force,
we have a light of the knowledge of truth contained in her: which as it was
first made, so shall it perpetually be. The other caducail fleshly matter,
whether it be blood, sinews, veins, or the secret treasure of life, so called
by you, it had neither the first nor the like admirable beginning that this
had, therefore mis-termed by you, to be the first creation or nature in man.
Dunst. I have been so sufficiently taught already that I cannot err herein.
Your self have proved, that all other things, as virtues themselves, a man
may have from his parents, who under God are the workers of natural things in
their children, either mediate or immediately. Now sir, for the infusion of
souls, I hope no Christian man is ignorant, that the knowledge of those divine
matters, proceed only and altogether miraculously from Almighty God, yet the
same not so excellent nor so divine a creature from him, that it should equal
or exceed it maker. But I am sorry, the adding my foolish words to a matter so
sufficiently understood, should take away the occasion offered you, to show
unto me the pestilent evils, that delicious vice leacherie steals upon us,
rotting our bodies while we are alive, offending thereby all that come near
us, with our unwholesome brimstone breathes, which are feign to be abated and
corrected with powders perfumed else could we not endure our selves, whose
rutting conditions have made these rammish faults, and not wise and temperate
nature. You have made so good show of your wit in describing that matter
already, in such sort, that there needs no further declaration thereof so
that there rests only now, use of your memory to restore us to the matter we
have thus long digressed from. Dunst. If you think good, the paper in your
hand will prove the remembrancer. Hud. It shall so be, but first you must
imagine, it speaks of the highest pattern of pride that has been in a
world, pleasing himself always with the iollitie of opinion that all
conclusions, counsels and knowledges, were within himself, and that he needed
neither conference, help or succor, of any other man's wit, but that he was
ordamed by his own aids to reatch into mysteries, either natural or
supernatural, and so, as I say, mighty enough in his own cunning to confirm
and resolve himself notwithstanding the mystery, subtlety, or intricatnesse
of any controversy whatsoever. The same easy and contemptible opinion he held
of all creatures, the like also he did of God himself. Dunst. I pray you also
let me once more stay the matter, with asking what religion he was of. Hud. But
that I know you mean plainly, I have great cause to doubt you mock me,
enquiring such a man his religion, hearing him thus discribed. Until I have
read this writing, hold your self contented, to think he was an ace worse
then Julian the Apostata; he yet at the last cast while his bowels were
dropping out before him, feeling the secret judgments of God sent down upon
the blasphemer could in the induratenesse of his heart, cry out and
acknowledge the Galilean to be a conqueror over all godless Giants. Thus begin
the words according to the tenure of my copy.

The strange and monstrous life and death, of a vertulesse recreant, who this
other day made himself a notable spectable to all proud lostie tyrants,
blasphemous devils, and voluptuous Epicures, together with his speeches to his
servants at his deadly sickness, first taking him. Hereafter follows also
his souls farewell, and forsaking the body. Escript. Gogswounds, a pox on that
damned Ghost, I think the Bawd has poisoned me, Gogs heart, sicker and
sicker, oh that I had the hellish hagge here, to torment her ere I die. Oh my
heart and all comes up together. Lord have mercy upon me, oh good God, oh
sweet Jesus, help me, I shall die, I shall die: James, go desire master
Doctor to come pray with me, and for my sinful soul. Go when I bid you, and
bring him suddenly. Thomas. How fares it with my master, James? James. I
think he be out of his wits, he ailed nothing when he went to supper, now he
has ouercharged his stomach after his old fashion, he cries out she has
poisoned him, she has poisoned him. Surely he is thoroughly in to night, for I
never knew until now, but a pipe of Tobacco, or a little warm water taking,
would have helped him. Does he call this drinking of healths? pleadge them that
will, I mean not to entertain into my body, any such curious accidents, as
bring with them passionate sicknesses, for a little ouerflowing kindness. But
my master I am persuaded, finds himself drunk to night of the devil his
cup, and must needs have a Preacher in all the have, to raise that the devil
has thrown down. For my part, I am ashamed to bring a divine into such a
polluted place of turmoile, as my master has made his chamber Yet glad I have
gotten so good an occasion to be out of the ill sauors and stincks I was vexed
withal even now. But Thomas, list how he calls upon God, this gear works
to the purpose, it has made his head so full of waves, that by his floating
prayers, and calling upon God, I fear it will breed madness in the end. He
was not wont in his perfect mind to remember God on this fashion. May.
James, what James, let the knave alone, I will none of the babbling fool, hang
him he will but tell me a tale of three in one, and all one, I will none of the
Iuggler ^. James. Yea marry Thomas, now my master begins to mend, list how
he swears and raileth again, after his old fashion. I see well now there is
no danger in him: I thought his head was but tottie. May. James give me a
pipe of that Trinidatho Tobacco, lack brought me yesterday from my brother
Robin, the other is too bitter, I like it not. So, now I will prove if I can
catch a sleep; shut the door, but go not far from me. Thomas. How goes the
world now James with my master? Iam. It is to be doubted he draws homewards,
he fetches his wind so short: now I begin to fear indeed he has met with
some false measure, for he burns so hot, that it cannot be but his blood
sweateth within him, and that he is stung with an Aspis. Thom. Doubtless, if
your words be true he either has eaten black pottage, or else has swallowed
down a Ches nut whole, for I hear he heaueth and fetches hard to remove it,
but it will not be raised. Iam. Help, help, Thomas, my master is in a swond.
Alas he is in a lethargy, draw the Curtains, and let in the air. Thom. No,
rather he is in a frenzy, shut the windows and keep out the light. Iam. Sir,
for the passion of God, let nothing trouble you: she loves you too well, to
play such a part by you, who are her chief friend, and all her maintainer, if
she were here, this would prove a heavy sight unto her. Good sir, hurt not
your self, by misdeeming her, whose thoughts I dare swear, are harmless
toward you. It is but a qualme, you shall overcome it well enough. Thomas, go
fetch bay Frisland hither, my master will ride abroad and take the air, bid
the Faulconer bring hither the Barbary Tassell, my master will see her fly.
I beseech you sir, show us some comfort of your well doing. Here is your chain
of Pearl, pleases it you to put that on? Here is your hat with the bruche of
Diamonds, will you have it? Here is your Popenioy, take her on your fist,
prattle bird, prattle to master. Here are your Monckies, play with them.
Shall I fetch you your cloak with rich buttons? and if you will sit up in
your bed, I will reach you the looking-glass: if you saw your self, there
were no cause why you should despair. But behold, in good time sir, here is
Master Doctor your Physician come, speak unto him, and he will help you.
Doctor. James, let him alone, trouble him not, he is entering the gates of
death, her shadow has ouer-spred him. Thrice before this time I have been with
him, to forwarne him, that misrule and disordered diet would shorten his days
He has a dead Palsy all over his body, I must needs be gone: James,
farewell, there is scant one hours life left in him. James. See Thomas the
course of this world, spite of Arts maintenance, and Phisicks diligence, to
day an Emperor, to morrow dead. Hud. You must imagine the man already dead,
whom the Physicians give over. Upon this it is to be supposed, his servants
they voided the chamber, and prepare their lots ready, to draw cuts how to
deceive most, and who to begin first. Like good fellows, they must agree
within themselves, to part stakes euenly; least by their falling out, the true
owners come by their right. Dun. Had he made no will in his life time, to
direct his goods? his lands I know can want no heirs. Hud. Think you a man
thus dissolute could set any thing in order, himself so far out of frame?
Now follows the difference between the soul and the body, at the time of
their separation. Soul. Proud voluptuouse caitife, woe worth the time I was
destined to dwell in thee. Foul lump of lead, have I bin thy handmaid,
attending on thee night and day, always quickening to my power thy slow and
dull capacity, setting before thee to exercise thy heavy and downward
disposition, beautiful heavens, the rich substance of thy omnipotent maker,
and why would thou not there behold signs and wonders, sufficient causes to
have made thee know and delight in the power and Majesty of our Almighty
workemaister, exceeding all Arts and understandings? How often would I have had
thee occupied in beholding the sun that admired glory of the heavens?
Commended not I also unto thy brutishness, the innumerable number of stars,
rare ornaments of the same? In like manner opened not I unto thee the Moon,
her reuolutions and changes, and by her the whole years seasons? Dull-eard as
thou art did not I besides prompt into thee wit and knowledge how to guide thy
self under them? How often did I flatter thee, to have enticed thy gross
senses to adore that wonderful greatness? Sturdie block, thou would
neither bow nor incline to him. Told I not thee also in time and at the
beginning, what thy foolish coveting liberty and contempt of his power, would
bring us unto? By thy earthly and careless rest, thou have purchased to thy
self mortal death, and to me immortal unrest and torment. Have I this for my
reward, to be killed for quickening and comforting thee? Did I sue to get thine
eyes placed in thy forehead, to see before, and in time to the behoof of us
both, that we might not repent us after and too late? Have thou also cast them
behind thee, and made them look downward to delight in the old rotten and
corrupt grandame earth? I was fashioned according to the circumspect undefiled
mirror of the majesty of God, and after the Image of his goodness. I was
conueighed into thee a heavenly and a beautiful soul, but thy wickedness
has given me my deformities, and made me also foolish. I found but a little
spark of fire in thee, not sufficient to minister or to convey needful things
to nature, to keep her warm withal: but now I have increased and kindled
that little, all is on fire, and so have committed that I repent me of. Being
sufficient from my maker, in my self at the first, extending now that power
too far, am become so weak, that I am able neither to help my self nor
thee, letting my wilful boldness work my destruction. When I entered into
thee, I labored with diligence to have married thee unto me, but thou would
not suffer me to commune lovingly with thee, about matters of everlasting
memorial, and salvation of us both. Thou have been a heavy lump unto me,
keeping down my cogitations, which were always musing upon the holy Ghost,
his descending down into our heart, to have warmed our frozen zeal that was
settled there. Had thou observed the charge I brought with me, which was for
all thy makers benefits, to love and fear him. Had we entertained, that we had
bin safe: that loving fear would have kept us so in our makers favor, that we
should have been preserved there still, under the suerty thereof, till we had
been brought back again whence I came, to everlasting life. Woe worth such a
mansion and habitation as I have endured with thee, the bitter and tedious
fellowip I have had with thee, has been void of all joy and consolation. Ah
foolish Adam, that thou were no better settled, but shrankest away at the first
temtation, suffering the Serpent to take from the image of God obedience and
love, which thou were commanded to exercise thy self in. Thou were too fond
to believe one witness against thy self, and that one a weak, and an
insufficient woman, against whom by law thou might have excepted. Nay then
too wicked Eua, that thou would so hastily credit one, and he a serpent,
thus to be taken with delight and delicious show, esteeming appearance, and
neglecting substance. When thou were deceived, had thou none to persuade but
thy master Adam, who^ thy self should have feared and obeyed, and not
tempted and beguiled? Were there not works of Gods hands enough also besides,
and those above thy capacity, but thou must meddle and entangle thy wit with
that secret and forbidden understanding, even wittingly thereby to perish in
peril? No Adam, it was not thou, nor the Serpent that hurt me, it was the
woman: we were taken out of that offense and could not beware, but that we must
be bound again with the chains of darkness, and that by a woman. While I kept
thee from knowledge to in the^, thou riddest without spurs, and could by
thy self strongly lay hold on the raines. But after thou had trodden their
paths, how soon were thou fallen into Solomon his deep pit? When thou had
once seen the daughters of destruction, how long was it ere thou were taken
with their snares? How often did I bid thee take example by Ulysses, to stop
thy ears, not at all to hear their poisoned charms, which had power to
change thy form into the shape and condition of Swine, wherein whole legions
of devils delight to dwell? Before thou were allured by them, decent apparel,
mannerly to fit and become thy body, to keep out and defend offensive and
hurtful things to the same, would have contented thee. Now shirts of a
hundereth marks a piece, waste-coates of the like value, ill fauouredly to
dishonest the wearers, besides other attirings of too exceeding cost, will not
suffice to corrupt and deprave our counterfeit and disguising grossness.
Before thou were vp-growne to this vice (pouring out the sap and pithe of thy
body upon this appetitie, from which thou would not refrain thine
affections) temperate diet within measure, according to natures mediocritie,
would also have sufficed to have kept thy body in better health and vigor,
with these outrages, thorough which thou have lost the maisterie of thy self.
Now the whole air, sea, and land, besides the compounds or additaments of Art,
will not suffice to uphold and maintain thy immoderat lust. Before thou lost
thy understanding, and committedst thy self to bodily and fleshly government,
wholesome and nourishing meats, according to natures indifferency, would have
contented thee: now all the Artificers, that belong or owe any kind of suite,
to the puddle house or foul place of carnal delights, can scarsely find out
or invent one, pleasing dish to thy tombling appetite, thus rolled up and down
in fleshly delights. Oh how happy had thou been, if thou could have
commanded a new creation of creatures, acceptable to thy delights, that they
might have gnawed upon them also! O very plant of sin, that it was my destiny
to be dwell with thee, that have made thy throat the Sepulcher of sin, and
thy body a den of devils! Even now through the vehemency of thy sickness,
thou had a desire to call upon God, but how soon did thy foul spirit
within thy heart dam up thy mouth again? Had thou not been possessed with the
custom of sinning, prayers had broken the prison of thy adversary the devil,
as witnesses Paul and Sylas, at whose prayers the foundations of the prison
were shaken, the Jail door set open, and they loosed of their bonds at
Phillipi in Macedonia. Had thy prayers bin effectual, thou had shaken off an
enemy upon the earth, and found a friend in heaven: but they were forced and
constrained, thy devotion being covered with the darkness of sin. But why
complain I of thee, when my self, agreed to hearken and give care unto their
inticings? and was as willing to corrupt the state and place my maker gave me,
as thou were? I was married to thee in thy childhood, and ere thou came into
the world. I had my months growings as thou had, and delivered thence as
thou were. It is I that have transgressed, and it is I that have cast us both
into mortal darkness. Thou were not the prison nor Gailor unto me. I had a
large gallery in thee to walk, thou were the chariot wherein I triumphed, but
I committed the ruledome thereof to two violent guides, the one called riotous
or prosperous Luxury, the other, lofty or stately Pride, thorough which two
Adamants the devil drew me with his charms wholly into his possession, whereas
at the first, replenished with all grace, I was subject to no necessity of
sin. We thought our makers commandments had bin straight yoakes, too heavy
for us to bear: whereupon the devil, a ready help at all desperate and
murmuring assayes, gave us counsel to seek liberty, and to be free as all
other creatures were. An acceptable thing to obtain, but dangerous to seek by
way of perdition, by wandering alone without a guide, amongst enemies destitute
of al aids. Through this headlong way we have purchased unto our selves great
captivity. Did we seek liberty? why we had a large liberty to do well, and
that was all that we were commanded to do, which we called yoakes, hardly
imposed upon us. Contrary to this, we sought a liberty to do ill, whither
going on without returning, we have pulled a weight upon us, the burden
whereof is intolerable. Our unnatural leaving and despising our principal
guide by furious appetite, striving to usurp, break, and bring under, that
which should have been our Sovereign, by forbidden desires coveting that we
should not have desired, we are become the servants of lust, and so deprived
and cut off from being a branch of the tree of everlasting life, from whence we
were first sprung out. How often were these forewarning speeches pronounced
unto us, from the most excellent spirit of the Almighty? Satisfy your selves,
look what you covet is impossible for you to have; you being subject members
from the beginning, break not the law of your creation. How much better had it
been for us to have carried thankful minds for the innumerable benefits
received and enjoyed, then thus to have rebelled a fresh against the host of
redemption, who by his meek sufferings took away the first sting of death,
and anointed us again with the oil of grace? Unworthy that we are, had we
but carried thankful minds, humbly and lovingly to have respected his
merciful sufferings for us, we had now also found a strong hold to have risen
up again by. I showed thee what was true, and what was false, which were my
properties, but I could never get thee to consider what was to be done, and
what was to be left undone. If I could have delighted thee, thou would have
exercised thy self in me. But now I have let go my hold, and slid down into
the world with thee, where giving my consent to all manner of evils, we have
made our conscience our adversary, holding it down with the custom and
guiltiness of offending, so that long since we have left us no possibility of
amending. Had we taken heed in time, continency had so walled us in, as no
enemy could have entered his batterise, neither the flesh, the world nor the
devil himself, which is the chair of pestilence. Look as leprosy makes a
leaper, so does ambitious disobedience and fleshly softnes, breed a devil.
Thou were of an earthly generation, nourished with milk, ordered according to
man's reformation and instruction; but I was created in righteousness, disposed
according to the nurture and understanding of the Almighty, who will not be
pleased with the beastly manners our selves have fashioned and made here beneath
in this world. Thorough thee I have been hindered of the augement and increase
of grace, which was promised me, yea thorough thee I have lost humility and
continency, the guard that should have defended me. Had I overcome in this
world, we had worn an immortal crown; but now thou have prevailed, I have
lost the sincerity of an angelical spirit, and am become abominable in the
sight of God, before whom we shall have no kindred to speak for us nor any
other that we have bound by benefits and rewards, nor yet such as will be
afraid of our threats and commands But as we could have none to speak against
us in this life, no not in the behalf of truth and innocence: so now we shall
find none so corrupt to speak for us before him, who will suffer no bolstered
causes nor depending delays to ease us one whit. But there we shall be sure to
find the whole quire of heaven equiuolent, to judge between good and evil,
pronouncing this definitive sentence; Go ye cursed and possess utter
darkness, prepared for the devil and his Angels, where it is not known nor
remembered what the treasure of immortality is. Fortunes wanton, how much
better for us had it bin, by tribulations to have bin weaned and separated from
the voluptuous delights of the world, then to have enjoyed this liberty, thus
to fulfill our appetites and desires without controleme^t? But in comparison of
our selves, we have set at naught al creatures, especially the poor, defying
at the heart their necessities, whose accusations, no question, are gone up
into heaven, in the bitterness of their soul, accusing us to the majesty of
him before whom their prayers cannot but be heard. Thus confounded with cruel
and immoderate excess, how could we propound unto our selves long life, when
we neglect the means to preserve health? Nay, what could we look for, but
soddaine and miserable confusion; who preferred excess before mediocrity? Thou
were in the right, she poisoned thee, thy tender and loving darling, that
embraced every vain and joint of thee, holding thee so fast, that thou had
no feeling of thy self. It was a right she is part, after she had inflamed thee
within, made thee cold, bare and naked without, to leave thee also like a
block, empty and hallow within, fit for nothing but worms to creep into. For
all thy high climing, she has laid thee low enough. Farewell, the worst
veslell that ever good licour was put into. Corruption I say farewell, till we
meet in hell. Whether I go upward or downward, torment is ever before me, and
the sound of this trumpet; come ye that are dead in sin, to judgment. I am
but a borrowed spirit, thou can not call me back again, wherefore without
hearing thy reply, farewell. Dun. Ah desperate man's death, in whom was all
pronenesse to evil, and no disposition to do good. It should seem he was
haled out of this world contrary to nature, and without the consent of
sickness. Your report of these news, have put me in mind of a speech I once
received from the wisest man's mouth that I think was in our age, if I may
speak it, as I hope I may without offense. This worthy Gentleman, was called
in other countries as I have heard, the English Solomon: the honorable dignity
and place he bare here, were sufficient approuements of his wise virtues. Sir
Nicholas Bacon, once a famous Lord keeper of the broad seal: whose words agree
rightly to prove one part of your speech, that the woman had done the hurt,
which the devil gave over and could not prevail in. His experience was on
this sort. In his young days, a friend of his that was like to suffer death, for
consenting to murder a child he had unlawfully begotten on a most wicked
woman, sent for him to the prison where he then was: to whom this worthy
Gentleman, hoping to do good, was easily entreated to come. At his first
entrance into speech with him, he straightly charged him with the heinousness
of the crime, saying, he thought all the devils in hell could not have enticed
him to have done the like. To whom he answered, his conciept of him was good,
and no other then the truth: for it was not the devil that had the upper hand
of him, who received always a discouraging answer: so that showing his
complaint of not prevailing to her, she gave a harder onset that would take no
nay, as by the sequel appeared. To demonstrate the matter more evidently, he
drew out to this honorable Gentleman, her diverse charming letters, written
unto him with such terms of confident boldness, as were hardly to be resisted
in an affectionate body. Which when this modest Gentleman had read, so soon as
conveniently he might, betook himself to humble prayers, that it might please
Almighty God all the days of his life, to deliver him from the high and
inightie prevailing temptations of wicked women. Hud. Surely a deed beseeming a
most advised wise man, whom no doubt all his doings declared to be the best
obseruer of godly mediocrity that I have known: a rare matter in a man of his
greatness. Dunst. But I shall never forget the horrible death and end of a
most unrighteous wretch. I think not my self a little beholding unto you for
these good teachings, though by the example of the most absolute ill man that
ever lived. Hud. To give me thanks, is but to purchase you your due from me,
who have not my ceremonies in so good a readiness. I am more like to profit
self by your reports, especially deriuing them from so well a chosen worthy,
whose approved example herein, I will bind my self to observe, taking it for
a general rule, that the devil when he goes about to beguile man, thinks
it more meet to procure women to solicit for him, then to go himself on the
errand, as witnesses also more specially the example of Euah. Dunst. Now I
beseech you to your other London news. Hud. With a good will: another news is
this. There was of late, an old man in the City, who decayed as it should
seem in memory, mistook the season of the year, persuading himself he felt
April flowers springing fresh in his withered body, thought it had been May in
January. Whereupon, he ventured like a fresh gallant to marry a young damsel,
to whom he might well have been grandfather. Dunst. Poor wench, she was like
to have a great harvest and a little corn. But I pray you sir, did she not
hood the old fool? Hud. You make such have to your new found phrases, that
they ask leisure for me to understand them Dunst. The old word is so odious,
that for my part I could be content the deed and all were out of fashion: but
doubtless, I can think no less, but this marriage must needs iumpe with my
meaning, for hoate and cold cannot agree together. Huddle. You mean she made
him Cuckold. Dunstable. I had almost said so. Huddle. Though all likelyhoods
prove not true, yet perhaps this did; and now fir to the purpose. This old
courser of Naples, knowing the daintiness of his chaffer, took the way he
could to please her, sithence the way she would was not so ready with him.
Furnishing her at the first with the plenty of all rich delights that the heart
could wish, as Jewels, apparel, and diet of the choicest. Notwithstanding all
the heap and plenty of these gorgeous things, there was ever one thing
wanting, that ran most in her mind, which all the cators she had, could not
the skill to buy or procure her. Though Fortune had not yet been so friendly to
afford her longing, yet nature had sufficiently furnished her with skill to
dissemble her want, showing all cards made, whenever this old yonker list to
rage and play with her; in short space, this luckie chance fell out, for the
devil will always help his servants, look whosoever wants, they want not.
A young reueler, fresh budded April indeed, came by the door, where this fair
flower stood, in the custody and looking to of a withered impotent gardener,
whose strength appeared scarce sufficient to raise the dry and light moulds
that grew about this Rose, much less able to water and gage to the root it
soundness. Presently upon this glaunce, he cast with himself how best to
supply the wants he might easily discern her to be in. Not trusting too much
to his own green wit, thought it good to repair to the counsel of such a
one, as experience and knowledge had made wise in that faculty: not having
spent all his time at cards and dice, as some unthrifts do, had upon some
urgent occasions been acquainted with a cunning wisard, called mother Ducke, a
dame, who in her days had brooded up no small Ducklings, but such rather, as
were able, without putting the bill underneath the wing, to look the Fox
himself in the face; to her he hieth him, with his purse in his hand ready
drawn, for loosing of time, and that as Chaucer says, tied with a Leeke, that
it may not be long in opening, for the hours that are spent in making many
words, in such a matter, cannot be recovered back again. Now, delivering his
mind in this brief manner, to one of so good understanding, the substance of
the matter thus laid open before her: she hearing the place, the man's name, and
his desire, casts presently all doubts behind her for Pettifoggers to take up.
Being poised with that balast, her ship fell to sail, and her self turning
round like a circle, with the strong breath of this Argentum viuum, blown
thither and home again, ready to break her neck over the threshold; she
returns into the house to her peepling, singing, I have her, I have her:
enough to have cast they youth away, enslaming so his blood with the sudden
fire of unlooked for joy But this mother Quack, with conserues of Roses and
Barbaries, and other gentle cooling stuff which she has always in a
readiness for such hoate liuered Gentlemen, calmed all the storm and rage,
proceeding from too rank courage, even as it were at once, bringing him back
again so to himself with these probatums, that at leisure and toward his
going away, he enquired her good speed concerning foreign commodities. Dun. It
is marvel she would trust him with these sweet probatums till she came back
again, seeing him so ready to violate abroad. By my faith sir, you have so
lost me in mother Ducks drugs that I cannot understand your meaning. Me thinks
without making any such to do, he might better cheap perhaps have sent for her
to the wine Tavern. Hud. Wine I confess will make a consenting answer that
way. But is it so with you? will the appurtenances to these feuerous
conjunctions, so prepare your blood, that you cannot tarry the launching till
you come at your Surgeon? What man, suffer your pulse to beat a little; I am
almost at an end of this matter; then if you cannot stay til you come home,
bestow your largess upon some one of your women reapers that is stiffest in
the back, she will perhaps stoop the better to her siccle, after you have bent
her a little. Du. Surely sir, as old as we are, I fear me we shall grow wild in
this wood, but I long to hear the hasty speed the old crampe-stretcher
clattered so faston, at her in coming to her hiue. Hu. Well sir, the matter
went thus forward with them. According to her chickens direction, she found the
parties sitting in the door as he had lest them. In her walk up and down
before the same, she had espied one of their servants carrying in a couple of
Partriges, bought for their supper, upon which to look, she laid aside the
fine work she had in her hand. The master she might perceive to mislike the
price: for such folk would farewell were it not for cost. Du. All this while I
find not, what might make her so rejoice, in singing; she had her, she had her.
Hud. With patience you shall hear; comforting her self with the knowledge
that they loved to fare well, finding also the old wanton was contented his
young mistrisse should rule him, so he might carry the purse: out of such
discoueries mother Trusse has bound up these conclusions, that where Bacchus
cheer was, there might also be Venus play. Dunst. A crafty callets
construction. Hud. Then sir, she broched to her nesllecock this device, if he
would be at the cost to buy some sorts of deintie fowls, she would take the
pains to go to their house, and sell them at an under value: by using so to
do, she was sure to prepare her way more easily for her other affairs. Dun.
What another yet worse then the devil? Hud. To be short, through this practice
she became a guest, and a much made on woman by them both: where she still
waited her opportunity, to whisper certain lectures or points of her dangerous
doctrine, in the ear of this fair flower, whom she saw thus prime fed at the
board, and as she thought, forepined with bed reuersions, and short
beneuolences, warily prying continually to discover what troubled thoughts she
might perceive her to smother up and keep secret to her self, through the
fear of his frantic ieaiealousie, and her own ignorance in remedies. Had not
indeed this old leech been at hand (as the case required) this flower had
seeded away untimely, oppressed with too much heat by day, and the want of
nightly moisture. Dunst. Before God, I begin to pity the poor wench. Hud.
What do you man, pity her, and know her not? it is like if you had seen her
as the other did, you would have made mother Duck gone double ringed thither.
In faith, I am persuaded your tale might have bin heard, but hardly credited at
these years. Yet you could not have blamed your messenger, who would have done
her true intent, as well for you as for him, so you had waighed asheauy in her
scales, which I know you are able to do. Dunstable. I think if I should meet
with your Maistership in London, I should go near to put you in mind of this
merriment, so the Gentlewoman your wife were not by. Hud. You have made your
^lfe merry belike in conceit, so that your wishes being set out already, it
is thereby like that you mean to be there before me: and if ye be, the least
boy in the street can direct you to mother Duck, with whom you may lovingly
confer about the truth of this matter, or the like concernings if you find
your self so troubled. Dun. I always hinder the matter, and endanger your
displeasure with my troublesome speeches. Hud. Nay verily, if your meaning be
no worse then your words, there is neither danger nor displeasure toward you
from me. Dun. I thank you sir, now I pray you begin again where you left, at
the young bride her distress. Hud. Well, if I left there, there also shall
begin the words of mother Be her commission, who put the young wench in mind
of her husband his age, which had been a pleasure to her to have forgotten.
Dunst. Nay I beseech you sir, hide not from me mother Ducks night spells, which
I know are wholesome charms, especially her self being favored by the aid
and conduct of that happy and succesfull star, called by the Poets Dione the
mother of Venus. Hud. You shall pardon me by your leave, especially the matter
being such, wherein I desire to have no skill. To this demand of yours, I will
answer with the Dutch man, Ick kan die wijes well kunde icke die woorden,
which is in English; I know her meaning, could I her phrases. Wherefore in a
mind so well prepared in the one, and so great skill to solicit in the other,
you and I at these years will not doubt, but conditions were agreed of, in
manner and form, which were these. That the young lover for whom she was agent,
should come in apparel clad like a Poulter, keeping such times of bringing
ware, and such proportionate sorts of foul, as she was wont. Adding besides,
this caveat; that if she were not ready in the way, he should hold his birds
dearly prised to the servants, to the intent he might be brought to her
presence, if occasions might so suffer. Besides, it was agreed between them,
that she should keep her chamber, and feign her self sick those days
appointed for his coming, giving charge to her people, that if the Fowler
came, himself with his ware to be brought up to their Master and her. Now if
master Oswould were out of the way, all the better market, if not, they to
take the chance that should happen. To couller the matter the better withal,
this mother Ducke sued to her master to be privileged for her age, no more to
come on these services, saying, she would appoint the Mallard her son, at
such times as he came to town, in her steed to brin, his best and choicest
fowls thither, in sort as she was wont. Her master, to save three pence or a
groate he was wont to give her for her pains, thought it as convenient or
rather better for one to come and go, on whom there should be no cost
dispended, and so readily dispenst with mother Duck. These matters thus far
in parleance, were according to agreements performed and acted by this taker or
country Powlter, holding traffic inviolable on both sides, to the full
accomplishment of both their desires; till break-neck fortune, which suffers
nothing to be well done always, threw in a slender chance to leese all at a
cast, which was won by hazard, and kept by great adventure. Her husband
having lost the money in his purse abroad, at a neighbors house, where he was
wont to play at tables, came home to fetch more money, with have to return and
recover his losses: where he found his wife merchandising with the Fowler,
hucking and half penying to save a penny in a bird, which pleased her husband
well. He to agree and take up this green quarrel between them which were but
new fallen out, as he came up the stairs, casting his eye from one to another,
as they gave him cause in their pleadings, found a fault in the casement of the
Mallard his hose, which for have he could not lase up so close, but that a
false piece of a wrought wastcoat was discerned to hang out. Which when the
husband striued better to discover, the other brake violently from him leaving
foul and fair and all behind him, through his good fortune of the gates being
thus left open, he escaped their hands. Dun. It many times comes so to pass,
that those things which should commend men to their loves, are less safeties
then mean and neglected things: but doubtless it was a great chance to the^
both, he should come in, while they were thus comparing their things together.
Hud. What man how is it with you? me thinks your looks plead the young
wenches case: say truly, is she guilty or not guilty? and if you were her
husband, what would you do in this case? Dunst. Surely sir, where nothing can
be proved, suspicion should not part a man and his wife, might I have
persuaded the matter. Hud. Had you bin there, you might have done more then
indifferent service to have taken up the matter, which would have deserved such
a further faucur, as women leave not commonly unrequited. I am partly of your
mind, he came somewhat short of his proofs, yet sooner up the stairs then he
was looked for of them, who would not have sent for him, had he tarried until
this time: nay perhaps she had rather her husband had ran out, and the other to
have tarried. Dunst. Had it bin my case, for all my saying, I would have made
master di dapper have fline out at the roof tiles, sor presuming to kanke
upon my nest, unless my wife could have persuaded me he had bin an Funuke, and
could do nothing but kiss her hand, or carry her Fan, and then surely I might
safely have committed her to his keeping to have looked that none should come
up unto her but his self. Hud. It is not to be doubted, but they were both too
wise to make him privy to their bargain, as appeared by the one, which was
not the man he dissembled himself to be. Dun. I am of this mind further, that
this elegant beholder of beauties, that could be moved to love at the first
sight, could also be put in mind to follow his occasions busily, according to
the shortness of the time he had with his mistrisse in the chamber. But every
man that breaks his neighbors fence, trespasseth not against his enclosures.
I think well, while they were bargaining, there might some beck or twinkling
regard pass between the^, but as for further harm, notwithstanding the
other his jealousy, I think there was none. What imagine you sir, would you
credit false suspision, which has too busy an eye in every corner? Hu. Herein
let your conceit help you, especially in a matter that declares it self. Du.
Then I pray you sir how ended the matter? Hu. Surely the young woman made her
husband a piece of amends, in wishing him so young a man as the mallard was. For
the rest that remains, he must have patience with her, till time and place
may assoord her the like means to make him a further amends. Dunst. What became
of the Mallard, went he home to his mother? Hu. He was pursued thither but not
found there. You may imagine by his have, he had a further flight to make: yet
in her houle were found by the old senior, seathers of another color then he
was wont to wear when he came abroad to sell his foul. Now he comparing the
similitude of the man, and the ritchnesse of the attire together, it seemed
better unto him to let fall his revenge, and to whist the matter, then to let
the world make a tale of this transmutation. Dunst. How then I beseech you came
you to hear of this business? Hud. By the common post that keeps no man's
counsel Dunst. Belike he is some monster, you name him not. Hud. If you have a
desire to know him, it is long winged fame, who sits on every man his house
top, bringing with him news of all sorts. Dun. Now I pray you sir, show the
Gentleman his name that was thus likely to be wronged. Huddle. I have not heard
his name, but they say he has maskt open faced with her since. Dun. It was
after the banquet then, else had it not been Italiano More. But I wonder how
the matter should be given out, and not the parties names with it. Hud. There
are many dainty things in the world, and those wholesome to, which have no
names, neither are to be found in my Lexicon. Dunst. If they be not already in
your Lexicon they will never come into my Dixionarie. Hud. I am sure I have not
lied unto you, in saying there was such a matter even since the conquest also,
yet I must confess a long while ago, and still news to you, because you have
not heard them before. Dunst. I beseech you sir have you not taken this report
out of Chaucer his January and his May. Hud. Indeed yes, though not in every
half agreeing with the same, the rather, because I knew nothing but maruailes
would delight you. Dunst. I pray you then sir, what became of mother Duck, had
she not a husband to help her now in her extremity? Hud. Like enough she had
a Nicolaitane, who in his days had slept many an acceptable sleep to others,
and profitable ones to himself Such mechanical lewdsbies, are said to get
more sleeping, then others can do waking. Dunst. Had she no punishment for
these her foul solicitations? Hud. Perhaps ere this time she is both caught
and skinned also, but for ought that I can hear, her constancy is such, that
neither for whip nor coard, she will confess, who the Mallard her son was.
Justifying her self besides, that she has done nothing contrary to her
profession, saying; every one in their trade, may exercise the vocation they
were bred and brought up in, without offense to law. Dunst. But by your favor
sir, such foul cancellers and breakers of the seals and obligations of
marriage, cannot be too seuearly punished. I perceive they that make their
recourse to such folks, must not have their benignities shut up in their
coffers at home. Hud. No doubtless, with such, so soon as the door is once
shut, and your self gone out, you are forgotten for the gift-already bestowed.
Dunst. Me thinks they should be afeard to make any their enemies, who have in
that sort commanded them, doubting least in their anger they should confer
their benefit some other where. Hud. Nay, such is their sincerity, that they
dare give venture to endure all hazards. Dunst. I pray ye sir satisfy me in
this one thing more: what do you take to be the cause, why some that use this
vawting exercise grow lean, and other some fat? Hud. I think you know, or
else can imagine the cause, without my telling you. Dunst. No verily. Hud. Then
I will not be dainty with you in my reason. They that grow fat put their whole
felicity in it, and so battle themselves withal. Others, that go not so
heartily to it, pine themselves away, because their bodies are in one place, and
their minds in another. Dunst. I never had thought, that in those conjunctions,
it had been necessary to have had two souls in one body. Hud. Look ever what
the lover loses, is to be found in his beloved. Dunst. Now your other news I
beseech you sir. Hud. There is also a pleasant report made of another
Gentleman, who had an elder brother his part, of such vices as were noted unto
you in the Gentleman deceased, who is like enough to fit your desire, in making
away his living which the other kept. Besides other his faults, he was noted
with these two especial ones, both enemies unto grace, viz. Pride and
Ingratitude. Of such notable pride he was, that the day he had not bin noted
and observed with caps and knees as he had gone in the streets, that day he
would return back again to his chamber, taking it for ominous to have been so
despised and neglected of the base and ignoble world, falling at defiance with
his wholesute of apparel, the workman, and the obscure and unworthy people,
that through through slenderness of their judgments, could not value his
excellency, at whose begetting for ought he could conjecture, without doing
himself wrong, there could not be any of the gods less then Jupiter himself.
Working out the day upon this conceit, striued with his little wit how to
amend this fault, which he knew was not in the boys of the street, whom often
before he had seen to point at his proper person. Neither in himself, for he
rather mended his conceit, thinking every day better then other of himself,
till in the end he concluded, it must needs rest in the workman and in his
attire. Whereupon his every days exercise, was to cast and devise strange
inventions, how to double and trebble cost upon all manner of apparel, till it
came to such expense and height, that himself with his lewd deuisors, could
bring it to no greater: toward the furnishing and maintenance of which
disguised outrages, great sums of money were wasted, to the hazard and
overthrow of his whole estate of liuelihood. The good Gentlewoman his mother,
hearing tell of the lewd waste her son made of his lands in this prodigal
and unworthy sort, came home to his lodging, hoping through the interest she
had in him, together with the counsel and experience, which by report of the
world she might allow to be in her self, and afterward fell out to be foo^d
in her, she might be bold to persuade him, that those were not the ornaments
that best beautified a Gentleman, neither that his father and ancientors wan
their credit and advancement by such degrees of fantastical and slothful
slightnesses, but rather by valiant and aduenturous deeds, acceptable and
pleasing to kings and Princes their masters, whom they served. Which words he
seemed not to hear, on purpose, to show his mother in the most despitefullest
sot he could, her unworthiness to speak to him, who was neither at so much
leisure, nor so base minded to leese any time in answering her. Which she
noting, and the easilier by his knitting and frouncing his pair of lordly
brows at her, this tender Gentlewoman, finding her self thus over awed by the
weed her son, fell into a great grief, or fresh lame^ting the loss of the
worthy Gentleman her husband, this bastard God his father, from whom in the
many years of their living together, she had received no such discomfiture.
Withal, breaking into these words, uttered (it should seem) with much grief;
Shall I die, ere I see the hope of one of thy father his virtues come from
thee? Had not thy birth made thee a Gentleman, this painted apparel with thy
dark conditions, would prove thee but a mock Gentleman. They that borow
gestures and apparel, to put on the out sides of Gentlemen for an hour, could
they become the persons of them they strive thus to counterfeit, no better then
thou imitatest thy fathers inward virtues, notwithstanding their apparel and
likeness of them they would present, they should be thrust headlong from the
stage. Wretch that thou art, to have one finger of thy glove, the worst and
meanest thing about thee, better, and of more worth, then all thy conditions.
His remembrance being thus rubbed, he gave his mother this reply; You tell me
that which I make lessereckening of, then the lace that tieth my shoo. Care I
for my father or your breeding me a Gentleman? or should I be so foolish to
think, the world esteems or cares the more for me, in that he has left me
gentilitie, which neither he, nor you, could take from me, I having that you
see lying before you, to whom I am more beholding, then to heaven or earth?
Had my father left me enough of that, then perhaps his virtues you speak of,
might have had my good word now he is gone. I confess I have heard my father,
when he was disposed to please himself, to remember the services he did his
Sovereigns, at Bullen, New Haven, Saint Quintins, and I wot not where else
besides. Put case he did in these places, thanks worthy offices, beseeming a
forward and a valiant Gentleman, what is that to me? Had I no money in my purse
now to pay for my supper to night: think you the reciting or remembrance of my
fathers Acts, would pay for my ordinary? Perhaps it would, where nothing is to
be had, so nothing and nothing, may have a merry meeting, but something and
something, shall have the better greeting. His pensive mother, too much
discontented and discomforted with this careless and irreligious answer, fell
into a further perturbation, or rather grievous passion of mind, out of which
these words were occasioned; Alas the while, that I should live to hear a
counterfeit wretch, contrarious to nature, and borne of my body, to reckon his
fathers living too little for him, and his virtues too great. Are we come to
that pass now, not to care how we be bred, nor on whom, so that lands and
goods be one, let the devil or the dunghill be the other, it mattereth not?
Had thy father carried that mind, or rightly discerned thy disposition, he
would have left thee that which should better have fitted thy conditions, and
have bestowed a gentle gift upon a Gentleman. Is there a diligent choice made,
and a principal labor taken, to make horses fit for a Prince his stable, and
shall we not admit or bestow the like care to breed and fashion men, beseeming
a worthy Prince and nation in their better places and services? If a horse that
is not rightly bred, prove better then the generation from whence he comes,
because of the ill likelihood, it is more then was looked for. On the contrary
part, if a horse that was duly bred, miscarry and come short of the likely or
rather certain grounds of well doing, it cannot be without faults in
themselves, who wanted not good breeding. Thou can look for no less then a
heavy judgment from God, for thus pulling down with thy vices whom he had
exalted for virtues. There I see money lying before thee for land I am sure is
already sold, and I fear the rest stands but upon assurance. Lock it up,
and keep it safe, since thy lands thou could not keep. As for thy
conditions, trust them abroad loose I warrant thee, neither Gentleman nor
honestman will rob thee of them. Dunst Surely sir, it is a dangerous wit,
which makes a man forget nature. Had it not been for the ordinance of nature,
this Gentleman's father might have had perhaps, more likely reasons and better
hopes to have bestowed his living upon some other of his children or kindered.
May this gear go on this sort, we shall have an untoward race of children, if
they be no better taught then thus, to care for none, nor to show duty longer,
nor futher, then they receive benefits. To say truly: they that care not what
parents they come off, I little think they can sufficiently regard themselves,
or love their children. Hud. You did well to put me in mind of my own
forgetfulness of the time of the day, which already begins to bid us good
night. Dunst. I wonder how a man thus puffed up with the whirlewinde of
vanity, could keep his bones from breaking under his flesh. My Lord is not
yet returned from hunting, so that if I have not wearied you too much already,
I may hope to enjoy you yet another while, till this discourse at the least be
at an end. Hud. My business being altogether with my Lord, no excuse nor
borrowed occasion, shall carry me from you, till by the last season of the
evening we be constrained to part. Du. Then I beseech you sir, to finish these
news, and show me what became of this Gentleman. Hud. After all was sold and
spent, there fell out this merry jest. All his men saving one, were gone to set
up their bills in Paul's, to catch another young master, better feathered then
the other, whose plumes they had pulled within the down. He finding himself
thus forsaken, in a lunatic sort, bad his man (thus post alone left with him)
make ready his horses, for he would ride home and live sparingly, using
abstinence after a surfeit, till his half years rent should be due. To which
his man made answer; why sir, whither will you go? Marry knave (quoth he) home,
and named the place. To which he smilingly replied; You know sir, you took
money for that long ago. Why villain, quoth the Master, where is the money
then? I think Sir, spent, says his man. The money spent (says the Master)
my land sold, and I never knew of it till now! In that rage, he falls upon
his man, whom he would have slain outright, had he not been rescued from him
by some other company within the house. Dunst. If he could have coniured his
land out of his man again, it had been a cudgeling well bestowed: but I fear
me there would come no such dust out of his coat. It is a pleasant thing for a
man that has sold his land, and spent the money, to dream he has it still,
till he waketh, and finds indeed nothing left, but his bare desire to have it
so. Yet you have not declared, what became of the Gentleman in the end. Hud.
Surely it was his good hap, by lighting upon a good marriage, with his after
wit, to recompense much of his follies, purchasing again in the end, as much
land as was left him at the first. Dun. Great fortune to be twice a man,
withal met he with any better conditions then at the beginning? Hud Would you
desire better conditions then to purchase land? or would you wish him to do any
thing else, if he were your son? Dunst. He recompensed his man's beating I
doubt me not. Huddle. Perhaps nay, as the course of the world goes now amongst
spoilers, the master his good day, proves the man his ill day, and the
masters marring, becomes the man his making. Perhaps, when he sold land, the
other might take out of the bags that were too heavy many times with money, to
make them lighter for carriage. But now the world being changed, his master
finding no bags to hold enough, nor sumpter horse that will carry enough,
Totnam thus become French, you may easily imagine the date of such wasters were
out, as would send it faster packing, then the master could get it coming.
Dunst. You have rightly discribed the condition of a secret knave, that were
like enough indeed, besides his privy pilferies, to rob his master of his
wits also, as in this Gentleman it appeared. Hud. If your son would
entertain such a one, it would be a good ease for you, which are feign to
carry his cloakebag, and walk his horse, for want of such a one. I know many
sons that would afford their fathers better offices: but he makes you an
amends I know, that will content any reasonable father; for while you hold Jack
nag in your hand without, he goes in and takes up money after ten in the
hundred, which gains you forty. So I trust you cannot say, but you are well
paid, for bearing the budget, and walking the Palfray. Dunst. I confess I
cannot repent me in ouerdooing for my towardly child, who will from time to
time, and I hope at all times, deserve it: or at the least, keep things in the
same stay and order I shall be able to leave him them. I like not to play the
tyrant with my child, as some fathers do, who unnaturally suck up the bowels,
and devour the blood of their children: who after they have spoiled the fame
and renowine of their ancestors, leave also behind them innocent children, on
purpose to have them bear the burden of their own outrageous follies. Where
the heir is thus punished for the iniust offenses of their parents, there
comes in Gods wrath, to the third and fourth generation, by the unjust
impositions of their accursed fathers. This is called the child's performing his
fathers vows, which he undertook and fulfilled not according to the charge of
his first promise made unto Almighty God. What more godless part in a manner
can there be, then for wicked parents to make illegitimate their immediate and
lawful children, by prodigal disheritings? Such injurious parents, by law
should be forbidden to get children, who thus selling their livings, leave
behind them a perpetual memorial of their faults, by the testimony of their
own apparent wickednesses. What infinite evils are they subject unto, which
beyond the condition of savage beasts, take from their children all power and
means, which should defend and keep them safe from the violence of the
oppressor? Who after they have delivered over the honor of their ancestors
into other men's hands, leave their own creatures upon a bare flint stone, or
succourlesse in the dust, which no savage beast at no time has voluntarily
done, by her like dear and tender ones. Till such destroying fathers usurped
upon the right, whereunto they were appointed but Baylifes of the husbandry
upon an account, these heritages being the gift of God, remained in one stock
and line, from generation to generation, according to the first virtuous
blessing, as your self yesterday graciously remembered. Call we this bestowing
of children in our own places, to make them heirs of nothing? They that thus
unkindly neglect and set at naught their second self, what delight may any
other hope to find in them? Dunst. Me thinks the equity of the law, should
as well provide for keeping the heritage, as to appoint the heir. Hud. I
think the law makers in time past, thought there could be found none so
unnatural, as to wrong their own children, in sort, as they supposed none so
hard hearted, as to murder their fathers, against whom also, for the said
respect there was no law thought upon to be made. Dun. Happy were the children
of such fathers, if they might be borne again, or their fathers new
christened. For they must needs be accursed in their cradles, or begotten
against their parents wills and consents, who first of all, pull down the seat
of their ancestors, then next root out the foundation of their children;
after that cause brotherhood utterly to perrish and decay: and so by
consequence in the end, become a perpetual impediment to the well doing of all
their friends, especially to tread utterly down, all such that are in degree
of proximitie in blood with them. Hud. It should seem to me, that the
dishonouring of parents, is the principal cause to pull down Gods heavy hand
upon them, which you have marked and set out in this accursed sort. Du. Yea
surely sir, the defying of parents, argues a wasting of Gods grace, and all
manner his blessings. There is nothing could trouble me more, then to be
wronged by a man of my own nature, and to have him made my familiar enemy.
The man of peace whom I have trusted and set out in a readiness, to take the
first fruits of my labors, to be supplanted by him, and to see him gnash his
teeth at me like a persecuter, o that would bury me quick! Is there a spite
beyond that displeasure, to have a man's head broken with his own foote-stoole?
I must needs call for my grave to defend me, when my nearest and dearest
neighbor shall approach me with violence, and stand up stiflie against me.
When I shall find that I took for suppled honey, to become stiff darts, what
shall I then do? Are they not words softer then honey, for the child to crave
the father his blessing upon his knees? And are they not darts infected with
deadly poison, for the Son out of the same mouth to say, I rejoice in this
day, wherein I have prevailed against my father? Nay, are not these the words
of a mere Sathanist, out of his heart to say; Death take my father, hold him
fast, I have delivered him fettered and bound into thy hands, thou shall
murder him with little striving, for I have taken resistance away from him?
How like you sir of these dutiful recompenses, to reward a tender father
withal? could you not be contented to see such an heir fair hanged, and that
in time too, ere he had deminished that whereto he had no right, to make rome
for a more worthy to come into his place? Hud. Is this that you would have your
son to stay himself upon in such order and sort, you shall be able to leave
him in. Are you from a kind father, become the tragical tyrant you spoke of
even now? or have you made a trial of your self, against the time may come to
play that part in earnest, you have hither to dallied withal? Thanks be to
God, your case has been such, to find always a leisure, to look upon
lamentable spectacles in others a far off, and have at no time bin constrained
to come upon the stage, to play a part your self. Dunst. Could I play any part
to do you service, according to the intendment of my heart, I would willingly
without constraint, perform my service, in what soever sort it may please you
to command my poor ability. Would God your worship had removed displeasures,
and taken up strifes, while they were new begun, before they had altered to
that vehement sharpness, and been aggrauated to that greatness, which since
has brought a tedious adversity and vexation upon you, the rigor whereof has
constrained you to endure such unkindness, as the world in the like cases
affoordeth. Hud. I stand in very little need I thank you, to have these
vnpleasantnesses renewed or made lasting unto me; but rather am compelled, by
the cruelty of a disease worse then a Dysenteria, to use the remedy of a
medicine against the devil his biting called patience. Dun. To be plain with
you sir; If you sell the Lordship of the town wherein I dwell; forsaking all
other parts, I will play the Caonian Dove, and be gone ere the Hawke come. Hud.
Your are a shrewd Pigeon to pull, come it once to billing, it had need be a
hardy hawke that should bring you under her beak. If you escape the sowfe you
will it, and leg it, too too swift for a short winged Hawke one the plains,
and too strongly for along winged Hawke in the couertures, or bushie coppises.
I have taken more harm by three kinds of base birds, that have their bloods
bruised within them, which I will be content to name unto you then by all the
Hawks you can reckon that have any spark of natural goodness in them. The
birds names be these Rookes, Stock-doues, and Starelings. But of the three, the
least harm I have received from the Starelings, and the rather because my own
commiseration has caused me to bear with them The other two, for these
noisome properties especially, I am troubled with. The one is, they are full of
hurt, the other that they are profitable to none. The Rookes, look whom they
take an unkindness against, as it is their beastly natures and properties
indeed, to be noisome and troublesome to all sorts of birds, look I say what
they cannot master single and of an even hand, they bring in a rage and tribe
of helpers, to the downfalling of them they have conceived shrewdness against.
The Stockdoue in like sort, when he has laid an offense in your way, for which
he looks for your indignation and displeasure, if you but stalk at him as
they say, without fire in the cock, straight his tail goes higher then his
head, giving you a proud obeisance or malepart courtesy, which you must take
for a full recompense of all your harms. I saw this other day in a wood of my
own, one of these rank blouded Stockdoues, breast a phesant from his perch,
as disdainfully as if himself had been Lord of the wood alone. The Phesant you
know how harmless and generous a bird he is, hurting none, neither striving
at all, but when he is compelled to resist. Dun. I marvel surely how the Dove
could mislike that beautiful and lovely bird. Hud I can easily take away your
wonder; because the Phesant had better blood in his body, then the other
lowering and wrie looking wretch. Dunst. To continue my speeches to you, to whom
I mean as to my self, I wish you to hold fast, and make much of somewhat while
you have it, least hereafter you seek that you had, and could not keep where
it will not be found. I am but a poor thin Kettle, and therefore would be
loath to be knocked against a thick brass pot, whose smiting would surely
prove my breaking. I love not to take wrong and to be threatened also. I had
rather be packing while my bones be whole, then to be promised golden splents
when they are broken. I like not those privy mocks, to be made bare of my
goods, and then to be pitied: the shame that is so put upon me in my extremity,
is far worse then indurate necessity it self. It is a wayfairing man's
property to make much of the pot, and never to let it go out of his hand when
he is dry, till he have supped it of clean: then when he has left it
licquorlesse in a rage, to cast it against the ground. I like not while I have
ought, to be stroked and scorned together with these fair words, what wants
thou, let me know and I will help thee. They that be brought down through
such simple confidence shall be raised again at leisure, committing all to
fortune, like as when a man has foolishly ouerseene his foregame which was
furthered by good casting, thinking to recover the same with the muse of his
wit, playing an after game at Irish. God bless me from such merciless minded
men, as can so lead a man into a fool his paradise, and there leave him
succourlesse. When I am tempted by any such ones busy questions or dangerous
communication, it is my best and safest way, to be always found in a dream.
Were I a rich man, I might speak proud words, and have them justified at the
full, but since I am but poor, I will speak such words as without offense may
take place. Hud. Sithence the black mantle of the night, has foulded up within
her darkness this days light, I am also contented to let the fiery light of
this exercise die in my hand, bearing patiently the burden of the heavy
saddle you have fastened upon my silly Asselike back. Dunst. Nay rather I
beseech you I being Gods silly creature, commonly called a packhorse, suffer me
to carry the last sack to the mill. Since the multiplying of speeches to this
large proceeding, have grown out of my desire, to have fashions and patterns
restored to their wonted guise which you have maintained and vpheld, to stand
already in a better frame: wherefore now, show I beseech you, the right abuse
your self have observed in matters worthy reproof and amendment. Hud. If it be
my rule, you desire to have things squared by, I had rather keep a Feruler to
admonish them which corrupt the language and capacity they have freely given
them to exercise, then at all to find fault with such, who show to have more
wit in their hands, then the other have in their heads. It is the new fashion
speech that troubles me. Dunst. I beseech you sir, show the abuse thereof, for
I am persuaded the singularity or meruellous finenesse therein troubles the
whole world. Hud. I am contented to show you their criplednesse that I have
observed to hault in that kind. Some speak, as if they had a mint going in
their mouths, and lack a stamp to figure their words. Others speak as though
they were matching their words, as Fletchers do Arrow heads to their shafts
Others speak, as though their words were hidebound in their mouths, and lack
a mash of liquorice and Reasons of the Sun, to loose their toungs. Others
keep their mouths shut up a long while, to make their words strong and
forcible, on purpose to shoot birdboults. Others have such a sharp loose, in
letting go of their words that they are able to make you an answer, before they
know your demand. Others speak so scornefully, as though they bought their
words by wholesale, and were too good to retaile them again. Other some
speak their words so thick, that you must tarry the chewing them, ere you can
conceive what they say. Others speak with such a grace of moral sentences and
phrases that you would think that they eat no other meat but Apothegs and
Dixionaries. Others keep a school of manners in their mouth, every word
giving back, to have the other go before. Others are as dainty of their
words, as if they bought them by Haberdepois, and would keep them till a dear
year, that they might utter them by Troy or grand weight. Others speak such
brackish and pickled words, that they are feign to lay them a watering in the
foame of their mouths, ere they can utter them. Others speak such high and
lostie words, that they are feign to set open the broad gates of their mouths,
for the wicket is too little for their larded words to come out at. Others
speak, as if there were more vowels then consonants. Others speak so short,
as if their words were made of the medicine that cures the toothach. Others
speak, as if their words were made all of one liuerie, and were afeard of the
state of retainers, such men have likely the Iaundies, or ill affected livers,
as may appear by the duskie color in their faces. Others speak as though
they were sacrificing their words, and quartered them with their teeth, as they
come out of their mouths: those be such, as their words be ever better then
their deeds. Others speak their words so grave and so sad, that you can
discern nothing by them but their coullour, which is for the most part Lion
tawnie, into such you must dig deep to know their meaning. Others have such
bouncing words, sent so strongly from their lungs, that they that are subject
to the falling sickness, had not need to stand in their way. Others speak so
holily, as though their words were made of S. Helens beads: such tell their
words as they utter them: you must take heed of those, for they are ever bored
through the midst with hypocrisy. Others speak, as if they had eaten all
their meat at the mill door, and had scraped their words out of Malt dust:
such when they should speak, fall a cackling. Other some speak forked words,
as if they shot them out of a Crosse-bow: it is dangerous for a tame beast to
meet with such. Some speak as leasurely, as if they tarried for a wind, to
bring their words from Franckford mart, where if the exchange prove good, you
shall be sure of a banquet of conceited words. Other some speak as if their
words were made of wild Hops: such men's tongues run always poasting before,
and their wits come halting after; such a wit had William Summers. Others
speak such spangled words, that you would think they had them all at the
Imbrotherers: such commonly never spare for any cost. Others speak such
odoriferous prouocatiue words, that you would imagine them to be made of Amber
griese: when such open their mouths, all the coast is perfumed, as it was when
Cleopatra breathed upon wanton Anthony. Others tell a tale, as if they were
making a Bridge of words between Lambeth marshe and Greenewitch park. Others
speak as blasphemouslie and Giant-like, as they did at the confusion of toungs
in Babylon, who had been better the doors of their mouths had been dammed and
shut up, then to have profaned the deity with such ideot-like words, as were
neither conceived with meditation, framed with counsel, nor directed so much
as with a heathen judgment. Dunst. Had I not crossed my self, and removed
out of your circle, I had been a dead man ere this. Huddle. Why man, show me
the bugge, that we may run away both together. Dunstable. Your word
odoriferous, has made every joint of me to tremble and shake, and my hair to
stare and stand upright on my head as you see. Hud. How may a man keep off a
ghastly spirit, with crossing himself, or otherwise profit himself, by that
ceremony of crossing, show me that skill for a parting blow. Dunst. The virtue
thereof I know not, but my own custom that I can teach you. When I meet with
a strange or contrarious thing unto me, the like whereof I have neither seen
nor heard off before. I straight take it for ominous, and to prognosticate ill
luck unto me, which to prevent, that it creep not upon me, I stand upright,
making the sign of the cross on my sore-head, to stand me in stead of a
Target to cover and defend my whole body.

FINIS
The Argument of this book, according to the Authors meaning.
THough I promised in my epistle to the Readers, to put no interdations or
distributions of my own ignorances, between the authors words and meanings,
whereby to enlarge or diminish their speeches, yet because there are no
partition walls set up and laid, between one speech and another, through out
their whole discourse, I have thought good, hoping it may be done without
offense, with groundsels of mine own rough hewing, to divide the floores of
the rooms within this work, for the further benefit, if it might be, of the
well disposed readers. If I come short or mistake any thing herein, for lack of
knowledge, being not made privy to the deuisers conceits, I desire as at the
beginning, it may be pardoned of the wise and indifferent reader, the rather,
because I have not taken upon me to ride aloft between the authors meanings,
but altogether go about, humbly to resound unto the world, the echo which was
beaten back upon me from out the wood or Park wherein these matters were
talked of. Again, though through the whole book there are few words that go
for naught, yet dare I not venture to expound them accordingly, as I might
barely imagine them to be spoken, least I should make my self thereby a
coactor or gatherer up of other men's meanings, as if I were able to beat out
the brains of their sufficiences, whose experience and knowledge, I must of
necessity give place unto. That which I am able to perform, I offer my self
willingly unto, which is, to lay open such doubts as may arise to such as are
not readily disposed of themselves, to labor or regard the true intent and
meaning of the dialogers; who in my conceit, were altogether desirous to
benefit if they could, such Gentlemen as daily seek to murder themselves by
all manner degrees of violent follies. Unless in time they better respect
themselves, neither this supplying plaster, nor Master Kellie his great
Elixer will be able to restore or recover them from out their dangerous
consumptions, who by disorderly government, make this incurable disease also
hereditable to their children, so that the sovereign medicine it self can give
the no remedy, unless in time they sly the privy snares, which all sorts of
enemies both sleeping and waking intend against them. As the spider with
poisoned twist unseen, beguileth the silly flies, so with the deadly sting of
these venomous deceivers, through too much outrageous folly, do Gentlemen
fuffer their blood, and their childrens blood, to be sucked up. The first
speaker within this dialogue, is called an ancient retired Gentleman, because
of his lowly and mild kind of living, not at all disposed to strive with the
world, in a proud busy restless sort: the other is termed a midling or
franckling. The world acknowledges no such degree, as they of that sort desire
to be holden in, which is to be accounted more then a yeoman, and less then a
Gentleman: such ones are said to harrow hell, to make their sons Gentlemen.
Whereupon comes this byword, Master how call you him, the son of goodman
what shall I call him. These kind of men are instant wonderers at lewdriches,
which when the canckered and malicious minded wretches enjoy in any plenty,
then straight they think, the troth and grace of all things, consists in
themselves, presuming that their children and themselves put on new natures, by
attiring them beyond their birth and degree. This sort of men Palingenius took
great displeasure at, saying; If riches and worldly dross should make
Gentlemen, then the Butcher, the franckling, the Barbar, the Fishmonger, the
Sheapheard, the Tanner, the Bawd, the thief, the Usurer, and all of every
filthy sort, whom the unequal hand of Fortune has exalted, might cloute out
their gentilitie. But God and nature forbids such as proceed from those base
conditions, addicting their minds wholly unto that which can deserve no worthy
laud nor praise, to attain the gift and force divine of gentility, which is
only achieved thorough vertuousnesse. Good enterprises and virtuous deeds,
commend unto this degree, and not the body set out with gorgeous shows: so that
the mind alone procures gentilitie, which is an ornament to none, but to him
that does appropriate himself to virtue. Many of mean degree have bodies and
outward shapes bred in them thorough the force of nature, which for all that,
still retain in mind a base conceit of virtues. Neither God nor nature gives
this value unto all; but deals only bountiful herein with such, as
respectively incline themselves to better their conditions. If gentilitie
consisted in triumphing names and brags of riches, what lack might not be then
a Gentleman? To she stouthfulnesse, to haunt righteousness, to relieve the
distressed, to provide for the weak, to defend the injured, by these means
was gentilitie at the first attained. All men lived in equality, till virtue
made the difference. Then were not men admitted to principal and greatest
offices, that could gain or oppress most. Then was not authority fenced in
with wickedness. It must needs be a miserable commonwealth, where the best
officer shall become the worst author and maintainer of naughtiness. It is a
woeful authority that defends wickedness. Offices were not ordained for
such as could most politically enrich themselves, but rather for those which
were likeliest to perform unto their Prince and commonwealth best services.
If nothing should be law, but the decree and pleasure of them that sit in the
commanding place, what hope should any have long to enjoy it, in that
certainty and orderly frame, that gracious and wise Princes have commanded
them? Princes laws therefore, are not to be executed according to the pleasure
and commandment of their officers, but rather according to the office and
duty, in conscience and honesty from their prince they are charged by.
Gracious Princes think it not sufficient for themselves, to be conversant and
exercised in virtues, unless also they hold their principal offices in the
strict observation of their just and expedient laws. If it be fit for the
Prince himself to be dect with judicial effects, outward pomp and
ostentatious shows will not alone suffice to discharge inferiors duties in
their offices. Such as from an high place offend in their office, no account or
correction can be so straightly taken, as the quality of their offense
meriteth, faulting against the task imposed upon them by their Prince, for the
whole commonwealths good. Such in this discourse, were by their principal
leader or chief worthy, clearlie disfranchised from the society or
conversation of men. The strict exercises of justice in the magistracy, caused
the Roman Empire so long, and so not ably to flourish. But when they fell at
their own lust, to dispense with laws, shaking off moderation and abstinence,
then ceased their happiness, and after them followed a more unthrifty seed,
which made an viter end of all prosperous years, bidding virtue in the end
utterly adue, making the noble birth of their ancestors, through the stain
of their villainies, a reproach unto them, shaming them also to whom they
should have passed their blood by testament of virtues. As the body engenders
a body where nature is complete, so does the mind beget a perfect mind,
according to such perfections of virtues, as were entire in the state of
virtues in the antecedent and noble worthy. By ignorant times in this place, is
meant the sort and state men lived in, ere they were taken with the desire of
knowledge, before there was any search made into natural causes, and the
general use of creatures. Because there should no contention arise who that
principal worthy was, that mended thus the condition of men, he names him
not. At no hand he will allow him, that has an eye to himself, without
respecting the good of others, how rich or great so ever he be in the world,
to be a constant man, firm in virtues, but only a proud puffin of the world,
or a Pippin of S. Ioanes wood. By hypocrites, in this place are meant, such as
humble themselves beyond cause toward some, on purpose to lift themselves up
beyond reason, against other some. Such are said to imitate the outward habit
and shape of virtues, but never to put on the inward ability of well doing.
Such hipocrites, in their slattering promises resemble the devil who offered
our savior Christ all the kingdoms of the world, to the intent to take from
him (if he would have been tempted by him) the incomparable riches he was
already possessed of. The seditious Jesuits, are here called poisoned
Serpents, and hooded Friars, because they have put on the hoods of Rome and
Spain, which are murder and rebellion, sent hither by the Pope and the King
of Spain, who are called greater Serperts then themselves. Friars have always
bin cariers and recariers of the trash of Rome, so as these lesuits are now. By
calling his dames house a chapel of ease, is meant, his sextrie or vestry,
wherein he was wont to bestow his holy relics, called by the frankling the
Friars demisaries and by the Apothecaries Testiculum canis. By fortunes wanton,
is meant such a one, whose lust goes over all things without being satisfied:
such a one as is ever sick of the surfeit of plenty. Fortitude is called a
valiant virtue, because the courageous heart thrusts out the blood from the
shroud of the fearful breast, to succor and strengthen the veins and outward
parts of the body, which are in a more readiness to execute valorous things.
By the hockie dame, is meant Vacana, the goddess of harvest, to whom
husbandme^ give thanks, and pray for rest and quietness after their great and
sore labors. Digestion, is called, a constant and a substantiall-humor, meddled
in the body by opposite co^mixtions, the better part whereof in the end by
outward and inward heat is advanced to blood in the body, whereby life is fed
and maintained. Ingratitude, especially toward parents, the enemy to all
graces. Voluptuous pleasures, gnaw in sunder the sinowes of Fortitude. By the
equinoxium is here meant a similitude, between a restless woman and the Ass,
which is said in that season especially to bray twelve times in the day, and
twelve times in the night. By the Physician his four times coming, is meant
thus much: First he comes to hear his patients confession, how he disordered
himself at the diseases entrance, whereby to find the nature thereof, and
state of the sick man's body: the second time, to minister Physic according to
the diseased his grief: the third time, to launch into his disease by
austerenesse of physic, to open the windows between life and death: the
fourth time if he chance to come, it is to pronounce sentence of death. By the
diverse constructions of his disease, amongst his men, there is meant to be
showed, the properties of the ignorant, for they ever take upon them still
diversely, and for the most part, every one contrary to another in opinion.
Because he hated to do well, he was therefore said to be in a frenzy, and to
refuse the light Drowsy and voluptuous persons are also said to be in a
lethargy, or deadly sickness, and so to stand in need of the air, and the
light thereof. He was said to have a deadpalsey all over his body, because it
is a disease of the sinews, weakening the strength and most effectual parts of
operation in a man's body wholly and at once, surprising life and nature, so that
death cannot be resisted in such a one. Caonia is a part of Epirus, a region in
Greece, wherein is a wood called Dodoni, haunted with a multitude of
Stockdoues, whereupon this prouer became, Caoniae columbae, crafty Pigeons of
Caonia, because the year before the great preparation of ships which the
Greeks made, these birds fore seeing the downfall of the wood, fled into
another country. This crafty Franck ling likewise, dwelling by a harmless
Gentleman, from whom, without doing any desert, he was sure to receive benefit,
was content to give him check mate. But when one was coming to possess the
foresaid Gentleman's seat, which was like more straightly to look into this
churl his unworthiness, him he calls a Hawke, whose coming he may not
abide to here tell off. Of all birds this Dove is said to be most privy to
the nature of a hawke, and to live in most contempt of hawks. Covetous men, in
this place, are called the devils Faulkners, because it is the property of
them, when they are seized of their pray, and gotten into their tallents more
then they can well gripe, or need to gorge themselves upon, yet in that while,
if there come any other pray by, which is like to be within their maisterie and
command, they force themselves at that also, which shows their cormorant
desire to be snatching. Besides, from the height of their stand, they are able
to make many slights, and such as by their swift and fast flying, are neither
seen nor heard, till they be seized of that they pursue. The Pheasant here,
his blood is praised, because it is medicinable and effectual to many good
purposes. By the Stockdoues breasting, to drive the Pheasant from her stand or
pearke, I take it is meant lack Straw, Wat Tiler, and the rest of his fellow
rebels in Richard the seconds days, who by their rustic and rude billing at
the Pheasant, would have put back the best blouded bird within this wood, from
his high perch, had they not been prevented by the virtuous endeavor of such
an excellent worthy, as for his virtuous act at that time showed, has enriched
many others since, to a degree of worthiness, and that for his virtues sake.
Dione is the mother of Venus, to whom chits and bawds are said to pray unto, to
ripen their young plants, and to make them slack, pliant, and ready for their
harvest: and that their young heiffors may grow to use for the yoke and the
paile, sooner if it were possible, then nature requires. The other star here
meant, is called Luciferum, Venus her own star, to whom bawdes are wont to
complain, when they were deceived or robbed of any of their sequestered
weanlings: desiring by her light, that they may be restored to the knowledge
where they are: beseeching also her aid to be revenged of those wrongs, in as
much as she has taken them into her protection, to whom they are sworn by
oath never to forsake that profession. By an Eunuke here, is meant an officer
to keep good rule in Gentlewomens chambers, or else such a one altogether,
which the bawd has in charge, to keep Cupids tender sacrifices inuiolated.
The Bawds house is called a Hiue, in respect that as in a Hiue all Bees are so
like one another, that they cannot be discerned: so within this hiue of good
fellowship, there is to be found such a swarm of perfect ill conditions, that
you cannot discern who is the worst. The riotor or vnsatiat body, here is
called a Didopper, because the kind of this bird delights in many changes of
puddles and unclean waters. The bitterness of these dialoguers displeasures,
is especially extended against those, that by excessive riote and wantonness,
pull down the renown of their ancestors, decaying thereby themselves and
their children, greatly shaming besides, to see water-bearers, and such as have
done most mean and despised services unto them, to become better worth, and
more able to live then these ungracious kind of consumers. Eneas was not
called a godly and an happy man, because he carried away with him from the
destruction of Troy sixteen dissents of Grandfathers, that never foiled the
reputations of their first ancestors, but rather chiefly, in that through his
laborious and painful virtues, he was able to restore his decayed house to
former happiness, being so blessed of God, that before he died he saw a large
propagation of his own progeny and natural blood, to flourish again by his
industrious labors. To the Gentlewomans comparison of breeding horses, I have
thought good to add Virgils words, concerning the excelencie of their first
nature. A horse says he, from his first foaling, that is duly bred, lifts up
himself with such steps, gate and pace, as willeuer after prove proper unto
him. And at the first he is of boldness to venture and to pass over hard and
unknown things, fierce then also to go against dangers, as waters, hedges,
ditches, and such like. Besides, to be so instant and hoate in courage, that he
fears no sudden or tumultuous noise, as armor, shot, or outcries of men.
Showing further by his breath, ears, and other parts about him, such
animositie, that sometime with his courageous high neighing, he seems to fill
the places round about him, and to divide the air near unto him. Afterward,
with such boldness you shall see him insult upon an enemy in the field, under
his rider, that you would imagine through the force of his generositie, he had
a desire to pull the Lance or Curtelax from out the enemies hand. If there be
such worthy things peculiar and proper to beasts in their first natures, let no
man doubt, but there is a more divine and effectual force by the secret and
mystical provision of nature, properly to descend from one worthy man to
another. Where he says, happy were the children of such destroying fathers,
if they might be borne again, I take it, he means their happiness, which by
new fathers may be adopted, to make good their first birthright, whereof they
were fraudulently deceived. By that he would have their fathers new christened
again, it is not meant by water of a new fountain, but rather as I take it,
by the mercy of God to be redeemed from that curse, which some children are
said to have given them in their cradles. Where he says, there wanted unity
between their parents, at their conception, it is not meant that they were not
gotten without concirtation, or the lifting up of both their consents: but
rather that they were begotten against the grace of God, as those are that
proceed from forced marriages, where wanted agreement of hearts, which is called
a false and an unchristian conjunction of bodies. Where the father is said to
carry his sons cloak-bag, is meant such a man, as having gotten a reputation
amongst his neighbors, to be holden and reputed honest, with the credit
thereof is contented to color and excuse to his power, his sons lewdnesses.
It is good for the world in time, to see to the fraudulent entents of such,
which carry their sons cloak bags: and also warely to look to such
princocks, as put their fathers in their pockets at their pleasures. When such
young masters begin to gentle it, strifes, discentions, and law suits, are
made rife and combersome in the world. Then have Gentlemen, and the well
disposed of all sorts, great cause to look to themselves, and to hold these
Boarepigs and Bear whelps at the staves end, who for all their slickt coats
and smooth tongues, understand not what courteous behavior and gentle deeds
mean. They that think to carry candels before these young devils, are in
great danger to be stifled with their stinking snuffes. The moderate Gentlemen,
that have to do with these hoydens, shall be sure to reap in churlishness, what
they sow in courtesy. By the Panacea or suppling plaster in this place, is
meant forewarning rules for them, who know not how to guide themselves, and
have made themselves weak thorough babish pucillanimitie, that they might yet
with an after-wit, strengthen themselves with that which remains, if they have
not already made a bloody defect, and slaughtered themselves with that weapon
that was left them by their worthy ancestors, to defend themselves. To those
that have not set themselves besides the eushion, let this teach them not to
admit strange masters and comers into their fathers houses and heritages: and
that because Kites can be no goodkeepers of Chickens. Likewise, for those that
have meddled too far already, unless there be but one way with them, and that
they be past remedy to be redeemed: let I say, this caveat persuade them, that
it is surer standing upon flesh legs, then upon wooden stiltes, and that it
is surer holding with both the hands then with one. Let them further beware,
that their livings provided by their friends, prove not Tantalus his orchards,
by which is signified, that there are good things coming toward men, if for
want of grace they do not prevent it themselves. The whole intent of these two
careful fathers speeches, within this dialogue, has been to teach all sorts
of men, especially Gentlemen, to beware of selfe-vvill and self love,
prescribing remedies withal, how to keep men from aspiring, and coveting
greater things, then their likelyhoods can perform: showing also in especial,
how inward virtues are the means to advance and set men up in approved
degrees of worthiness, and not base riches, iestures, apparel, nor
hypocritical policy, which of all the rest stains them most, who in place
of justice, with greediness practice nothing else. By loue-tales and other
ordinary matters within this book, is meant no more but this, to show into how
manifold dangerous precipitations (by playing rex with themselves) Gentlemen in
this age are fallen into. As by too gaudie and too gorgeous apparel; then
with voluptous and excess diet; then besides, with too outrageous and vvanton
luxury, whereby they unnaturally destroy, first their bodies, then
vngratiouslie loose their souls, and last of all mercileslie, and too too
unkindly, deface the name and fame of themselves, their ancestors, and whole
posterity. Now to conclude, I crave pardon at this time, in that I have not
taken the pains to divide or distribute into several parts, this diverse
discourse, neither so much as with marginall notes, lead the authors meaning
in some words. The principal cause why I have omitted so to do, is because I
had no purpose from the beginning, to vvrong the speakers meanings. Therefore,
look what errors I have added of my self, I have thought good to let them
take their own places by themselves, hoping, such as come gently minded to
the reading hereof, will allow me some liberty and pardon for a while, till
with better leisure, I may be able more fitly to satisfy them.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Richard Field. 1594.


