THE ARRIEREBAN: A SERMON preached to the Company of the MILITARY YARD, At St
Andrews Church in Holborne on St JAMES his day last.

By JOHN EVERARDE Student in Divinity, and Lecturer at Saint MARTINS in the
fields.

SENEC. ep. 17. Remotis istis lusorijs armis, decretorijs opus erit.

LONDON, Printed by E. G. for Thomas Walkley, and are to be sold at his shop at
the Eagle and Child in Britains Burse. 1618.

Digno PATRIS filio. HONORATISSIMO DOMINO FRANCISCO, Baroni Verulamij, summo
ANGLIAE Cancellario, Serenissimo Principi IACOBO MAGNO, Magnae BRITANNIAE
Monarchae potentissimo, a sanctioribus Consilijs. Magnificentissimo literarum
ac literatorum Mecaenati.
MIrabitur, sat scio, Amplitudo tua, Honoratissime Domine, quid isti chlamydato
Militi, tecum, pacis nempe and legum destina, sit negotij.

Homo impolitus and asper, vereoi vt incoram tui ipse pro se loqui vel sciat,
vel non erubescat: Itaque ego, qui eius parens audio, and, vt apud Aegyptios,
solus generis author, si paulisper mihi audientiam tribueris commune vtriusque
votum expediam.

Postquam inuentus est, qui Theaginis defuncti statuam, ac si viuentem
vlcisceretur, denocte flagris caederet; exinde caepit iste meus Tyro eximie
timere rebus suis, ne idem sibi vsuveniret, vt destitutus vindice, absens, ac
inscius vapularet: Proin nimium quantum orat, vt quoniam iuxta Pindaricum
illud, -- (...)


(...). in ipso statim aditu (tanquam infantibus laudatis antiquu^ illud
PRAEFISCINI occinerem) illustris tui nominis fulgore, and virtutis (...) malos
oculos praestringere^: Ego vero, qui sponte mea id facturus eram, miratus
praeterea, at facillim^ agnoscens ingenium militare, tantum dominationi tuae ex
animo tribuens, ( foelix toga quam protegunt arma, foeliciora arma quibus fauet
toga, o vtinam indirupta copula, and perpetua vos teneat concordia;) eo magis,
magisque Honorem tuum compellans (...)
(...).
sed istud co^fidentior paulo, sed timidior tamen. Auget enim mihi animum,
fateor, quia Magnum hoc est and literarum viro conuenientissimum, cum studijs
ipse maximis polleat, ea and in alijs etiam minima complecti: Auget vultus ille
tuus in supplices perpetuum nulla temeratus nube serenum:
Auget benigna pietas quae Musas semper eousque coluit, vt nunquam -- (...).
verum despondere itidem cogunt, accuratum illud judicium, cuius limam subire
metuunt - quae multa dies and multa litura coercuit; negotiorum tuorum moles
quae tibi vni nec puero vnquam ferias contingere passa est; praecipue autem
flumen illud, and torrens eloquentiae -- (...), quo perfusa beantur,
foelicissima illa, and aeternum victura tua scripta.

Inter spem igitur metumque fluctuans, quid agerem? Sane, vt cum fata volent,
bina venena juuant,
ita consultius duxi, minutias istas, tametsi extra oleas forsan cauillabitur
Aristarchus, non minori cum impudentia, quam ineptia, nomini tuo (clarum
Angliae and beneficum sydus) inscribere, quam diutius intestata sinere effusa
dediti tibi penitissime animi desideria; Diutius, inquam, nam quid deinceps
molior, erunt (...).

Interea loci, qui mos Aegyptiorum fuit, Deos suos, dum sacra face rent,
inarticulata voce colentium, vt plurimis indigentes, and votis tamen and
vocibus se destitutos significarent; eundem ego

Amplitudinis tuae seruus a sacris infimus Ioannes Euerardus.

TO ALL THAT EITHER love or follow the profession of Arms, in a good cause,
with a good Conscience, and for a good end.
More particularly, TO THE WORTHY GENTLEMAN, CAPTAIN FRANCIS CONISBY, and the
selected Company of them that practice the Exercise of Arms in the MILITARY
YARD.
FOR all your sakes, and at many of your requests, I have hereby adventured to
be wondered at, as a Saul among the Prophets, and engaged my self into what
further obloquy a native propension and inclination to your noble quality can
cast upon me.

Yet, I confess, when I preached the Sermon, I only intended it one hours
life, unless the memory and meditation of the hearers could have repriued it
longer: But when I saw the power of pale-faced Malice conspiring with most
unworthy baseness, labored to beget me more shame and lasting disgrace, than
so momentary and transient an action could either conceal or redeem; I was
easily moved to make my good purposes as public, as their vile and injurious
practices had been notorious, and as voulntarily to submit my self to the
Arrest of all honest judgments, as I was then forced to do, to their insulting
and unseasonable follies.

I walk thus in the clouds, because I would have the plaster no bigger than
the sore; and therefore leaving them to their future repentance, I return to
you, whose hoped good and encouragement from hence, is the point and term to
which this motion tends: If it there arrive, acknowledge the wisdom of him,
that made meat come out of the eater, and this sweet out of the sour: And
blame not me, though there be some things added, and many things altered: The
liberty of the Pulpit is too little, but that of the Press, in our affairs, is
much less: Besides that in all writings, somewhat must necessarily be
understood, which the Euphonia of the praesent times will not bear, if too
accentiuely expressed* For man to man is a Tyrant, and Pr^^^ustes like, cutteth
of Giants, and stretches out Pigmees to the measure of that bed, wherein his
imagination lies.

If you have felt this evil hand, nibbling at your quality and profession,
think it not strange; your General has called you to follow him in these and
greater Conflicts: Only let all things be done in faith, and let your faith be
warranted by the privy seal of a good Conscience, and the Letters Patents of
Scripture, and then you shall see, how far unable the breath of man is to shake
that, against which the Gates of hell shall not prevail.

But I will not anticipate my self, in giving that counsel at the door, which
I can but repeat in the best room of the house. I conclude; Chi pecora si fa,
il lupo la mangia, Him that makes himself a sheep, the wolf deuoures, says
the proverb; But he that is praepared to save himself and others, shall after
he has seen seven contemners take hold of his skirt for safety, rest (...)
peace among the mighty men, among the valiant men which are fallen, which have
gone down to the grave with their weapons of war, and have laid their
swords under their heads.

Now enter, and take in good part, the poor, but hearty welcome, and
cheerful entertainment of

Your most affectionate friend and well-wisher IO: EVERARDE.

PROVE. 21.31. The horse is praepared against the day of battle, but salvation
is of the Lord.


THESE three books of Ierom. in prolog. Galeat.
Solomon, which only of all those great and voluminous 1 Reg. 4.32, 33.
works of his, the providence of GOD has to this time preserved in the Canon
of Scripture, are like the three Tabernacles, which S. Peter would have had
built upon the Mountain, where his Master was Mat. 17.4.
transfigured; one for Moses, one for Elias, and one for Christ.

This book of Proverbs, or Parables, is like the Tabernacle of Moses,
containing matters moral and political: Ecclesiastes, or the Preacher, is
like the Tabernacle of Elias, sparkling with the fire of a sacred zeal, the
light whereof discouers, and reprehends the vanity of all things under the
Sun: But his Song, or rather The Song, Canticum Canticoru^, is the Tabernacle
of Jesus filled with that sweetness, which none can conceive but they that
taste; with Revel. 2.17.
hidden Manna, which only Contemplation feeds on; with new names, which only
Contemplation reads; with new light, which only Contemplation discouers; and
with new tones and raptures, which only Contemplation hears: Cant. 8.13.
O thou that dwell in the gardens, the companions hearken unto thy voice,
cause me to hear it.

But we must down again from this eminent height, and for this night take our
rest, at the foot of Jacobs ladder, in this forest of Proverbs, amongst which
(such is their nature and condition) Iansen. prolog. in comment. in Prou.
you can expect no dependence; nor need wish any, every line showing Apelles
his hand, and every letter the wisdom of him, that had a 1 Reg 3.12.
wise and understanding heart, so that there was none like unto him before him,
neither after him shall arise the like unto him.

For this particular, we see here Almighty God, (who in every syllable of his
word breathes freedom and royal majesty, and is as sparing in those Non ego
inornata and d^minantia nomina solum, Verbaque, Pisones, satyrarum scriptor
amabo. Horat d^arte poet.
dominantes sermones, speeches which will not be easily translated from their
first notion, as frequent in flourishing Allegories, both of necessity and
ornament) commending unto us the wisdom of man, in his provision and
preparation for things necessary, but reserving unto himself the power and
authority to dispose thereof: conformably to other places of scripture; Behold
(says Ier. 4.13.
Jeremy) he shall come up as the clouds, and his charets shall be as a
tempest; His horses are lighter than Eagles: There Is the wisdom of
Nabuchad-nezzar, in parandis equis ad diem belli, in praeparing horses against
the day of war: yea but, says Psalm 33.16, 17.
David, The King is not saved by the multitude of an host, neither is the
mighty man delivered by his great strength; An horse is counted but a vain
help etc. There Is Gods praerogatiue to cross the greatest means, and to give a
blessing to the weakest, and most despised, when it shall please him to work
such Miracles: Dominus enim salutem tribuit, for it is he that gives health,
salvation, or victory.

So that you have in this text one proverb justified by an other; for here is,
Man purposing, and God disposing; or if you will, The commendable wisdom of
man, and The commanding power of God; The one in praeparing the horse against
the day of battle; The other in preserving or giving victory, with means,
without means, against means: But salvation is of the Lord.

And with this plain division, and the pursuit of these two points, I shall
desire you will rest satisfied, without expecting, that I should spin my text
out into so small threeds ((...) Aristoph. in (...) Schol.
(...)) as will neither be for the profit of your memories, in the wearing; nor
the dignity of the subject, in delivering: For as Ep. 89.
Seneca of Philosophy, so I of Scripture, Diuidi in parts, non in frusta
concidi vtile arbitror, think it fit, 2 Timothy 2.15.
(...), to divide it aright, and to distinguish it into his parts, but not to
mince it into so small and invisible Atoms, as if the whole body of Divinity
were made of nothing else.

The horse is praepared for the day of battle.

The horse] It is an ordinary figure in the language of Canaan, by specifying
one part of anything, to intimate the whole: So you have sometimes a finger put
a man; Esa. 2.8.
They worship that which their own fingers have made: Sometimes a foot, Psalm.
119.105
Thy word is a lantern unto my feet: Sometimes a hand, Job. 4.3.
Manus lass as roborasti, Thou have strengthened the weak hands: and sometimes
a head, Exodus 16.16.
Gather of it (Manna) every man according to his eating, an Omer for a head.

In like manner, it puts, for the whole power and preparation of war,
sometimes no more than a Bow: Ierem 50.29.
All you that bend the bow, besiege ye Babel round about, let none escape:
Sometimes only an Arrow, Perforabit eas sagittis suis, Number. 24.8.
says Balaam of Israel, He shall shoot them through with his arrows:
Sometimes only a sword, Psalm. 44.3.
They got not the land in possession by their own swords: Sometimes a shield
only, 2 Samuel 1.21.
For, there the shield of the mighty is cut down: Sometimes Charets only, 2
Reg. 19.23.
By the multitude of my Charets I am come up to the top of the mountains,
says Sennacherib by his messengers: And sometimes horses only, as Josh. 11.6.
I will deliver them into thine hands, and equos eorum subneruabis, thou shall
hough their horses: And in these words of my Text, The horse is prepared
against the day of battle. By which is meant not that this wisdom, counsel,
and understanding consists in providing horses only, nor peradventure horses
The question whether the service of foot or horse be more necessary or
honorable (not falling properly under the decision of a Divine) you shall find
argued apud Machiauel. dis^o^s. lib. 2. c. 18. and apud Iulium Ferrettum lib.
de antiq^^. i^staur. and illustr. militia tit. 51. n. 53. and apud V^g^t. lib
2. cap. 1.
chiefly against the day of battle; but generally, totum apparatum belli, all
manner of provision, men, munition, and (that which Q. Curtius, somewhat
besides the good liking of Machian. Discors. lib. 2. cap. 10.
Machiauel, calls the sinews of war) money, and what else soever the
judgment of man can foresee, to be any ways necessary, either for an
offensive, or a defensive war, as the occasions shall most probably arise.

A point which the Wiseman thought fit to drive, like a nail of the
Sanctuary, into the knotty timber of secure hearts, with many blows, and
therefore beside testimonium oris, the testimony of his word, we have also
testimonium operis, his own precedent and example, who when 1 Reg. 4.25.
he had peace round about him, and all Judah and Israel dwelt without fear,
every man under his vine and under his fig tree, from Dan even to Beersheba;
yet at that time, besides the maintayning of his Navy (the safest wall of a
sea-bordering kingdom) he had Cities for store, and Cities where his Charets
for war were kept, and Cities where his soldiers were garrisoned, and forty
thousand horses always in a readiness, and twelve thousand horsemen
continually in pay: And certainly, howsoever this policy escape our practice,
yet (like all virtue, which laudatur and alget) it cannot want our approbation,
while that proverb of Ingrediare via^ caelo licet vsque fereno, Ad subitas
nunquam scortea desit aquas. Mart. lib. 14. ep. 120.
taking a cloak with us in fair weather, shall be as well understood, as
generally used; the rather, because all times do abound in the examples of
those, Hieron. dialog. aduers. Pelag.
Qui dum non timent, in sereno patiuntur tempestatem, who are suddenly wracked
before they see any appearance of danger.

It Is true: it was once prophesied of the days that were then to come, Esa. 2.4.
Conflabunt gladios suos in vomeres, They shall break their swords into
plough-shares, and their spears into sithes; But take away, (...), the cover
of the letter, and you shall find there no prohibition of the use of weapons,
and lawful war, (much less of the due preparation thereunto;) Agit enim de
pace interna, non externa. vide Aquin. 2.2 q. 40 art. 1. ad 3.
But only, a sweet and gracious promise of unity, and spiritual concord,
between them who are, Gal. 6.10.
(...), of the household of faith, and know themselves to be brethren by grace,
sons of the same father, God: children of the same mother, the Church: heirs
of the same hope, happiness: and members of the same body, whereof Christ Jesus
is the head; And indeed if all men were Rom 15 5. (...). Homer Ilia^. 1.
notetur (...)
(...), like minded one toward another; or, as the same Apostle had fully
expressed himself in the twelfth chapter and tenth verse of that Epistle to
the Romans, not only (...), loving as brethren, but (...), kindly affectioned
one toward another in brotherly love: Certainly then, Esa. 11.6, 7, 8.
The wolf might dwell with the lamb, and the leopard lie with the kid, and the
calfe, and the young lion, and the fatling together, and a little child might
lead them; And the cow and the Bear might feed, their young ones might lie
down together, and the lion might eat straw like the ox; The sucking child
might play on the hole of the aspe, and the weaned child might put his hand on
the cockatrice den. But seeing that 2 Thessalonians 3.2.
all men have not faith, and that Esa 57.20.
the wicked are like the raging sea which cannot rest, wanting all peace, both
external, internal, and eternal: Surely, (...), that we may be delivered
from unreasonable and evil men: It is not only lawful, but necessary to
follow our Saviors advice, Luc. 22.36. Let him that has no sword sell his
coat and buy him one: lest it fall out with us, as it did with the many
thousands of Israel, 1 Samuel 13.22.
When the day of battle came, there was neither sword, nor spear found in the
hands of the people that were with Saul and Jonathan.

Nor does this preparation to war argue an indisposition to peace; (Peace, that
blessing which as all other, not only James 1.17.
((...)) perfect gifts, but ((...)) good giuings is from above, and comes
down from the father of lights: Peace, August. de Ciuit. Dei lib. 19. cap. 11.
qua nihil in rebus terrenis gratiosius solet audiri, nihil desiderabilius
concupisci, nihil postremo potest melius inueniri: than which there can be
nothing named with more willingness, nothing wished for with more heartinesse,
nothing found with more happiness: -- Sil. Ital. lib. 11.
Pax optima rerum
Quas homini nouisse datum est: pax vna triumphis,
Innumeris potior, --


Peace, the best of earthly blessings given unto mortality: more safe then any
war: more secure then any victory: more glorious then all triumphs:) No, no;
Cyprian de Ieiun.
Ordinatio diuina non est peccatorum obstetrix; we shall never find that any
commandment of God, does either directly or indirectly imply a necessity of
sinning: He that professes himself in his word, to be Sequester pacis, a
Peacemaker, enioyning us to Psalm. 34 14.
seek peace and ensue it; cannot be, lest he should be unlike himself,
incentiuum belli, a stirrer up of strife and sedition: But if you will be
pleased to remember, that Exodus 17.16.
war with Amalek, is the condition of Isreal's peace: that Psalm. 122.3.
Jerusalem is built as a city that is at unity in it self: And that as we are
commanded Rom 12 18.
to have peace with all men, with a double condition: First, (...), if it be
possible. Secondly, (...), for our part; So there are some with whom we may
upon no condition, either make Deuteronomy 7.2. and Judge. 2.2.
covenant, or Deuteronomy. 23.6.
peace; For, Esa. 32.17.
opus iustitiae pax, True peace is the fruit, the issue, the daughter of Equity
and Justice: Then shall you see how far the Danaeus ad D. August. de
haere^ibus. cap. 22.
Marcionites, Idem ibid. ad cap. 86. verum Tertull. excusa tur (nec immerito)
ab eius vindice Pamelio in comment. ad lib. de corona militis.
Tertullianists, Anabaptists, and whosoever else condemns the use of the
sword, (if managed by the hand of the Magistrate) are from that spirit which
leads into all truth; an endowment whereof (though happily none of those (...),
gifts which are without repentance) the Scripture has always acknowledged
valor and fortitude in this kind, to be.

When Israel in their necessity cried unto the Lord, and the Lord in his mercy
gave them Othniel the son of Kenaz, to save them from the hands of their
enemies; The Text says, that Judge. 3.10.
The spirit of the Lord came upon him, and he judged Israel, and went out to
war.

Afterward, when Gedeon was appointed to fight the Lords battles against the
Midianites and Amalekites, Judge. 6.34.
The spirit of the Lord came upon him, and he blew a trumpet, and Abiezer was
joined with him.

Again, when Iephthah was chosen General against the children of Ammon, Judge.
11 29.33.
The spirit of the Lord came upon him, and he smote them from Aroer, till thou
come to Minnith.

Moreover, when Sampson was assaulted by a Lion, in the vineyards, as he was
going down to Timnath, Irruit in eum spiritus Domini: Judge. 14.6.
The spirit of the Lord came mightily upon him, and he tore him, as one should
have rent a kid, and had nothing in his hand: And least it should be said, that
this was but in his own defense against a beast, the same testimony is given as
well when he slew the thirty men of Judge. 14.19.
Ashkelon, as when he destroyed a thousand with the Judge. 15.14.
iaw-bone of an Ass.

In like manner, when Saul had heard that Naash the Ammonite had besieged
Iabesh Gilead, and would not hearken to any composition, without the thrusting
out of all their right eyes, it is said, that 1 Samuel 11.6.
The spirit of the Lord came upon him, and he was exceeding angry.

As then it is beyond all question, that valor of this kind is from the
spirit of the Lord, so it shall not want impiety, to doubt, whether the use of
so excellent a gift, may be lawful, just, honorable, or no; Otherwise, to
what purpose was Judah, that victorious Tribe of Judah, epitomized in its
Patriarch, compared to a Lion, the Hieroglyphicke of all fortitude? But because
Genesis 49.9.
His hand was to be in the neck of his enemies? Judah, as a Lions whelp shall
thou come up from the spoil my son, he shall lie down, and couch as a
Lion, and as a Lioness; who shall raise him up?

To what purpose did Deuteronomy. 33.20.
Moses compare Gad to a Lion, but because he should catch for his prey the
arm with the head?

Yea, to what purpose did Number* 23 24.
Baalam in the spirit of prophecy, say of all the children of Israel, that
they should rise up as a Lion, and lift themselves up as a young Lion? But
because they should not lie down till they had eaten of the prey, and till
they had drunk of the blood of the slain? Let me be bold to say with De verb.
Dom
St. Augustine, Militare non est delictum, sed propter praedam militare,
peccatum est: Nec rempublicam gerere criminosum est, sed ideo agere, vt rem
familiarem potius augeas, videtur esse damnabile: To go to war is no
offense: but to do it for love of spoil and rapine, is a grievous sin. To
bear office in the Commonweal, is no blemish: but to do it to the end to
enrich a man's private coffers, is no less then damnable. For, as storms and
tempests do naturally purge the air; but accidentally hurt the fruits of the
earth: So is it in a just war, whose natural and intended effects are to 1 Samuel 30.
recover our own; 1 Chronicles. 19.
to revenge injuries: Genesis 14.
to succor the distressed; 2 Reg. 3.
to subdue rebels; 2 Reg. 23.
to defend our own land; Nehem. 4. De quibus omnibus consule Aug. lib. 83.
quaest. super Iosueq. 10.
to maintain true religion (for although there have been and are that
question the propagation thereof by the sword, yet this was never doubted of,
so it be undertaken by those who have ius belli) and lastly, to procure and
establish peace: Prudent. in (...).
pax summa laborum,
Pax belli exacti pretiu^, pretiu^que pericli.
Peace is the price and sufficient recompense of all labor, wars and
dangers. These I say are the natural effects of a just war: But that amongst
Soldiers Nulla fides pietasque viris qui castra sequ^ntur. Lucan. lib. 10. pro
Castra, quida^ legunt Claustra, inquit Gaudent. Merul. Memorab. lib. 2. c. 25.
violence, cruelty, rapes, delight in blood, blasphemy, and profaneness, are
so frequent and ordinary, that they are now thought proper unto the profession,
it may seem vitium personarum non rei, the fault of the Nocendi cupiditas,
vlciscendi crudelitas, implacatus and implacabilis animus, feritas rebellandi,
libido dominandi, and siqua sunt similia, haec sunt quae in bellis iure
culpa^tur. Aug. cont. Faust. Manich. lib. 22. cap. 74.
persons, and not of that profession, than which I do not find any other more
honored in the whole book of God; at the least if you interpret it an honor,
that he who in these later times has been called Deus pacis the God of peace,
did in the days of old call himself Dominus exercituum, the Lord of Hosts.

And had it not been so, he would never have suffered his own spirit to have
entitled himself, Il maestro di guerra, The grand master of war, Psalm. 144.1.
Blessed be the Lord my strength (says David) which teaches my hands to fight
and my fingers to battle.

Had it not been so, the Scripture would never have called CHRIST, the Josh.
5.14.
Captain of the Lords army.

It would never have called the Angels soldiers: Job 25.3.
Nunquid est numerus militum suorum? Is there any number in his armies? and at
the incarnation of our Savior mustred them in a band of Luc. 2.13.
heavenly soldiers.

It would never have called the CHVRCH a squadron of armed men, Cant. 6.3.
Thou art beautiful, my love, as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem, terrible as an
Army with banners.

It would never have called a BISHOP a Soldier, 2 Timothy 2.3. Videmur remissis
and fluentibus ^unicis, fed habe^us militiae nostrae cingulum, quo castimoniae
interiora constringuntur. Ang de verb. Dom ser. 19.
Thou therefore suffer hardness, or evil ((...)) as a good soldier of Jesus
Christ.

It would never have called a Christian a Souldior, Ephesians. 6.11.
Put upon you therefore the whole armor of God, that you may be able to stand
against the wiles of the Devil.

Nay, it would never have called every man a soldier, Job 7.1. verse vulg.
Militia est vita hominis super terram, The life of a man upon earth is a
warrefare: For although as Apud Hug. in Psalm. 57.
Augustine and Ruffinus affirm, similitudes in the book of God be sometimes
drawn a rebus non amandis, from evil things, and applied unto those that are
good, as from the unjust Judge to God Luc. 18. yet As Dominus exercituum, the
Lord of Hosts.
Titles, or (...) (as Basil calls them) you shall never find ascribed either
to holy men, or to the most Holy (if borrowed only) save from things in their
own nature good, and approved.

But what need we strive so much to express and wring juice from symbolicall
Divinity, which seldom concludes, when waters sufficient to quench our
greatest thirst of knowledge, do so plenteously gush from the rock of the
word? Or shall curiosity seek out another Doctor while it is in the chair?
Habes oracula Dei? ne moreris alium Doctorem; Nemo te docebit quemadmod^m illa.
Chrysostom. in Coloss. Hom. 9.
There Is none can teach us so truly, none more plainly. With how great evidence
do the Scriptures prove that the husbandman so soon as he had chosen out a
Vineyard, hedged it, making his care equally ancient, of fencing, and planting
it? Are they not as exact, (though peradventure not so plenteous) in the
affairs of the Army, as in the business of the Sanctuary?

Will you see modum indicendi bellum, a prescript form of denouncing war? (A
matter of much regard and cerimony amongst the ancient De quo vide^^ Dionis
Halicarn. lib. 1. and Liu. lib. 1. and Agell. lib. 16. c. 14.
Romans:) see Deuteronomy. 20 10.

Will you see delectum militu^, the choice of soldiers? see Exodus 17.9.

Will you see sacramentu^ militare, the oath of obedience from a Soldier to
his Captain? see Josh. 1.16, 17.

Will you see Colonells, and Captains? look Number. 31.14.

Will you see the sounding of an All'arme? look Number. 10.5, 6.

Will you see the order of a Camp, and how the Army is quartered? look Number. 2.

Will you see a March, who have the Van, and who the Riere? look Number. 10.14.
etc.

Will you see a Council of war? look the same Chap. verse. 4.

Will you see a City besieged? look Josh. 6.

Will you see a City relieved? look Josh. 10.9.

Will you see an Ambush laid? look Josh. 8.9.

Will you see a prey taken, and recovered? look 1 Samuel 30.

Will you see the spoil divided? look Number. 31.27. But what should I stand
wearying you with repetition of watches, spies, battles, skirmishes, defeates,
supplies, stratagems, and six hundred things of like nature? whereunto the
blessed spirit has every where in Scripture given, not only approbation, but
direction, assuming to himself the honor both of the command, and execution;
Psalm. 18.34.
He teaches my hands to fight, so that a bow of brass is broken with mine
arms, says David; yea, I weaken the loins of Kings, I open the door before
him, and the gates shall not be shut, for I will break the brazen doors and
burst the iron bars, says Jehovah of himself, Isay 45.1, 2.

From all which, it easily results, that as by the law of nature it was
permitted unto man and implanted in his heart, to oppose violence with
violence, art with art, and cunning with cunning, vt fortis impiugat in fortem,
Ier. 46.12.
that the strong might stumble against the strong, and the armed man against
him that was armed: So in the statutes and ordinances which God gave by Moses
for the reforming of the degenerate and counterfeit manners of his people, he
confirmed unto them the lawfulness thereof, he ordered the circumstances, and
professed himself General of all such wars as were made at his command. Nor
did Es. 9.6.
the Prince of peace, at his coming, abrogate this, as ceremonial, amongst
those Heb 9 10.
(...), carnal rites which were enjoined until the time of reformation, nor
dishearten the practice thereof in his servants, as though it had been of the
Iudicialls, peculiar only (by way of command) to the then (...) and
Commonwealth of the Jews, to us though not Mortua sed non mortif. ra. Aq. 12
ae. q 104. art. 3. c.
deadly, yet dead, except quickened and revived by the higher powers, who have
command of the sword. The contrary appears by that which the Baptist enioynes
the soldiers, Euangelium no^ abolet ordines politicos, quales sunt
publicanoru^ and militum, sed officia iustitiae a singulis requirit. Errant
igitur Anabaptistae, qui putant hominem Christianum non posse bona c^nscientia
militare. Piscat. in loc.
Luc. 3.14. not to leave their profession, but to do violence to no man, nor
accuse any falsely, and to be content with their wages. By that which Christ
himself attests unto the Centurion, Mat. 8.10. who published his calling, and
from thence drew an argument to strengthen his faith, Verily I say unto you, I
have not found so great faith, no not in Israel. And by that which afterward
his Act. 10.2.
Apostle writes of Cornelius the Captain of the Italian band, that he was A
devout man, and one that feared God with all his house etc. which threefold
argument, we are thus taught to enforce, by Hom. in Mat. 8.
Chrysostom, Lib. de corona militis c. 11.
Tertullian, Ep. 5. ad Marcellinum.
Augustine, Orat. in Gordium mart.
Basil, and (because Ennius.
Hoste^ qui feriet mihi erit Carthaginiensis) Tom. 1. lib. 3. de Laicis cap.
14, 15, 16.
Bellarmine, Contr. Haereses v^rbo Bellum.
Alphonsus a Castro, and Tom 3. disp. 3. q. 16. pun^. 1.
Gregory de Valentia.

To all which doctrinalls, I might add the practice of the primitive Church,
in the age next after Christ, which was richly enameled with the blood of
infinite Martyrs of this profession, as Sebastian, Maurice Chrysogomus, Victor,
Pantaleon, Gorgonius, and the whole legion of the Thebans, with many more,
whose names and sufferings are every where obuious, and upon record in the
Histories of the Church. But (me thinks) I have been already too profuse in
this argument, especially to you, and such as know that howsoever the name of a
Soldier, be at this time ridiculous among secure fools, and contemptible
among such birds of peace, as cannot abide the Drum, saving in a
Morris-dance, nor the Trumpet, but in Triumph; yet even in this generation,
Lucan. lib. 1.
Quae patitur long ae pacis mala.
There is never a Paris, never a Carpet-Knight (howsoever he would think
(...), a roaring friend less terrible, than the face of an armed foe) but with
a greedy ambition, snatcheth at those honors, which were at first given to
Soldiers, to them only, and still retain their Denomination and Titles from
thence.

Of all these see Mr Seldom in his titles of Honor.
A Dukedom was a military honor, given per vexilli traditionem, by the
delivering of an ensign, banner, or penon into his hands, with intimation that
he should be valiant, wise, and circumspect in the leading and command of
the Soldiers, committed unto him for the defense of the borders and
territories: so was a Marquisate, an Earldom, a Baronie, together with the
honor of being made Knights and Esquires, as their very names of Duces,
Equites, Armigeri, etc. do sufficiently prove, though now the sailing by that
compass be much discredited, in respect of a newfound passage, a more
compendious and less dangerous way lately discovered; but where Ajax his
reproach of Ulysses, does justly meet with most of the Passengers. Ovid. Met.
lib. 13.
Postulat vt capiat quae non intelligit arma.
The more our misery that are fallen upon this effeminate age, and the greater
injury to that honorable profession, which is not only scorned, but robbed.
The time has been, when War was accounted Synes. Ep. 104.
(...), An exact trial of a brave spirit; but now that touchstone has lost
his property, for Hose. 4.14.
cum Meretricibus conuersantur, they keep company with Harlotts, and
sacrifice (their dearest blood) to Whores; but populus non intelligens
vapulabit: The people that does not understand shall fall.

The time has been when a well ordered camp, was accounted a School of
Virtue, where was professed and taught, preparation to death, continence,
vigilance, obedience, hardness, and frugalitie both in meat and apparel: But
now that Hose. 4.11.
Whoredom, and Wine, and new-Wine have taken away our hearts; now that we
have turned Memento mori, the meditation of death, into Viue hodie, an
Epicurean and sensual life: now that we are grown from absorbentes vinum,
swallowing of Wine, to be Es. 28.7.
Absorpti a vino, swallowed up of Wine: Surely now, the neglect of the Lessons,
has brought and wrought the contempt and disgrace of the School.

The time has been, when amongst our selves, we have been so jealous of our
honors, that the Ie. Sarisburiensis nug. cur. li. 6 cap. 18.
Kentishmen would not have sold their prerogative of being in the Vaunt-gard,
nor they of Wiltshire, Cornwall, and Devonshire, of being in the
Arriere-gard, at any reasonable price: But now he is accounted the wisest, that
can keep himself furthest (...) out of danger; and he the most valiant, that
can take 2. Reg. 14.10
Iehoash his counsel to Amaziah, even to brag of Victory and tarry at home.

Let it therefore suffice, and content us, (as it will do any man who dares for
truths sake, Ne examenu^ improbum in illa Castiges trutina. Pers. sat. 1.
stem the tide of the multitude) that howsoever these wanton and womanish
times, vndervalew the lawful, necessary, honorable profession of Arms, yet
GOD himself has graced it, our Savior has approved of it, the Apostles have
commended it, the Saints have pra^tised it, the Fathers have praised it, our
Ancestors have gloried in it, our Land has been renowned by it, and even
those Nahum. 3.17
crowned locusts, and captaine-Grashoppers, which camp in the hedges in the
cold day, but when the Sun arises flee away, and their place is not known
where they are, are glad, and proud to feed upon the leaves, and titles,
knowing themselves unable and unworthy to reach the fruit and honor thereof.
Only, let me be your Remembrancer, that whatsoever I have said of the
lawfulness, necessity, and praise of war, is but so far forth true, as
the war it self shall be just, whereunto there are these three material
circumstances required. First, Aquin. 2.2 ae. q. 40. art. 1. c.
vt recta sit intentio bellantium, that both stock and branch, Commander and
private Soldier, do every one in their degree and order undertake it with a
right intention, not that one war may draw on another, nor that blood may
touch blood; but in the midst, of war, our intentions ought to be
peaceable, contrary to them, who Psalm 55.21.
have peace in their mouths, and war in their hearts; for when we have war
in our hands, we must have peace in our hearts, Aug. ep. ad Bonifac.
vt eos quos expugnamus, ad pacis vtilitatem vincendo perducamus, that by our
victory we may inuest them, whom we overcome, with the benefit of it.

Secondly, to a just war there is required Authoritas Principis, the command
of the Prince whosoever he be, that has Romans 13.1.
(...), that same transcendent power (which Vlpian calls imperium merum) of
life and death: let him be a Pagan, an Haeretike, or a Tyrant, yet still
(though not modus potestatis, the manner of the power) potestas est a Deo, the
power is of God; and therefore says in Psalm. 142.
Augustine of the soldiers of Julian the Apostata, that though they would not
sacrifice to Idols at his command, yet when he divided them into Companies, and
placed them under Captains, and led them against the enemy, they most
willingly and readily obeyed: The lawful command therefore of a lawful
Magistrate is the second qualification of a just war, without which (by
whomsoever undertaken) it is but a sedition, conspiracy, tumult, commotion, or
a rebellion, and accordingly shall receive its judgment.

Thirdly, there is requisite unto a just war, causa iusta, a just cause of
war: whereof having spoken somewhat already, I will add only this, that it
does not belong (notwithstanding) to every private man, to make too curious a
disquisition into the causes and occasions of his Sovereigns command: (reasons
of state and policy sometimes inioyning secrecy therein, and the breast of the
Prince sometimes more sensible, than the heart of the subject is capable;) For
if a just man (says Cont. Faust. Man. lib. 22. cap. 75. Si vir iustus, sub
Rege, homine etiam sacrilego, milite^, recte potest, illo iub^nte bellare,
ciuicae pacis ordinem servant; modo quod iubetur vel non sit contra Dei
praeceptum, vel vtrum sit, certum non sit.
Augustine) do serve under a sacrilegious King, he may well and safely go to
war at his command, and obey him in all civil affairs; provided, that what
is by the Prince commanded, either be not against the commandment of God, or
that he (the subject) know not whether it be or no, (that is, doubt it not, or
call it not into question, for Quid perdo, si credo, quia bonu^ est, si
incertum est vtrum sit malus? Aug. in Ps. 147.
why should he stretch his suspicion beyond his knowledge?) Ita vt fortasse
Regem reum faciat iniquitas imperandi, innocentem autem militem ostendat ordo
seruiendi; so that it may be, the injustice of the command, may make the King
guilty, and yet the soldiers obedience may plead him innocent. And thus far
have I gone, (I hope not out of the way) to show the lawfulnes and necessity
of war, because as all preparation to unlawful things is evil, so to
unnecessary is unprofitable. And now we come to the preparation it self.

The horse is prepared for the day of battle.

So that the wisdom of man does not only look after, equum, a horse, but
equum paratum, a horse prepared or made ready, and that cannot be except they
be ready horse: For take a horse out of the studde (so the Irish call those
equos gregales which the ancient Graecians called (...)) of how generous and
excellent a breed and stomach soever, yet its known how fearful and
timorous he is at first, Tales Grae^i (...) appellabant. (...) (...), and (...)
timor.
afraid of every noise, and at every motion, starting aside like a broken bow:
Afterward when he is in hand, and applied unto the manger, ((...)), though he
be a creature of wonderful docilitie, yet he is unruly, ticklish and proud. --
Virgil. Georg. 3.
Namque ante domandum
Ingentes tollent animos, prensique negabunt
Verbera lenta pati, and duris parere lupatis.
Nay when he has admitted a rider, because he cannot shake off his carriage,
still he leapes, and bounds, and kicks, Psalm. 32.9.
he has no understanding, his mouth must be holden (chamo and fraeno) with
bitt and bridle least he come near thee, and for a long time he continues
(...) aut difficilis, qui ne tactum quidem aut ^^tillationem ((...)) pati
queat. Si^ appellat Xenoph. in lib. (...).
disobedient, unready, and unserviceable. But lastly, Virg vbi supr.
Carpere cum gyrum incepit, gradibusque sonare
Compositis, sinuatque alterna volumina crurum.
when he is grown gentle, willing, strong, useful, and ready, yet if he have
not been accustomed, as the same Poet speaks -- animos atque arma videre
Bellantum, lituosque pati, tractuque gementem


Far rotam: to the Drum and Trumpet, to fire, smoke, dust, noise, shoutes,
cries, blows, the Fulgor armoru^.
lightning of the weapons, and the Job 39.25.
thunder of the Captains; surely, he may well be equus paratus, a ready horse,
but not prepared against the day of battle: No there is still more difference
between them two, than inter equum sagmarium, Aurel. Olymp. lib. 2. Cyn^get.
Quemque coloratus Mazax deserta per arua
Pauit, and assiduos docuit tolerare labores.
between a sumpter horse, and a horse of service; for Es. 9.5.
every battle is with confused noise, and garments rolled in blood: Ierem.
47.3 and 8.16.
There is rushing of charets, rumbling of wheels, snorting of horses, and
neighing of strong ones; which if custom and use have not softened, sweetened,
and made familiar unto a horse, Zech. 12 4.
he will be strooken with amazement, and his rider with madness, and both
together will flee as fast out of the battle, as the 2 Reg. 7.6.
Syrians ran from their tents before Samaria at their supposed hearing a
noise, of charets, horses, and a great Host.

Only, when Ier. 46.4.
The buckler and shield is ordered, when men draw near to battle, when the
horsemen get upon the harnessed horses, when they stand forth with their
helmets, fourbish the spears, and put on the brigandine, so that the Ier.
50.42.
horses are put in array like men; then are they prepared against the day of
battle: for then Job 39.21, 22. etc.
Their necks are clothed with thunder, and the glory of their nosthrils is
terrible: They paw in the valleys, and rejoice in their strength: They go on
to meet the armed men; They mock at fear and are not affrighted, neither
turn they back from the sword; The quiver ratleth against them, the
glittering spear and the shield; They swallow the ground with fiercenes and
rage, neither believe they that it is the sound of the trumpet; They say among
the trumpets, Ha, ha; They smell the battle a far of, and the noise of the
Captains and the shouting.

By this time me thinks, as S. Paul demanded of himself, 1 Cor. 9.9.
(...), Has God any care of oxen? so there are some of you ready to ask of
me, has God so great care of horses? But I told you before, that under the
name of horses was understood totus belli apparatus, all, and all manner
provision of war; and so I hope their wisdom understands it, whom it
especially concerns to have a general and universal care thereof; for our
parts, since God has likened Joel 2.4.
strong men to horses; and wisdom compared Wisd. 19.9.
good men to horses; and Origin. in E^^. 15. hom. 6.
Origin has affirmed, that all men are horses: Let it be lawful for me to say
that Soldiers are a principal part, that your selves are a great part of the
Cauallery here spoken of, and consequently that unto you, there is commended a
twofold praeparation against the day of battle. The one is internal, to
qualify the mind, the other is external, to enable the body; the one is
valor and courage, the other is practice and exercise. Of these two, and no
more to this point. But naming valor or fortitude, I first protest against all
these aequiuocall intruders and usurpers upon that noble title, as incapable
(whilst so) of this qualification: namely the lusty, or rather lustful
adulterers, that pretend to valor, because they can Ier. 5.8.
tanquam equus emissarius vnusquisque hinnire ad vxorem proximi sui, neigh like
fed horses, every man after his neighbors wife. Secondly, the Drunkards, that
lay claim to it, because they can drink like horses, Esa 5.22.
they are mighty to drink wine, and men of strength to mingle strong drink.
Thirdly, the Thrasonicall Braggers, Qui virtutem verba putant, vt lucum ligna,
that think by great words to brag themselves into an opinion of valor, but
whom experience shall find to be Nonnus in Dyonisiac. quo (...) notantur: sic
aute^ reddidit Cunrad. Ri^tershus. in n^^. ad Phaed: fab. Extra bella leo,
lepus in discrimine belli.
(...).
as Lions in their roaring, so hares and not horses in the day of battle.
Fourthly and lastly, all stabbing Ioabs, and puntilious duellists, qui occident
virum in vulnus suum, and adolescentulum in liuorem suum, that like Genesis 4.25.
Lamech, will kill a man to their wounding, and a young man to their hurt, Genesis
49.7.
Cursed be their wrath, for it is fierce, and their anger for it is cruel. But
these, and those being cashierd, and the lift of the Army by this means
reduced (with Iud 7 7.
Gedeons) from two and thirty thousand, to three hundred; them that remain
behind I let to know, that the valor required and expected at their hands,
consists in 1. Willingness to undergo danger for the public good. 2.
Constancy to bear it. 3. Wisdom to manage and deport themselves therein.


1. Willingness in undergoing, to exclude timiditie; for inevitable danger
makes Cowards bold, and despair of safety makes the fearful Heart hold the
hounds at bay: But Qui sponte obtulistis de Israel animas vestras ad pericula,
benedicite Domino, say Iud. 5.2.
Deborah and Barok, you that offered your selves willingly for the auenging of
Israel, praise you the Lord.

2. Constancy in bearing it, to avoid a fastidious weariness, for as, Dulce
bellum inexpertis, war is sweet to them that never tasted it; so there are
many, that howsoever, in affectation of novelties, they run rather headlong
than willingly into the danger thereof, yet when they have tasted the
discommodities of hunger, cold, watchings, labors, and wounds; they suffer the
terrors of war with a troubled mind; But he was wise that said, Torm^nta a
me abesse velim; sed fi sustinenda fueriut vt me in illis forti^er, honest
animose ger^m, optabo: Quid ni malim non incid^re in bellum? sed fi incido, and
v^lnera and fame^, and omnia quae bellorum necessitas adfert, generose feram,
non optabo. Sen. Ep. 57.
he would not rashly engage himself into any dangers: yet when they were
necessarily to be undergone, he would wish to bear them, cheerfully,
honestly, courageously: he would not desire war, but being pressed by
necessity, he would demean himself becommingly amidst hunger and wounds and
all other companions thereof.

Thirdly, Wisdom and judgment, how to demean themselves therein, to acquit
them from temeritie; for as a constant boldness does erect and quicken
wisdom and skill, so does skill and wisdom direct and qualify that, as you
may see in him, who was a better soldiour than a Man, I mean Ioab: It was not
possible for a man to express it better than he did in that strait and
exigent, where the 2. Sam. 10 9.
Ammonites and Syrians charged him both in the front and the riere at once;
when suddenly he divided his army, and gave a great part thereof into the hands
of his brother Abishai, to encounter the Ammonites, and himself in the mean
time gave on upon the Syrians; but with this direction to his brother, If
(says he) the Syrians be to strong for me, then thou shall help me; and if
the Children of Ammon be too strong for thee, I will come and help thee.

Now, although this Wisdom and Judgment in Martial affairs, be of the
blood royal, yet like 2. Sam. 4.4.
Mephibosheth it has caught a fall, and is lame on its feet, unable to go
further than it shall be carried by practice and experience, which is the
outward preparation of a man against the day of battle. For as blood is the
Chariot of the spirits, so is practice and exercise to this Triumphant valor
the Throne where she sits and commands, and (where God is not pleased to use
his royal prerogative to work without means or against means) like God
himself Wisd. 8 1.
Attingit a fine ad finem fortiter, and disponit omnia suauiter, she reaches
from one end to another mightily, and sweetly does she order all things: And
in this respect, you must call to mind what I speak to the letter of the
Text, concerning a horse; and consider the relation inter fundamentum and
terminum, between him, and what we here imply by him, a man, for this is the
indiuiduum wherein the similitude consists, this the point wherein the
preparation of men is especially like the preparation of horses against the day
of battle. For were men as strong as Hercules or Sampson; as wise as Socrates
or Solomon; as politic as Ulysses or Achitophel; as valiant as Achilles or
David; as swift as (...). Apollon Argonaut. lib. 1. Talem etiaem refert Calpurn
Eclog. 4. qui, -- Viridi sic exultauit in aruo, Tangeret vt fragiles sed non
curuaret aristas.
Polyphemus or Asahel; yet if they were not trained up to the Discipline of
war, though as the sand of the Sea in number, they would be but (as Demaratus
the Lacedemonian told Apud Senec. de Benefic. lib. 6. ca. 31.
Xerxes of his numerous or rather innumerable army) multitudo indigesta, and
grauis, and metuenda ducenti, an indigested and disordered multitude and
fearful indeed, rather to their leaders than their enemies: If they were not
acquainted with words of command, In the greatest extremity, they would be like
the builders of Gen 11.6.
Babel, they would not understand one another speech: If they were not
familiar with the use of their Arms, they would say of them in the day of
battle, as David said of Saul's armor when it was girt unto him, 2. Sam. 17.39.
I cannot go with these, for I am not accustomed; and if they were not enured
(though but (...)) to noise and clamor, to shouting and groans, to the roaring
of the Artillery and the thunder of the small-shot, to the sight of wounds, and
the apprehension of death in his most horrid shapes; The first man that fell by
the hand of an enemy would, like the carcass of 2. Sam 20.12.
Amasa, make the whole army stand still in their march, until he were removed
out of the way: so great necessity is there of preparing both man and beast
against the day of battle.

This saw well the eye that sees all things, who intending to make of his
people a mighty Nation, terrible abroad and invincible at home, ( Non enim ex
corporis imfirmitate, sed a peccato vincebantur, si quando victi fuiss^nt.
Chrysostom. hom. 14. ad p^p. Antioch.
saving when their sins sharpened the sword of his vengeance against them)
did train them up, under Chiefetains of his own choice, from Brick-makers and
laborers to Tyrones, and from thence to Soldiers, and from that to be men of
such practice and experience, that every one of them was able to lead an Army,
as it is said of those 1. Chr. 12.38.
three hundred and two and twenty thousand which came up to Hebron to make
David king over Israel.

And this saw likewise they, that could see no further then nature and reason
did enable them; the Romans, who being to oppose their fewness against the
multitude of the French: their indifferent and mean statures, against the
giant-like tallness of the Germans: their weake-nesse, against the strength of
the Spaniards, their poverty, against the riches of the Africans: and their
plainness, against the policy of the Graecians: In all these difficulties had
no other stratagem, nor hope of victory, than Veget. lib. 1. cap. 1.
( Tyroronem solerter eligere, ius armorum docere, quotidiano exercitio
roborare; quaecunque euenire in acie, atque in praelijs possunt, omnia in
campestri meditatione praenoscere, severe in desides vindicare) to make exact
choice of their Soldiers, to teach them the law of arms, to confirm them
with daily exercise, to acquaint them in their drillings and trainings, with
whatsoever things are wont to fall out in the battle, and to punish severely
those whom they found backward, lazy, or negligent of their discipline. Which
makes me the less to wonder at the strange and almost incredible victories
achieved by either of them, the Jews driving out before them on every side,
people that for their numbers were as the stars of heaven; for their strength
were as Giants the sons of Anak; and for their fortifications, had Cities
with walls as high as Heaven: and the Romans, in their period, growing from a
few sheophard-like Cottagers to be Lords and proud owners of almost all the
inhabitable World which was known unto them. For certainly, if ( Justinian, in
proem Institut.
leges and arma fraternizant) laws and arms be brothers, as an Emperor has
told us: their near alliance and equality ( nam doctor and miles
aequiperantur) consists not only in those four proportionals, which the Gloss
upon that place points at; but especially in that, both in the one and the
other, Omnes arts in meditatione consistunt.
there is no excellence attained but by exercise; no perfection but by
practice; which induces me to believe, (neither without reason nor authority)
that as the Israelites had Schools of Prophets at 1. Sam. 19.18.19.20. etc.
Naioth in Ramah; So they had (somewhere) of Soldiers too, for Non
exercebuntur vltra ad praelium, says Esaias 2.4 vulg.
Esaias: They shall not be exercised any longer to the battle: and non descent
vltra belligerare, They shall not learn to make war any more says Micah.
4.13.
Micah: By which different translations of the same original phrase, we may at
least, see this, that discere belligerare est exerceri ad praelium, to learn
to make war, is to be exercised, or prepared against the day of battle.

But supposing it uncertain of the Jews; It cannot be denied of the Romans,
whose Campus Martius was their Grammar School, and whose Camps were their
Universities; In the one they were taught pugnare to fight; in the other
bellare to make war: Rosinus Antiq. Romans lib. 6. ca. 11. Et Veget. de re
milit. lib 1. cap. 10.11.12. etc.
In the one they were brought up to run, to leap, Caesim and punctim ferire
ibid. Illud v^ro maius est quiddam, ordines seruare discunt, v^xillu^ sun^ in
tantis permixtionibus, in ipsa prolusione c^mita^tur; nec inter doctos aliquis
error existit, cum multitudinis sit tanta confusio.
to strike, to thrust, to defend, to shoot, to cast darts, to throw stones, to
swim, Atque omnes implere numeros. But in the other they were instructed ad
maius quiddam (as Veget tells us lib. 2. cap. 23.) somewhat further, namely to
keep their ranks, to fight in array, and in the greatest tumult and
confusion, not to forsake their Colors: there likewise (according to their
deferts, and the vacancie of the places) they commenced and were preferred to
be Serieants, Ensigns, Lieutenants, Captains, Ad opes etc. dignitates ordo
militiae, and Imperatoris iudicium co^sueuit euehere. Veget. lib. 2. c. 24. and
Lucanus lib. 6. de Scaeua Centurione.

Scaeua viro nomen, castrorum in plebe merebat. Ante feras Rhodani gentes; ibi
sanguine multo Promotus, latta^ longo gerit ordine vilem.


or what other offices and places of Command in their discipline were suitable
and correspondent to these. And when they were thus acquainted with terms of
Command; when they were thus enured to hardness, by watchings, spare diet,
and sleeping (according to the French proverb) a l'enseigne de l'estoille, at
the sign of the star; when they were thus accustomed to the use of their
weapons both defensive and offensive; then did they hold themselves more
assured with a few, than with infinite millions of such as either had never
seen, or never learned any thing, ( Sen. ep. 36.
elementares senes, Abecedary old men, (for Post quanta volueris stipendia
inexercitatus miles semper est Tyro. Veget. lib. 2. c. 23. Immo pro Tyronibus
etiam habiti qui diu in pace durarunt, quique pugnare longo tempore desierunt.
Idem lib. 3. c. 9. tum ij quoque qui homines nunqua^ viderunt vulnevari aut
occidi. ibid. cap. 10.
It is not time but exercise makes a soldier) whose greatest numbers have
always been noted to be rather exposed to slaughter, by disbanding and
breaking their array, than confident of victory by preserving inviolable that
discipline, which they never learned, or at least had not practiced. This
Pompey (though by the testimony of his enemy, one that knew better how to
overcome, than how to use the victory) found too true by experience, in the
battle of Pharsalia, where, though he had double the numbers of Caesar -- Lucan.
lib 7.
primo gentes orient coactae,
Innumeraeque vrbes, quantas in praelia nunquam
Exciuere manus: toto simul vtimur orb:
Quicquid signiferi comprensum limite Cycli
Sub noton, and Borean hominum sumus, arma mouemus.
yet knowing them to be not legionary soldiers, as Caesar's were, but a
mixture of barbarous nations, rather relying upon their multitude than their
discipline and valor; he wisely purposed to protract the war, and by robbing
his enemies both of sea and land to have wrested from them an unbloody victory;
but when he saw it no longer possible to withhold the untaught rage of
inexperienced men, from giving battle to Caesar -- stat cord gelato
Attonitus; -- his heart forsook him with fear and amazement, knowing upon how
unequal terms they met: and praesaging, that (which accordingly ensued)
they who were so hasty to fight, would be as headlong in their flight, so
loosing themselves, and discouraging others. And indeed, what could a man
expect at their hands, who howsoever rich in clothes, yet base and effaeminate
in spirit, are not able to (...)? Lu^i^n. (...).
sustain thirst, and heat, and dust, trembles to hear of an enemy, are
amazed at his presence, swound at the sight of blood, and die before they come
within the reach of their Artillery?

How much better that Militiae art^fex. Flor. lib. 1. cap. 18.
Master of war, Tullus Hostilius? who to set an edge upon Courage, that it
might cut even whetstones, did ordain (which was with much ear and jealousy
observed, during the flourishing estate of that Republicke) that not only
there should be a general survey of all the foot and horse once in a year,
Liu. Decad. 1. lib. 9.
at what time they should be transported beyond Tyber, and there mustered;
Polyb. lib. 10.
but that at home and abroad, in the City, and in hibernis and castris, in
their garrisons and camps, they should be daily exercised, as well, viritim,
man by man, as in acie, in array of battle; knowing that Veget. lib. 1. c. 1.
scientia rei bellicae dimicandi nutrit audaciam; Nemo facere metuit, quod se
been didicisse confidit, knowledge how to do, adds to the boldness and
willingness of doing, and by familiarity with danger, the fear of it, at
length grows obsolete: whereas on the contrary side, Cassiodor. lib. 1.
variar. c. 40.
Animos subito ad arma non erigunt, nisi qui se ad ipsa idoneos, praemissa
exercitatione confidunt, there is no man can with cheerefulnes and alacrity
undertake that, whereunto he knows himself unfit, for want of skill and
practice.

I have, in mine own intentions, confined my self, for foreign instances,
within the history of the Romans, or else I should with much difficulty
forbear, to give the ancient Graecians their due commendations in this
respect; especially the Plutarch. in vita Lyc^rgi.
Lacedaemonians, whose very Children from seven years old and upward, were
distributed under such as were in stead of Captains, commanding and
instructing them; wherein they took so great pride and glory, that Tusculan.
5.^
Tully reports with wonder, what he had there seen amongst them; Adolescentiu^
greges Lacedaemone vidimus. Ipsi incredibili contentione certabant pugnis,
calcibus, vnguibus, morsu denique, vt exanimarentur priusquam se victos
faterentur. We saw (says he) in Lacedaemon, troops of young men, who with
incredible fiercenes, fought with fists, heels, nails, nay with their teeth;
in so much that they had rather dye than confess themselves vanquished: And
certainly where such sparks were in boys, we must needs suppose bright
flames in men of more ripe age.

But I dare, as now, wade no further in this argument, least I should be cut
of, as he that had made a long oration in the praise of Hercules, with a Quis
vnquam vituperauit? who ever dispraised him? I may not flatter; although this
City, this honorable City, (who, in this respect, I hope, will prove to all
her sisters of this Empire, as Jason to his fellows, of whom the Apollon.
Argonaut. lib. 1. ver. 363.
Poet: (...).
As soon as he had spoken and counseled, he was the first that put it in
execution, and other were moved and swayed by his example:) have in a short
time brought forth (not without labor and travail) two so like nurceries of
that noble profession, as that of the Artillery garden, and this of the
Military yard; yet certainly, the building of these walls does not want a
Nehem 4.
Sanballat to malign it, a Tobiah to mock at it: The one suggesting, that
this warlike humor is an incentiue to Rebellion; The other insulting over it,
with a Cui bono, to what purpose? But for the first, it seems they never read
that of Cassiodore, Cassiodor. lib. 5. ep. 3.
Viri fortes semper in pace modesti sunt, and iustitiam nimis diligunt qui arma
frequenter tractarunt: The more eminent valor that is in a man, the greater
modesty in time of peace; and they are the most zealous lovers of justice, that
have been most frequent in dangers: And for the latter, though I might answer
with Thucydides, that Praestat se ex vano metu and rumore, aduersus pericula
praeparare, quam ex nimia securitate and hostium contemptu imparatum ab ijs
opprimi; It is better out of a vain fear, and idle rumor, to be praepared
against dangers, than out of too great security and contempt of an enemy, to
be by him overtaken unawares: yet me thinks, in this rotten and decrepit age, I
cannot truly confess any fear to be vain, or any caution too much, the
spirit having spoken evidently, that in these (...), perilous times, men shall
be 2 Timothy 3.3.
(...), truce breakers, and traitors, Psalm. 55.20.
that lay their hands upon such as be at peace with them, and break their
covenants.

Were it half eighty eight years, sithence the year eighty eight, that we
might the more easily forget those sudden attempts: Or were there none of his
line left alive, that durst say, Maximilian Duke of Austrich.
he treated of agreement with Lewis the twelfth, K. of France, only to be
revenged of the seventeen injuries he had received of the French, whereas
indeed they had done him no wrong at all: Or were it not known among the
Turks, that there is such a place as England, accessible with ships and
galleys, the Diamond of the world, and worth, oh how many Rhodes and Malta'es!
Or had we not amongst us men, Gil^as.
aetatis atramentum, the ink of the times, baptized Jews (as Bernard speaks)
whose bodies are with us, and their hearts many hundred leagues hence: Or had
we never heard of a Sicilian vespro, or a Parisian massacre: Or were we assured
that the Romish Catholics amongst us, who take the oath of Allegiance, mean
as they say; or that such as refuse it, meant not more than they say: Were all
these things so, certainly our peace might be the more secure, and our
security less blameworthy than it is: And yet all this notwithstanding, Esa.
59.1.
The arm of the Lord is not shortened, but that, as he could raise up children
to Abraham, out of stones; so he can stir us up enemies from among our
friends, for Ego Dominus faciens pacem, and creans malum, says he, Esa. 45.7.
I am the Lord that make peace and create war: and therefore as he could Esa.
46.11.
whistle for a bird out of the East, so he can call a Beast out of any other
coast, that shall make all the forest tremble: Whereunto there shall need the
less allectiues, and inducements, because Riches without means to defend
them, are of themselves invitations to spoil; and therefore where Solomon
mentions the riches of his bed, Cant. 3.10.
whose pillars were of silver, the bottom gold, and the hangings purple; there
he also specifies a guard of threescore strong men, that were about it, of the
valiant men of Israel, they all handle the sword, and are expert in war,
every one has his sword upon his thigh, for the fear by night. For when 2
Reg. 20.13.
Merodach Baladan the King of Babel his Ambassadors, had seen Hezekiah his
treasures of silver, and gold, and spices, and precious ointments,
(notwithstanding they were showen his armory and provision for war as well as
these, yet) their hearts were so fired with the desire of them, and their
fingers did so itch at them, that within less than an hundred years after,
all that mass of treasure and riches, together with all his people, were
(according to the word of the LORD) carried by Ipsaque furem praeda vocat.
Ovid. and according to the Spanish proverb, Puerta abie^^a al santo tienta.
Nabuchadnezzar unto Babel.

It concerns us then, upon whom the Lord has so showred down temporal
blessings, that I may truly say of the Jews and Englishmen, (as one of
Demosthenes and Tully; Cicero effecit, ne Demosthenes esset solus orator,
Demosthenes ne Cicero primus foret) that they were the cause we could not be
the first people, whom God did so extraordinarily favor; but we are the cause,
that they cannot boast, to be the only people interested in his love: It
concerns us, I say, to look upon our own happiness with a careful and
jealous eye, which so many behold with envious eyes; not to suffer upon our
foreheads a brand, of men A transcurrente subacti. Lucan. lib. 7.
nullo negotio vincibilium, that Nah. 3.12.
are like figtrees with the first ripe fruit; if they be shaken, they shall even
fall into the mouth of the eater.

They that are in public places of trust, have a more public charge, and a
greater charge of the public laid upon them Leo ser. 1. in Anniuersar. A.
Det virtutem, qui contulit dignitatem, may he that gave them the dignity endue
them with ability to perform it: But you, beloved, who to this purpose bring
every man his own self, and that Willingly, fitting, and offering your selves
to stand in the gap when need shall require, and like those 300. Laconians that
made Xerxes his Army of 300000. make a stand, to stop the Cataclysme and
inundation of war whenever it shall happen; Good luck have you with your
honor, Number. 24 8.
you shall eat the Nations which are your foes, you shall bruise their bones and
shoot them through with your arrows, you shall never be ashamed when you
speak with your enemies in the gate for, Aug. lib. contra qui^que haereses.
Donabit certanti victoriam, qui certandi dedit audaciam, he shall give victory
to you when you fight, that first taught your fingers to fight and your hands
to make war.

Thus we have seen, and stood a while upon the highest step, that in this
respect, Man's wisdom is able to climb unto, namely to prepare the horse
against the day of battle, beyond this we cannot go; yet we may lift our eyes
to the hill of Sion, and there as our weak sight shall be enabled, look upon
that (...). Dionis. de mystis Theol cap. 1.
ouerbright darkness of his supreme and transcendent power, the prerogative
which he will not communicate to any creature, in disposing of victory
according to his own pleasure with means, without means, against means,
which is the second point obseruable in this Scripture.

But safety ( or victory) is of the Lord.

Which truth was never more frequently and freely acknowledged by any man than
by David, one that had the 2. Sam. 17.10.
heart of a Lion, one that had 2. Sam. 8.13.
gotten him a name in war, whose happy valor was grown into a Proverb, Saul
has slain his thousand, and David his ten thousand, yet Psalm. 44.
in God will I boast (says he) all the day long, and praise thy name for ever,
I will not trust in my bow, neither shall my sword save me, but thou have saved
us from our enemies, and have put them to shame that hated us; And still in
every victory this was his song of triumph, Psalm. 115.1.
Non nobis, Domine, non nobis; Not unto us Lord, not unto us; but to thy name
give the glory, for Psalm. 124.2.
If thou had not been on our side, when men rose up against us, they had
swallowed us up quick; Our shields, our swords, our spears, our bows, our
men, our horses, had all been prepared in vain against the day of battle,
except thou had gone forth with our armies, brought us into the strong
Cities, and lead us into Edom. So much is likewise confessed by Moses in that
song of thanksgiving, made for the deliverance of the Israelites from the
Egyptians, Exodus 15. and epitomized as it were in the third verse, The Lord is
a man of war, Jehovah is his name. The same song sang Joshua his successor,
by way of prophecy, Josh. 23.10. One man of you shall chase a thousand for the
Lord your God fights for you; and by way of history, in the Chap. following
at the 11. verse; And the men of Jericho fought against you, the Amorites, the
Perizzites, and the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and Girgashites, the Hiuites,
and the Iebusites, and I (says the Lord) delivered them into your hands: all
which acknowledgements, though differing in words, yet naturally resolve
themselves into this proposition that safety (or victory) is from the Lord, I
shall not need to use many words in this matter; None but a Goliath, a
Sennacharib, a Nebuchadnezzar, or Holofernes, will assume to themselves, and
their own arm the success of war; whether victory or discomfiture; But if
Exodus 17.11.
Israel prevailed when Moses (who was but a servant in the house) held up his
hands, and when he let them down Amalek prevailed; much more (will the Saints
sing loud upon their beds) 1 Chr. 29.11
Thine, O Lord, is greatness, and power, and glory, and victory, and praise,
and on the other side, Psalm. 44.10.
Thou make us turn back from the Adversary, and they which hate us, spoil
for themselves. Nor is this only to be understood, in cases where numbers to
numbers, and praeparation is opposed to praeparation, as though it were then
only in his power (...), who should be found too light in the balance, when
resolution meets with resolution, skill with skill, and strength with strength,
-- Lucan. lib. 1.
Infestisque obuia signis
Signa, pares aquilas, and pila minantia pilis.
No, with God, non est distantia there is no difference, 2. Chron. 14.11.
It is as easy with him, to help with few, as with many; If he hold up his
hand, Gedeons three hundred shall be enough for the Judge. 7.
Midianites and Amalekites that are in multitude as the Grashopers; Nay 2. Sam.
14.
Jonathan and his Armorbearer shall be too many for the whole Garrison of the
Philistims: If he let it fall, then 2. Chron. 24.24.
Permodicus numerus Syrorum, Though there came but a small company of the
Aramites, yet the Lord will deliver a mighty army of the Israelites into their
hands; Thus safety, (wheresoever and to whomsoever, and upon what odds so
ever) is from the Lord; and from him only, you see it confirmed, testimonio and
oris and operis, both by the testimony of his word and his work.

And certainly, if the men of this generation shall think his power less, or
less able to praeuaile against Babel, because of the building her a Tower*
Against the Anakim, because of their walled towns: against Goliath, because of
his Helmet and Brigandine of brass: or against Jerusalem it self, because of
her bulwarks: I Will say no more, but as our Savior to the Mat. 12.41.
Jews, so tell I them, the men of Nineveh shall rise in judgment against them,
and condemn them: for Nineveh has God set forth as an example of his
irresistable power, how weak the arm of flesh and blood, how foolish the
policy of man, and how vain the help of Princes is in comparison thereof.
Take the example into your consideration. Nineveh was, at that time, the seat
of the Empire of Assyria; and Esa. 10.
Ashur the staff in the hands of the Lord, the rod of his wrath, to correct
his people of Israel withal; The rod lifts it self against him that takes
it up, and the staff exalts it self as if it were no wood; By the power of
mine own hands have I done this, and by mine own wisdom because I am wise;
Is not Calno as Carchemish? Is not Hamath like Arpad? Is not Samaria like
Damascus? says this ( flagellum Dei,) this scourge of God, whom the Lord had
appointed to be as whips on Isreal's sides, and as thorns in her eyes:
Hereupon, the Allmighty, (who cannot abide that a Judge should commit murder
in doing justice, nor that a man should persecute him whom He had smitten, or
add to his sorrows whom He had wounded, Qui fruitur poena, ferus est,
legu^que videtur
Vindictam praestare sibi.)
determines as soon as he has accomplished his work upon Mount Sion and
Jerusalem, to visit the King of Ashur himself, and his proud looks; to take
his rod, and cast it into the fire. Yet before this come to pass, before the
Lord open the gates, and the Chaldaeans bring war and destruction like a
tempestuous whirlwinde upon Niniue; he graciously vouchsafes to send
faecialem a herehault, his prophet Nahum, who in his words and name, to the
comfort of his afflicted people, and the terror of the Israelitomastiges,
rattles such an alarm in their ears, as never any Prophet did, in so
warre-like terms, unto any people. And that you may see, how the LORD will
have safety attributed unto himself; and how his power derides the opposition
of man's strength, observe how particularly, and praecisely, he answers every
objection, and loses every knot, that hope her self, the last company of
affliction, could devise to knit: to which purpose, as Judge. 9.8.
Iotham in his parable, supposes trees to speak, so imagine, that you hear
HOPE, and TRVTH thus Dialogue-wise discoursing.

Surely (says HOPE) Nineveh shall not be destroyed, for it is Jonah 1.2.
a great City, GOD himself has taken knowledge of it, and honored it with that
attribute.

Yea but (says TRVTH) The Lord has given a commandment concerning her, that
no more of her name be sown. Nahum. 1.14.

HOPE. But God once spared this populous City, wherein there are more than six
score thousand persons that cannot discern between the right hand and the
left.


TRVTH. The Lord indeed is slow to anger, but great in power, and will not
surely clear the wicked. Cap. 1. ver. 3.


HOPE. We hear no rumors of war, we are at rest, and have peace with the
Nations round about us.


TRVTH. Though they be quiet, and also many, yet thus shall they be cut off,
when he shall pass by. Cap. 1.12.


HOPE. But if there be no remedy, let us not be beaten at home, stop the
passages, man the frontiers, keep the munition, watch the ways, let us make
our loins strong, and fortify our powers mightily. Cap. 2. ver. 1.


TRVTH. Yea, but The shields of the mighty men (that come against thee) are
made red; Their charets shall rage in the streets, they shall run to and fro
in the high ways, they shall shoot like the lightning. Cap. 2. v. 4.


HOPE. But Nineveh is of old like a poole of water, the river Tigris is in
stead of moates, ditches, trenches to her walls; and besides, she will
remember her strong men. cap. 2.8.


TRVTH. But, the gates of the rivers shall be opened, and the palace shall
melt; they shall flee away, stand, stand, shall they cry, but none shall look
back. cap. 2.8.


HOPE. But, Nineveh has multiplied her merchants as the stars of heaven,
there is no end of the store and glory of all her pleasant furniture, and
therefore she can hire succors from foreign countries.


TRVTH. Yea, but The Chaldaeans shall take the spoil of the silver and gold,
c. 2. v. 9. and for other Nations, they shall be so far from helping her,
that all they that look upon her, shall fly from her, and say, Nineveh is laid
waste, who will bemoane her? cap. 3. ver. 7.


HOPE. But Nineveh is the seat of the Empire, she can command to her aid,
many Countries, Provinces and Cities, that are under her dominion.


TRVTH. Yea but Is she better than No that was full of people, and was situate
among the rivers? Aethiopia and Egypt was her strength, and it was infinite,
Put and Lubin were her helpers, yet she was carried away, and went into
captivity. c. 3. v. 9.


HOPE. But Nineveh has store of munition, and is victualled for many years.


TRVTH. I, I, draw thee waters for the siege, fortify thy strong holds, go
into the clay, and tread the mortar, make strong the brickill, yet there the
fire shall devour thee, and the sword cut thee off. c. 3. v. 14, 15.


HOPE. But Nineveh has her walls an hundred foot high, so broad, that three
carts may go on a row at the top of them, furnished and fortified with
fifteen hundred bulwarks and towers.


TRVTH. Yet all her strong holds are but like fig trees with the first ripe
figs, if they be shaken, they shall even fall into the mouth of the eater. cap.
3. verse. 12.


HOPE. But Nineveh has in her the flower of the Princes, the chief of the
Nobility, and the greatest Captains and Commanders in the Empire.


TRVTH. Alas, Her crowned are as the Locusts, and her Captains are as the
great grasshoppers, which camp in the hedges in the cold day, but when the
Sun arises, they fly away, and the place is not known where they are. cap.
13. ver. 17.


HOPE. But Nineveh is full of ancient, experienced, brave Soldiers, such as
have been accustomed but to come and conquer.


TRVTH. Yea but peace and plenty has made them wanton, effaeminate, base,
drunken, coward-like Carpet-Knights: Behold, thy people in the midst of thee
are women, cap. 3. v. 13. Thy people, those that have been so renowned in
Arms, those that have achieved such victories, those that have made such
conquests: Thy people, those that have been the terror of the world, able to
affront Babylon, and to give her checke-mate in the height of her pride; Those
thy people, thy strong, martial, honored, feared people; In the midst of
thee, not thy pondus in vtile, thy dregs and off-scowring; not thy paisants and
husbandmen, not thy Artisans and Mecaniques; not they that are far remote
from the safety of thy walls and turrets; not they that dwell in thy skirts
and suburbs, but thy people in the midst of thee, in the place of greatest
eminence, security, and defense, Are women, proud as women, foolish and void
of counsel as women, fantastical and newfangled as women, delicate and
tender as women, fearful and coward-like as women, nice and effaeminate as
women, Deuteronomy. 28.36.
which never will venture to set the sole of their foot upon the ground for
their softnes and tenderness, the heart melts, and the knees smite together,
much pain is in the loins, and the faces of them all gather blackness.
Nahum. 2.10.


We now come to our selves again, and demand, whether after the light of so
great evidence, reflected upon us from the glass of this example, there can
any man be so stupid as to doubt, so impious as to deny, that all power to
work with means, without means, against means, belongs to the Lord of
Hosts? who has done, does, and will do whatsoever he lists, in heaven, on
earth, in the sea and all deep places: And therefore as the Elders in the
Revel. 4.10.
Revelation, throw down their crowns before the throne; so cast down your
arms, o ye mighty, your swords and shields, o ye valiant men of war, before
his foote-stoole; hang them up as trophies in his Temple with this inscription,
Psalm. 60.12.
Through God we will do valiantly, for he shall tread down our enemies under
our feet: But if he be not our help in the day of battle, what can these
advantage us, for victory over enemies, as safety from enemies is of the Lord.

But it may be, that as a Philosopher dissuading the too much fear of death,
made men preposterously to cast away their lives: and Physicians sometimes
seeking to comfort the heart, do inflame the liver; so we by fastening our
eyes thus long upon the transcendent and imperial power of God, have lost all
sight of the necessity of means, or second causes; and Illud idem, de
praescientia futuroru^ quidam, sed rectius.

(...),

(...).

(...),

(...).

Scire si liceret, quae debes subire

Et non subire; pulchru^ sit scire.

Sed si subire oportet, quae licet scire,

Quorsum scire? nam debes subire Antholog.

Which I thus Englished at the request of Master Doctor G.

If man might know the will he must undergo,
And sh^^nne it so; then it were good to know.
But if he undergo it, though he know it,
What boots him know it? he must undergo it.

begin to persuade our selves, that seeing it is all one with God, (as we
have heard) to help with many, or with few, to give victory to men armed, or
naked, to save with sword and shield, or without them, therefore all
preparation against the day of battle, all provision, munition, numbers,
experience and practice, are either needless or bootlesse; If the Lord will
help, he can do it without these, and then they are needless; or if he will
strike, there is neither security, nor succor in any of these; and then they
are bootlesse.

For answer whereunto we are to consider, that albeit the absolute power of God
be infinite, a matter (much rather than a Kings royal prerogative) not to be
quaestioned, nor disputed of, for (...), says Damasc. lib. 1. cap. 2.
Damascene, things incomprehensible, are likewise unspeakable, and (...).
Basil. de Spir. Sanct. c. 18. Similiter Naz. de Fill. orat. 1.
to be honored with silence; yet his actual or ordinary power is limited,
and, as it were, circumscribed by his will; so that as the first can do no more
than he will; so this does whatsoever he will, and therefore voluntas eius est
potest as eius, says in Luc. 5.
Ambrose, His will is his power; Now he being pleased to reveal thus much unto
us in Scripture, that it is his will ordinarily to work by ordinary means,
and secondary causes, Ose 2.15.
himself to hear the heavens, the heavens to hear the earth, the earth to
hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil, and they to hear Israel,
certainly they that shall reason from his posse to his velle, from his power to
his will, are like those deceitful, or unlearned Physicians, who as Aug. de
bono persevere. cap. 21.
Augustine says, do so apply vtile medicamentum, a plaster wholesome in it
self, vt aut non prosit, aut obsit, that it shall either do no good, or a
great deal of harm; for with as much probability, might we omit both
ploughing and sowing, and expect Manna from heaven, because the LORD once fed
the Israelites with it; or abstain from food, because Moses fasted forty
days; or gape till the Ravens feed us, because they once did so to Elias; or
wait till an Ass counsel us, because Balaams Ass advised his master; as
expect that the Lord should give us victory, with sounding of Rams horns, or
breaking of pitchers, that is to stand still only, and behold what the Lord
will do for us: Miracles were they; and miraculous would this be, and
therefore Conuenit nunc quarere quemadmodum Deus ^nstituit naturasrerum, non
quid in eis ad miraculum suae potentiae velit operari. Aug. lib. 2. super Genesis
c. 1.
not to be looked for but in cases of necessity; our Savior himself when he
was to ascend into heaven, having chosen Mount Oliuet for the place, from
whence, that (as one says) Quamdiu nature ae vis inseruire potuit, miraculo non
vteretur, wherein the power of nature could help him, he might not work a
miracle: Nor is this any disparagement to his might, whom we acknowledge to be
(...) solely sufficient by his immediate word to govern all things, as well as
he was to create them; but rather an honor to himself, and to his creatures;
to himself, for beating out the golden ingot of his providence, into so
admirable a chain of causes, perplexed, folded, and linked one within another:
And to his Creatures in Dignationis enim est, non necessitatis.
daigning them to be Co-workers with him, that as he is the principal agent,
so they may have employment under him, wherewith to busy themselves, that they
fall not upon that just reprehension, Quid statis hic totum diem otiosi, why
stand ye here all the day idle? It rests then, that (as Hieron cont. Lucifer.
Hierom speaks truly, though to another point), Singulorum priuilegia legem
efficere non possunt, the privileges of singular and special persons, make no
common rule for all men in general: What God has been pleased to do at
sometimes, and what he is able to do at all times, we may look upon for our
comfort, but not rely upon for our encouragement to neglect the ordinary
means. For within these limits have they walked, to whom the secret of the
Lord has been revealed, and whose feet have been guided the right way, by
the lantern of his word.

Jacob had Gods promise, for the superiority over his brother Esau; and David
was abundantly secured of Gods protection from Saul, and all his other enemies;
yet for all that, they were content to use the best means they could, watching
all opportunities, redeeming all occasions, sometimes flying, sometimes
entreating, sometimes buying their peace, though always assured, that safety
is from the Lord, and by particular promises fully persuaded, that he would
deliver their souls from death, and their dearlings from the power of the
lion. Act 27.
Paul's voyage by sea, is known even to the Barbarians, so is his danger, and
the special revelation he had for the deliverance of himself and all his
company: And what then? did that make the Mariners neglect to (...). v. 28.
sound, to v. 29.
cast anchors, to v. 38.
lighten the ship, to v. 40.
wey anchors, to v. 40.
hoyse sails, nay such as could, to swim first to land, and such as could
not swim, to save themselves on bords and other pieces of the ship? No; for
he knew, that Aug. de Ciuit. Dei, lib. 16. c. 19.
si periculum quantum cauere possumus non cauemus, magis tentamus Deum, quam
speramus in Deo, if we labor not to avoid danger and peril, as much as we
can, in how deplored and desperate cases soever, we rather tempt God indeed,
than trust in God. But above all, we have an evident and an eminent example
hereof, in her whom all generations shall call blessed, the Virgin Mother of
our Savior, who though she had laid up in her heart, all the sayings, of the
Angel at the Annuntiation, of Elizabeth at her visitation, of Simeon and Annah
at her purification; yet when the Angel of the LORD appeared unto Joseph in a
dream, and bad him take that sweet babe, and his blessed mother, and flee into
Egypt, because Herod sought the Child to destroy it: did she reason against
her husbands resolution, and plead Gods eternal decree, or her ((...)) full
persuasion, and assured belief thereof against his purpose? Nothing less:
She thought not her self wiser than God in his commanding, than her husband
in his obedience: She was not like the Judge. 19.28.
Levites wife that answered not; nor like Genesis 19.16.
Lots wife that departed unwillingly* but as Ruth. 1.16.
Ruth to Naomi her mother in law, so answered her heart to Joseph, I will not
leave thee nor depart from thee, but whither thou go, I will go, I know the
LORD, certain and firm, in the end and accomplishment of his promise; I know
not the means, by which he has determined to effect it, and therefore, Surge,
eamus, Arise, let us go hence.

Thus all the servants of God, have one of their eyes fastened upon Ezech. 1.
and 10.
Ezechiel his Cherubims, and the other upon his wheels: their hearts are
reposed upon Gods mercy; but their hands are stretched out unto all that they
shall find to do; when Hezekiah is sick, 2 Reg. 20.7.
though the Prophet Isaiah be sent unto him with a promise of recovery, yet he
must take a lump of dry figs, and lay it upon the sore, and therefore means
must be used; But though the watchman stand upon the walls, yet Psalm. 127.1.
except the Lord keep the City, he watches but in vain, and therefore
secondary causes only must not be relied upon, nor a sacrifice offered unto our
nets, nor incense burnt unto our yarne: The horse is praepared against the day
of battle, there (as I said at the first) is man's providence, but safety is of
the Lord, there is his power and praerogatiue. Mat. 17.21.
Give unto Caesar, that which is Caesar's, and to God that which is Gods.

It was the Spartane resolution, admota manu fortunam invocare, alitur vitium
viuitque legendo. Dum medicas adhibere manus ad vulnera pastor

Abnegat, and meliora Deos sedet omnia poscens. Virg. Georg. 3.


to do their best, and then to ask help from fortune; we have a more sure
word, whereunto you shall do well to take heed, as to a light shining in dark
places, namely that according to Ioabs counsel to his brother Abishai, 2 Samuel
10.12.
We be strong and valiant for our people, and for the Cities of our God, and
let the Lord do that which is good in his eyes: and as the builders of
Jerusalem Neh. 4.17.
did the work with one hand, and held the sword with the other; so let one of
our hands be lifted up against our enemies, and the other unto our God: --
precibusque Sciens, volens, ad me detorsi: scripsit ^n^m minas, Ovid.
manus iam fortiter add.
that words and blows, and hands and hearts, be severally employed about their
proper business; for as it is true on the one side, Amos 4.7.
partem super quam non pluit Dominus arescere, that the piece which is not
rained upon does parch and wither away; so on the other side, what Plut. in
lib. Maxim cum princip. viris philosopho esse disputand.
Plutarch spoke of Philosophy, is much more true of the Allmighty, that he
has not, like a statuary, made men simulacra in sua perpetuo haerentia basi,
images cleaving and perpetually growing to their basis and foundation, but
active, judicious, full of counsel, invention, and greatness of mind, and
most ready to execute whatsoever they shall be, by them, spurred and provoked
unto; running sometimes into those dangers and troubles, Es. 47.11.
quorum ortu^ nesciuerunt, whose original or cause they do not understand; but
most an end, like Sampson, pulling upon their own heads, ruin and
destruction, either through contempt, or neglect of the means, which if
maturely applied, might have been antidotes and defensatiues against those
poisons. For conclusion of this point, Judge 7.20.
The sword of the Lord, and of Gedeon, of the one as concha the fountain and
original; of the other, as canalis the stream and conduit of safety and
victory, let be the meditation, the cry, the confidence, of all those, who are,
or shall be like horses praepared against the day of battle.

I would I might here make an end, that after so calm and serene a day, my
sun might not set in a cloud; but as our Savior says, Luc. 19.40.
If these should hold their tongues, the stones would cry; So it being the
property of light Ioh. 3.20.
(...), to reprove darkness: Although I should be silent, yet your
forwardnes, and willing offering your selves, would accuse and convince others,
whom it concerns as much, or more, than you, of a kind of namelesse sloth or
improuidence, which has insensibly emasculated and softened their hearts,
making them less careful to prevent, less able to resist, whenever nation
shall rise against nation, or kingdom against kingdom.

It has been said of old, Many a good father has had an evil son; I am
sure that we have seen three of the best mothers, peace, prosperity, and
plenty, bring forth such monstrous and abhorred issues, as we have just cause
to wish, Job 3.16.
the knees had never praeuented, but that they had been hid as untimely
births, or as infants which have not seen the light: Peace has brought forth
(...), injustice: Prosperity (...), impiety: and Plenty (...), effaeminate
wantonness: All we say, is that It is pity fair weather should ever do harm,
yet we feel our selves thereby melted into pleasure, and the sinews of our
strength dissolved by little and little; every private man's vices spreading the
infection; so that it may justly be feared that at length the whole body
politic will become corrupted. (...)
(...).
And surely, though the two first may cause the decay of a Commonwealth, as
much as the last, yet experience has ever found this to be the most infallible
and immediate forerunner, nutantis and iamiam casuri imperij, of a declining
and tottering Empire, ready to fall by the least impulsion, or concussion.

Rome, to the top of whose greatness Ammian. Marcell. de Amphicheatro.
aegre visio humana conscendit, scarce any humane sight could reach Moribus
ant^quis res stat R^mana, virisque.
, stood ever fast and victorious, as long as they kept their rigid discipline,
and ancient customs inviolable; as long as they either had war with other
Nations, as in the time of the Consulls; or were prepared for war, as it is
said of Augustus, that when the Temple of Ianus was shut, he kept forty legions
in pay: But afterward when want of foreign enemies made her study and apply
her self to the Persian luxury and delicacies; when she began to have Nero'es
and Heliogabali to her Emperors, she did forthwith not descend, but tumble
down headlong from her greatness, to that despicable and contemned estate,
whence she was never, never will be able to raise her self. As much might be
said of the Grecian Empire, the Persian Monarchy, and all other Estates of
whom there is now nothing to be seen, but the dust and rubbish. -- Nam caetera
regna
Luxuries vitijs, odijsque superbia vertit.
Unhappy men are always made in respect of their sins, not accessaries, but
principalls in their own destruction; they become bloody Pharaohs to
themselves, in killing the male children, and saving the faemales, in
destroying or discountenancing masculine virtues, and nourishing effaeminate
baseness; Diuidimus muros, and moenia pandimus vrbis.
Though not with their hands, yet by these means and manners, they disarme
themselves of their defense, and are exposed to the uttermost of all injuries
and perils. What could the Philistims have devised more dangerously against
the Israelites? though they made them fly from place to place, and 1 Samuel 13.6.
hide themselves in caves, and in rocks, and in holds, and in towers, and in
pits, yet there was hope that they might rally and meet together, and
(according to Demosthenes saying of himself) though they once ran away,
afterward fight again; But when they had left them never a Smith in all
Israel, so that among forty thousand men there was neither sword nor spear,
then they thought they had them sure enough, for ever being able to lift up
their hands, or make resistance against them.

The same policy did Sesostris use against the Egyptians, whose country being
great, and their numbers infinite, to keep them quiet he thought it his best
course to (...).
impose upon women the works of men, and upon men the works of women,
constrayning the men to sit at home, and the women to go abroad; the men to
spin, the women to buy and sell; the men to bear burdens on their heads, the
women on their shoulders; the men to wear double garments against the cold,
the women single ones: the men to wear long hair, the women short; (...).
(let me spare the translation of this unnaturally translated gesture:) And
wherefore all this? (...). Herodot. lib. 2. and Nymphid. lib. 13. (...).
Citatur a Scholiast. in Sophoc. (...).
hoping that by these means and customs, he should in time weane them from
all man-like thoughts and exercise of Arms, and make them willingly and gladly
yield their necks unto that yoke of slavery, which he knew it impossible any
free spirit could bear.

And what less or what other thing do they, who not from any outward
compulsion, but merely out of their own native and inbred vices, softness,
security, wantonness, and effaeminatnesse with the help of that Devil
pleasure, Sil. Ital. li. 15.
Quippe nec ira Deum tantum, nec tela, nec hosts,
Quantum sola noces animis illapsa voluptas;
do vn-man themselves, and change not their shapes only, as Circe, but the
habits of their souls, as if their bodies were moved and actuated by the
spirits of Peacockes, Apes, Asses. Were Solomon alive, in these our times, and
should change Iudaea for England, he could not say as once he did, Eccles. 7.30.
I have found one man amongst a thousand, but a woman amongst them all have I
not found, more truly might he say, I have found a thousand women (the vices
and sins of so many) in the shape of one man, but a man, indeed, have I not
found; the Lord of Hosts has made good his word, Esa. 13.12.
I will make a man more precious, than fine gold, even a man above the wedge of
gold of Ophir.

What this may portend, I do not, I dare not, know; sure I am, that a little
before the taking and sacking of Jericho, Rahab confessed of the inhabitants
thereof Josh. 2.11.
Elanguit cor nostru^, nec remansit in nobis spiritus, that their hearts did
faint, and there remained no more courage in any of them: A little before the
conquest of Egypt, Isa. 19.3.
Isay prophesied, Et concidet spiritus Aegypti in medio, that the spirit of
Egypt should fail in the midst of her; A little before the captivity of
the Jews, the Lord foretold, that he would take away from Judah and Jerusalem,
Esa. 3.2.3.
the strong man, and the man of war, the captain of fifty, and the honorable
person. And whenever he meant to punish his people, by the sword of the enemy,
he sent faintnes into their hearts in the land of their enemies, that the sound
of a shaken leaf did chase them, and they fled as flying from a sword, and
they fell when none pursued, Leuit. 26.36.

It is only known unto God, whose eye sees all secrets, whether Moab and
England sinning in the same degree, shall be punished in the same degree, or
whether he will for three transgressions punish Damascus, and excuse Judah for
four; yet far be it from us, on the other side, to think that God does Aug.
de ciuitat. Dei. li. 3. c. 2.
punire periuria Troiana, amare Romana, Revenge Trojan, and love Roman
periuries: Thus much we may say: The Math 16.3.
Jews could judge of the weather by the redness of the skies: the Mat. 24.32.
husbandman of the neerenesse of Summer, by the figge-trees putting forth her
leaves; 1. Sam 20.
David knew what Jonathan meant by the shooting of his arrows: 1. Reg. 18.44.
Eliah understood there was rain toward, when he heard of a cloud no bigger
than a man's hand: And he is but a simple Physician, who cannot find the plague
in one infected, before the Carbuncle appear; nor the pleurisy, till the
bag come up; nor the dropsy till the belly swell; Easily therefore may the
Seers of Israel, whose eyes are in their heads, The watchmen of Judah that
stand upon the walls, give (...), prognosticating or forerunning signs of
things which already have their beginning; Now sin and punishment, as they
have one word in the original, so they both run from the slip together, and
when we see the one, we may be sure the other is not far behind, Senec. Ita
Aeschyl.

(...) etc. in Pers.


Sequitur superbos vltor a tergo deus: Especially when we see this oily sin of
sensuality ouer-run whole countries: we may justly suspect it not only as an
adversary to fight against us, but even as a Messenger to bring us tidings of
evil, and that not far distant or much remote; but as the Messengers to Job,
one trod upon the heels of another, Job. 1.18.
Adhuc loquebatur ille, and ecce alius intrauit, while he yet spoke, behold
there came another; so while effaeminate, lascivious, nice and delicate
wantonness, is speaking, delivering it is message and seducing men to pleasures
and lasciuiousnes, ecce supervenit alius, behold there comes another, the
punishment it self, whereunto that was a praeparatiue, namely destruction,
ruin, and remediless desolation.

Marcus Aurelius Probus (an Emperor of Rome, Cuius nomen resipsa sequebatur.
whose name was not better than himself) was heard to say, breui milites
minime necessarios fore, cum desint hosts, that shortly there would be no use
of soldiers, for want of enemies; but ea vox plurimum obfuit, says one,
Pomp. Laetus.
That word did a great deal of harm, nay exitio fuit, says Eutrop. Breuiar.
lib. 9.
another, it cost him his life, for he was shortly after slain by the
soldiers in a tumult at Sirmium, the place where he was borne.

We have many, that with less cause, but with more confidence think
Soldiers the most unnecessary implement that can be in a quiet and peaceable
government; some do not let to say so, but ea vox plurimum obest, that speech
does much harm, for Veget. in Prolog. lib. 3.
Qui desiderat pacem praeparet bellum, He that desires peace, let him praepare
for war; and worthily does De legib. lib. 1.
Plato commend the laws of the Cretans so made, tanqua^ homines semper parati
essent ad bellum, atque in procinctu dimicandi consisteret, as if men ought
always to be ready for war, and should continually stand in array of battle
against their enemies.

It is but a weak retreat for humane frailty, to defend improuidence with
orbis pacatus, the peace of all the world, and want of enemies; Jerusalem is
removed, says the Lament. 1.8.
Prophet, why? quia peccatum peccanit, because she has sinned grievously; As
long as transgressions are multiplied, foes will be found: If Solomon sin, 1
Reg. 11.
Hadad and Rezon shall be stirred up against him. Inquire says Judith. 5.
Achior to Holofernes, whether this people have committed any error, or sinned
against their God; and then let us go up, and we shall overcome them, for that
shall be their ruin. Accordingly whereunto, a Noble Countryman of ours, did
wisely and soberly answer a petulant Frenchman, who at the loss of Callis,
seeing him praepare homeward, ask't him when he thought the English would
return into France again: Apotheg. Gall. libellus, page 72.
When (quoth he) the sins of the French shall be more grievous than ours: most
worthily and Christian-like; for vbi praeponderat iniquitas, ibi exaltabitur
iudicium, where wickedness presses down as low as the center, there judgment
shall be exalted as high as heaven. O then beloved, as we hope to be accounted
loyal subjects to our KING, let us shake off sin that hangs on so fast; for
1 Samuel 12.25.
If we do wickedly we shall perish both we and our King. As we love (that which
ought to be dearest unto us of any earthly thing) our Country, let us forsake
all unrighteousness, for Ezech. 12.19.
desolabitur terra a multitudine sua, propter iniquitates omnium qui habitant
in ea, the land shall be laid wast, because of the iniquity of them that dwell
therein: As we desire the protection of him, who alone is able to keep us safe
under the shadow of his wings, let us depart from that which is abominable in
his sight, for Wisd 1.3.
peruersae cogitationes separant a Deo, evil thoughts separate from God: But
above all the rest, let our own reason praeuaile with us, if we be reasonable
men, to abandon this sin, shall I say? or punishment of sin? or both? I mean,
that frozen and benumbed senselessnes of approaching danger; since God has
given us peace on all sides, let us seek to continue our peace by all means.
Bosquier. Veg. Christian. lib. 6. p. 378.
Henry the fourth late King of France was heard to say, that he had in his
Exchequer, a hundred thousand horsemen, armed, mounted, and lodged: But we
should hold it happiness and security enough for us ((...)) if we could truly
say we had but half so many footmen; so they were not such as Lampridius
calls milites ostensionales, soldiers for show or pomp; such as can wear
their swords in great scarfes and rich cariages; for any other behoof, as
useful as Alcinous his golden dogs were for the defense of his house: (...),
(...).
But such as David's Captains were, 1 Chr. 12.8, 14.
valiant men of war, men of arms, apt for battle, which could handle the
spear and shield, one of the least could resist an hundred, and the greatest a
thousand, like the fifty thousand of the tribe of Zebulon, which could set the
battle in array, and non in duplici cord, and were not of a double heart; a
praise which I could wish our Countrymen especially ambitious of, because elder
times have had too many, and I fear future times shall not want some, who like
Hercules his Priest (in S. Aug.) are able alone to play a game at tables,
casting for themselves with the right hand, and for their supposed adversaries
with the left. Now I conclude, and wind up all in a word; If in the truth of
your hearts (for alium notorem non dabo, I desire no other judges) you be
persuaded of the lawfulness of a necessary war, of your general obligation to
the defense of your country, of the necessity of being exercised and trained
up to military discipline; and lastly, if you be touched with a serious
detestation of these baser and effaeminate Sueton. in Ner. quales describit
C^em. Alexand. Paed. lib. 3. c. 11. (...). and (...).
virorum faeminae, faeminarum viri, men amongst women, and women amongst men,
Virgil. Aeneid. lib. 9. vt and Homer. (...). and n. (...).
O vere Phrygiae, (neque enim Phryges) ite per alta
Dindyma. -- sinite arma viris and cedite ferro.
Then take courage unto your selves, be neither amazed nor dismayed with the
mockes of such as sit in the seat of scorners, run not with the multitude to
do evil; the readiness and resolution of your hearts has made you Martyrs in
your will and affection, and having said so, I shall need to add no more to
your praise. Look down with sorrow and pity, upon the many thousands that
march under Mindyrides his colors, that Senec. de ira lib. 2. c. 25. Idem
saepe questu^ est, quod folijs r^s^ duplicatis incubuisset.
Epicurean Sybarite, who complained that his arms aked with seeing one dig;
and his sides were hurt with lying upon the doubled leaves of a rose; fie upon
these strutting peacocks, we have spit seven times in their faces, yet they
will not be ashamed.

Be in your selves, and may your example encourage others to be praepared
against the day of battle, and accustomed to the meditation of war, for
Cassiodor. lib. 1. page 39. Ars bellandi, si non praeluditur, cum fuerit
necessaria, non habetur. ibid.
Primordia cuncta pauida sunt, and aliter timiditas non tollitur, nisi quum
rebus necessarijs nouitas abrogatur; The first beginnings of all things have in
them a certain kind of fear, which is not banished but by being made familiar
with them. Labor (as occasion shall serve) to pluck up again, the sunk and
drowned honor of our Country; and that it may not be the punishment of a
slothful Nation, Aul. G^ll. noct. Attic. lib. 10. c. 8. and Fr^nt. Stratagem.
l. 4. c. 1.
which was once of a slothful soldier, to be let blood, Greg. Naz. car. ad
Nicob. Pat. ver. 104.
-- (...)
(...).
let every opportunity be waited, and all means of prevention willingly
embraced.

Lastly, when we have gone as far as we can, in praeparing the horse against
the day of battle, yet considering that safety, or victory is of the Lord, let
us repair unto him for help, and not Psalm. 20 7.
trust in charets or horses, for they are Psalm. 33.17.
counted but vain things to save a man, and in much humility refer our
selves to his good pleasure, saying with Ioab, 2 Samuel 10.12. Be strong and let
us be valiant for our people, and for the Cities of our God; and let the Lord
do that which is good in his own eyes.

Now to Jehovah, the Allmighty King of Kings, and Lord of hosts, and to his
victorious son Christ Jesus, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, together with
the Holy Ghost, the Communion of them both, the inspirer of all virtue and true
valor, be power, majesty, might, and dominion ascribed, now and for evermore.
AMEN.

FINIS.

