An example of Gods judgment shew^ upon two Children borne in high Dutch La^
in the City of Lutssolof, the first day of Iulie. and translated out of Dutche
into English the 6. November last by Cornelius Pet.



To the Reader.
DEerly beloved Brethren like as daily we see the wunderous woorks of GOD, to
advertise us to the amendment of our sinful wicked and detestable lives, be
fore he does plague us, like as alwaise he is good and merciful and does not
punish us according unto our deserts, but sends us first Signs and tokes to
admo^ish us of his ire which we so rightly deferne for our so little regarding
and esteeming of his most holy word and gospel. But we daily neglecting and
not regarding the same.

He therefore has not only sent hydeous Monsters and fearful Signs, unto
those where they were borne and seen: but as well unto us, yea and rather unto us
because we having the sincere Doctrine and Gospel of Christ so unfeignedly
preached yea so ernestly set forth and so diligently vtterd, and yet we
nothing regard ye same. But like stubburn and obstinate Children run hedlong
into our damnation.

Wherefore we have to give the greater account of the time which we have spent
(when we shall come and appeer before the Judgment seat of GOD the most
rightful Judge) wherefore deerly belouid let us not be like those of Sodom,
Gomorra, Jerusalem, and many other Cities which would not esteem of the tokens
and signs which God sent the^.

But let us repent with those of Niniuie, and pray unto GOD for mercy and
humble our selves before him then will he not extend his wrath upon us* but be
merciful unto us.

The Description of two strange Children.
THis Child (deerly Belooued, which you see figured before the here, was born
the day and yeet a boon written, being in alll proportion as thou see it
here presented. The head of ye said Child was to be compared in all points like
unto a Bishops Miter, In all other points well proportioned save the hands which
were as the Picture does represent the right hand a sword, and ye left hand a
rod, the other points firmable as a Child ought to be, but ye Coullour of this
Child was to be compared unto a Negro, or Blackmore, (the which Child) lived
the space of three days, in the which days it did most wunderously speak
these words following.

Be the wars of men not yet done? Make peace, Make peace in all Cuntries for
the LORD will come and punish the Earth, with Sword and Rod, as my hands do
represent. And also he said amend you in all Cuntries for there will such a
mortality come, yea such a sudain death that one shall say unto an other / Oh,
Brother where have you been that you are not dead? These were the words of the
first Child, which as I have said before is here portraturde unto thee.
Therefore repent of thy former offenses.

The Description of the other Child.

The description of the other Child.
THe other Childemy belooued / had this proportion, that is to say. It had two
heads in good form, but that it was upon the one side very black / like as
the other was. And the other white, and as good c^^^let as may be, and nothing
to be seen in the proportion that seemed strange, but only black and white.
This other Child lived also three days. It did ^^^ure rest but contiou^sly
did cry and weep and made great lamentation. In so much that every one Lamented
to see this pitious spectakle, and the third day they both dyed.

These Children were borne in Lutsolof, four miles distant from Sir^^^rach, in
the which Cittye, the same was first published, to the great comfort of the
Godly / and to the wicked a terror and grief of mind.

The Father of these Children was named Baltus Maler, and the Mother that hare
them / had to name Katherin Peeters, who was of the age of fortye years when
she bare them.

At the time of their death, fell such a grievous Plague amongst them of the
City: that there dyed in nine days two thousand persons. Whereof some dyed
sitting at meat, and with meat in their mouths. And the (...) was of so much
abundance that it perished upon the Ground for lack of those that should gather
it in for the people lay in ye streets as moss or dirt, and there durst none
gather it in.

There have some supposed this to be but lies and fables. but indeed they are
the very handy woorks of God and I would wish those Unbelievers to be
advertised from their unbelief and forsake their sins, least when it is to
late they do repent.

We have a fearful beginning amongst us of Louin, of Mastreicht of Aken, at
Namure, at Sitteret, and at Antwerp, where the People dyed of the plague by
heaps, for there has dyed of the plague commonly three hundred a week.

Thus wishing you Christian Brethren to take example by our plagues to receive
the glorious Gospel of our Lord and forsake your sins, I bid you Farwell.

Imprinted at London for William Bartlet and are to be sold at S. Magnus
corner by Richard Ballard.


