Pietatis Lachrymae. TEARS of devotion.

Temporis praeteriti fructus est compunctio, futuri flos est deuotio.

-- Bernard. LONDON, Printed by Edward Allde, and are to be sold at the long
shop under S. Mildreds Church in the Poultrey. 1602.

To the Right worshipful, learned and virtuous, Sir Thomas Kitson Knight:
earthes good here, and Heavens bliss hereafter.
THere was a world (but now that world is not,)
When Virtue was within men's hearts inroulde:
But now that world is almost clean forgot,
For vildest things do men's affections hold.
There was a time (but now, more grief, it is not)
When men (though mortal) seemed half divine:
There was a golden age, that age forgot,
When men (in charity) not wealth did shine.
There was a time when men relieved the poor,
But he is now counted wise that keeps his own:
There was a time, when men did heaven implore,
But now who thinks of heaven is scarcely known.
There was a tim^ when most men lived in God,
And men's perfections all on high were placed:
But now in Mammon most men have abode,
Earth is preferred fore heaven, and Saints disgraced.
But in that soul who heaven does only mind,
Deuinest wisdom will for ever dwell:
Jf such a soul in thee she cannot find,
Where such a soul to find J cannot tell.
For nothing can thy soul from comfort sever,
In him that bought thee dear, and loved thee ever.
Your Worships ever most humbly devoted William Euans.

To the Right worshipful and no less virtuous Lady, the Lady Elizabeth
Kitson, wife to Sir Thomas Kitson Knight: Earthes prosperity, and Caelestiall
happiness.
EXpound Tabithai, and it is Dorcas name,
And Dorcas is a Roe-bucke sharp of eye:
In this respect Tabithai won her fame,
That from the earth her soul did pierce the sky.
By faithes pure work true graces quallity,
Her mortal life won immortality.
Is there none like Tabithai? God forbid,
Yes some there are, but of those some too few:
Many make show, but do not as she did,
But give me leave to give your deeds their due.
Many have faith, no works, their faith is vain:
Your works approve Tabithai lives again.
From the admirer of your virtues. William Euans.

In Authorem.
INspired souls breath but the thoughts of bliss,
Whose humble hearts in heaven are only placed
and while the worldlings run their course amiss,
In Graces eyes, are gracious spirits graced.
So may I say of that which here I see,
Drawn from the fountain of a heavenly spring:
Where those best humors always nourisht be,
That make the soul of heavenly comforts sing.
Continue therefore this good course of thine,
And God will bless, and his blessed love thee:
And such as know what comforts are divine,
Will smile at them, that blindely will reprove thee.
And for my self, I find thy labors such,
I cannot love nor praise thy work too much.
Nich. Breton Gent.

In eundem.
WIth some fantastic foolish brain or other,
(Causles) thy weeping lines may be disgraced
While wisdoms wit their folly does discover,
And thou thereby in better thoughts be placed.
Thy lines (no Panimne toys) thy Text divine,
Exhales such darkning clouds that Sun may shine.
Go on to weep, and weeping laugh at those,
That do the pangs of thy sick soul despise:
While thou do weeping win, they laughing lose,
The crown that is ordained for thy sad eyes.
While I go sit me down, and musing wonder,
To see thy heart for sin nigh torn asunder.
Sweet is the Music that thy passion sings,
A high-fetcht note surpassing Ela's strain:
Sucked from the waters of those Hesbon springs,
That rise and flow, to never ebb again.
Who would not (taught by thee) do his endeavor?
Learn so to weep, that he may live for ever.
Phil. Holland Gent.

An Introduction:
A Way vain youth that studies naught but praise
The souls Inchauntrix, and the woe to man:
When sharpest theme in weeping Oadases,
Is all too little wretch do what thou can.
For to manure the odor of thy sin,
That thou from mercies seat, may mercy win.
Deuote thy wits to love and venery,
Base subject, fit to add sin unto sin:
Be-witch men's souls with beauties fopperie,
By Venus forged-Goddesse praise to win.
Only let me for my sins feate a rod,
Learn how to live, and not offend my God.
Illuminating God, fair milke-white Dove,
The souls best teacher, Tutor unto bliss:
AffliCtions comfort, Ghost of eternal love,
Clean Guest, that loves to Inn, where no sin is.
License my soul to weep with those true eyes,
That heavens implore, and all the world despise.
A passion of an afflicted soul.
NO sooner had the Sun all showed his face,
Measuring the welkin, by a furlongs space:
But that I sat free from his scorching beam,
Under an Oak fast by a silver stream.
Not long I sat, but soon I heard one cry,
Distilling shewers of tears from his sad eye.
And with those tears that did from him proceed,
Came sighs (true partners in each woe and need)
And with those sighs, came words, to hear, a wonder,
which thought-torne-hart had almost broke asunder,
Nearer I stepped, but yet I stood aside,
to see the end, and what might him betide.
When soon me thought I might this man behold,
Placing his arms a cross, with an infolde:
Casting his looks to heaven, sometimes to earth,
When offering speech, fear stopped his vital breath.
Yet truce he took with fear, heart-grieued man,
and with a mournful voice, these words began.
Peter denied his Christ for fear of danger,
And swore (being asked) he was to him a stranger:
O false forsworn, vilde-wretch that knew him well,
Who loved him more then any tongue can tell.
Yet he his fault no sooner began to see,
But he repented and from sin was free.
Saul did torment the servants of the high,
Clad all in arms to work their Tragedy:
And martyred Steven, that high sweet Sa. in heaven
Was by his means of his dear life be-reauen.
Of this great sin, he likewise was forgiven,
Whom, we Canonize Saint, as blessed Steven.
David did heap one sin upon another,
That so the first, the last might better smother:
Murder, black murder, and adultery,
The least brings man to hels foul misery.
He also was of this vilde fault forgiven,
And now with God, enioyes a place in heaven.
These all did sin, but yet were freed from fear,
But my sinne's greater then I well can bear:
Christ came a Savior that we all might live,
Yet my sins such, as would he would forgive.
Yea sin does cause me to be so forlorn,
As makes me wish I never had bin born.
O grieved soul why do thou sighing cry?
Why spring such floods from thy immortal eye?
Art thou surcharged with sin? plunged in woe?
Thy tears say yea, though silence tell me no.
Oh (out alas) that I might once be free,
Where thou (O God) might have no power to see.
If I climb up to heaven, (oh) thou art there,
And at thy right hand sits my Savior dear:
Whose saluing wounds, my soul so much neglected
That force, perforce, I needs must be rejected.
And by those dooming words thou breathe in ire,
Be headlong cast into eternal fire.
Heaven gates are shut sweet mercy there in none,
Then to black foggie hell i will get me gone:
That kingdome's priuiledg'd, perhaps and free
From sight of him, who all things else does see.
Oh! but my fearful conscience wills me know,
As God rules heaven above, so hell below,
And says, those gates stand open to let souls in,
Fit place of torture for their grievous sin:
And as the heavens, so does he hell retain,
Death dooming-torture neuer-dying pain.
Why then be gone poor soul, poast hence away,
For here thou may not, nay thou dare not stay.
Oh! that I had Auroraes wings to fly
Beyond those Seas, where farther parts do lie;
Or to some country which no eye has seen,
Where never creature has bin bred or been,
But it is in vain, for thy farre-reaching hand,
Can quickly pull me, from that unknown land.
Be dim oh brighest Sun, toarch-man to day,
Let thy moist oil decrease, thy light decay:
Fair Luna let not thy bright beams be spide,
For peradventure, darkness may me hide.
Oh (says my conscience) trust not to black night,
For with thy God darkness is as the light.
Well I could wish that some huge high-topt mountain,
Or else some vast-known bottomless deep fountain
Would take my life from his all-seeing eye,
Whose only name, makes me dispayring dye.
But all in vain, for if I there would be,
No rocks nor floods, can hide my sin from thee.
Where ere I would be, thou O God art there,
And though not seen, yet I thy voice do heart:
That voice that to my sinful Grandsire came,
Inforceth me to say, Lord here I am.
Here Is Adams sinful Offspring known by name,
First man created, and the first of shame.
Here is a sinful wretch, a Demie Devil,
Proane unto nothing, but to that is evil:
Unthrifty in goodness, Merchant in vile sin;
Exchanging better wares, more worse to win.
Earths excrement, (alas) of all men hateful;
unkind unto my self, to God ungrateful.
From these ill wishes I must needs refrain,
Since all my wishes are both fond and vain:
Or what I wish for, if I could obtain,
Those things I wish for, would soon prove my pain*
What ere I wish for, or do most desire,
The things I wish prove ministers of ire.
The things obscurest thou O Lord can see,
No place from thy world-seeing-eye is free:
The secretst parts that in my body lie,
They all lie open to thy all-seeing eye.
Thou likewise brought me from my mothers womb,
And thou shall Judge me at thy fearful doombe.
The Prince of darkness does likewise accord,
Bids me despair in my death-dying Lord;
Caytiffe says he, look not to heaven for grace,
Since heaven and earth see thy sin-couered face.
Earth looks at heaven, heaven at the earth does wonder
That earth vp-holding sin, rents not a sunder.
Tells me that wealth, was my hearts chiefest treasure;
Says that in pride, I took my sweetest pleasure;
Envy and malice, doing neighbor wrong,
All these I do confess, I loved too long:
Murder black murder, and foul leachery,
Were coupled Actors in this tragedy.
He further says, that God shall prove untrue,
If he forgive to whom revenge is due:
That God's not God, except he do prove just,
That he revenge for sin needs render must.
It Is true, it is true, o whether shall I run?
Would God my life were now but new begun.
Now would I sow, when Autumn yields ripe corn
Now well nigh dead, now do I wish newborn:
Long have I lived, out-liuing many men,
passing the age of foure-score years and ten.
And now the Devil for to add more pain,
Says my huge sin calls but for grace in vain.
D^ue^, let not the sluices of thine eyes,
Make thy tears passage unto Paradise:
Entreat not Abram send us Lazarus,
No, for if that heau'nling come among us,
He Will but delate of that I fear to know,
Hell, Death, Destruction, Devils, Torture, Woe.
Thus might I see this poor wretch plunged in woe,
Almost receiving foul sins overthrow:
And now his Sea of tears moist drops past number
Lull him (sad pensive) in a heavy slumber.
Not long he slept, but grief owle-scriching cries,
Beat paths for passage through his ceaseles eyes.
Now combats his good Genus with the Devil,
Mauger the bad, the good expels the evil:
Satan did tempt him much, and sore did shake him,
Yet the good spirit would not so forsake him.
Though flesh be frail now he defyeth sin,
And with fresh tears does thus his passion gin.
O Ship-wrackt soul, drencht in a Sea of tears.
Laden with Evils and full fraught with fears,
Let bitter floods fall from thy restles eyes,
Make heavens to pity thy hearts woeful cries.
Never, o never cease heaven to implore,
Till peace of conscience heavens to thee restore.
Swim O my soul, break through the floods of sin,
See if with P^eter thou the Shore can win:
And at thy landing rest, thou shall embrace
A golden wreath the Lamb, the Child of grace:
And heavenly Quiers for to welcome thee,
Shall sound the music of heavens melody.
Think no work great enough this bliss to gain;
Great is the joy that comes of this thy pain:
Trouble like wings must hurl thee up and down,
Before thou may receive The Imperial crown.
"Thou unto days and weeks, to months and years,
"Must owe the hourly rent of stintlesse tears.
Apprentice-like bind thou thy years to care,
The heart thy shop, Gods sacred word thy ware;
Goo^ tho^ghts thy Chapmen, and good works thy gain
Thy che^ the poor, and thy rejoicing, pain.
"Days pass in plaints, thy nights without repose;
"Awake to weep and sleep in wakinge woes.
Let Wisdom be thy head, Compunction Mother;
Thy friends the Angels, and the Lamb thy Brother.
Take for thy souls sweet Spouse deaths memory,
Thy kinsfolks sighs, thy children Lachrymae.
This right hand path leads not thy soul amiss,
But eftsoone brings thee to the bower of bliss.
Consider further, o my soul (quoth he)
Sinners beside my self there many be;
Many have stained the honor of their place,
And yet in heavens bright eye not lost their grace.
And though I sin, in lives book I am noted,
Since now to my dear God, I am devoted.
Moreover by his death it does appear,
How great the love is that my God does bear
To me sins Monster and most worthy blame;
The badge of ignomy and Map of shame.
Th'abuser of rich Time, a lump of ill,
Too slow, in good too bad, too swift in will.
What meaning has his head declined but this?
To give my sinful soul a gracious kiss.
His heart's all open, for to let me see,
A heart that has such love, none has but he.
His hands are stretched out for to embrace me,
That he in Angels bliss, may after place me.
Yea all his precious corpse (alas) are wounded,
That though I sin, sin, death and hell confounded.
His bodies life, fell-death does also sever,
Yet he kills death, that I may live for ever.
Mercy sweet Jesus mercy let me win,
Since now I hate my self, and loath my sin,
This he no sooner said, but I might see
A man well seeming Angell-Saint to be;
Of comely hue of gold his pleated hayres,
More grave in Wisdoms book, then aged years.
His feet instead or sandals troade the air,
And winds for wings, did this Caelestiall bear.
His first arrival was with this sad wight,
Whose sinful soul Justice did so affright:
To whom, such balm for medcine he did give,
As dead in sin, by it are raised to live.
O blessed Lord that in each time of need,
Sends comfort from above, sick souls to feed.
Do not despair (quoth he) thou woeful man,
Doubt not, but he that made all, all things can;
Think not that he that breathed into thee breath,
Will ought rejoice in thy souls fearful death.
No wretched man thy God wills thee to know,
Sins red as scarlet, he makes white as snow.
Seal this (O Lord) clear my sinne-spotted-Den,
Tears beg the warrant, Jesus say Amen.
Nemo renascitur in Christi corpore, nisi prius
nascatur in peccati corruptione.
S. August. Tears Efficacy, and Sins pardon. Or Mary Magdalens Lachrymae.
WHen Anna wept the tears ran down amain,
From forth the Flud-gates of her watery eyes;
When Agar wept that water she might gain,
Tears, sobbes, and sighs were only Sacrifice.
When Susan falsely was condemned to dye,
Her innocent true tears did pierce the sky.
They had the things that they with tears required,
Oh who can tell the force of such true tears?
Wonder of wonders for to be admired,
Since eyes, as keys do open mercies ears.
Never came wretch to God with true contrition,
But did obtain, so it were just petition.
Sad humble tear, shed by a soul divine,
What may thou not account of as thine own?
will thou a kingdom? why? heavens kingdom's thine
will thou a seat thou have the La^bes bright throne.
Will thou be strong? let one tear, heaven be sent
And it shall doombe all hell to banishment.
Meat for the soul thou art, strength for the sense,
Guerdon of Virtue, Assosiate of Grace;
The blotter out of vice and great offense,
The Font that Lauers filth from foulest face.
The drink and repast of the penitent,
Swift billow, wafting to amendment.
Best health of new-returning innocence,
The Angel food of reconsiliation;
Chief joy of an appeased conscience,
And the strong hope of souls election.
The Odor of the joys of bliss to come,
The best companion in the day of doombe.
Since tears are of such force, who would not weep?
And weeping weep for sin, with tears an Ocean:
A flood within his heart who would not keep?
To drench the entrance of each sinful motion.
Yes says my soul, Lord of my soul I will.
Mary that most has need will weep her fill.
Close thou thine eyes, o righteous Jeremye,
Let not thy tears lament the faults of other,
My sighs, my sobs, my eyes, my Lachrymae,
Shall wash my soul, and my soules-sinnes discover.
I, only I my self, my self alone,
Will wash in tears and my huge sin bemone.
Michah, why weep'st thou, said the men of war?
Why do thou us pursue? is not all well?
Why have thou strayed from thy home so far?
Nay sigh not grieved man but quickelie tell.
My God (quoth he) whom I with care did keep,
Ye'aue stolen from me, and ask ye why I weep?
Michah with grieved heart does much lament,
The loss of his forg'd-fained-golden God:
And shall not floods of tears of me be spent,
For loss of him that was my lives abode?
Shall Michah wail his loss, and shall not I?
Yes, while I live I Will weep, and weeping dye.
The nimble Heart when he is beset with Hound,
Seeing no way te'scape pale greedy death:
Before he feel the first life-killing wound,
Weeps out a groan, and then yields air his breath;
And makes the Hu^ters heart (though hard as stone)
By reason of his sighs, his death to moan.
Shall this mild Heart (O Mary) full of evils
Sigh forth the farewell of his lives decay?
And shall not thou that art beset with Devils,
That rent thy soul as ravenous dogs their pray?
Yes I will weep sigh, sob, and never cease,
Till heaven have mercy, and my sins release.
If holy David did so much lament,
Th'vntimely death of his rebellious Son:
If he upon the dead corpse these words spent,
O loss! o Absalon! o Absalon!
Then needly must I weeping say each hour,
O loss! no loss to my souls Savior.
As was the sound of Aarons silver bell,
Whose sweet alarm caused each man to hear:
So Mary let thy griefs sin-weeping knell,
Rung by the virtue of an hearty tear,
Sound such a loud, and doleful pleasing ditty,
That it may move thy God, thy woes to pity.
Few drops (men say) force hard stones asunder.
Not by compulsion but by often fall:
See! stubborn stones to moist drops yield; o wonder!
And shall not God, when tears for mercy call?
Sins tears; almost (me thinks the very name,
Should be sufficient for to blot my shame.
O therefore hye thee wretched Magdalen,
To him that sin has power to forgive:
Entreat him cleanse thy foul defiled den,
Desire to dye to sin, in him to live.
Let not thy God, from Simons board be risen,
Till thou unto thy God be truly shriuen.
As an enraged cold taken in thy breast,
If it continue, proves but little good:
So will thy sin disturber of thy rest,
If thou to greater sin do let sin bud.
O therefore take thy time, while time thou may,
For who can tell, how swift time glides away.
Nor be not thou ashamed before them all,
Of thy vilde sin to make confession:
But bend thy knee, and bid thy salt tears call,
Of thy great sin to have remission.
Defer no time, no week, no day, no hour,
But plead with tear, best pleading Orator.
Confess (I say) with a true broken heart
(For who can tell the force of such confession?)
Thy sin, and by thy sin, thy just desert,
And for the same thy souls contrition.
With such confession learn for to accord,
For such regaines thy now lost living Lord.
It joys the Saints, make clear the conscience,
Cancels the bond of sin, it is hope of pardon:
It Is Brideler of fear, best pleasing incense,
Heaven opening key, sweet satisfaction.
Best motive moving thy dull soul to rise,
From wretched earth, to blessed Paradise.
Jesus I thirst, but not for David's draught,
Not of the Cisterne of Philistines spring:
It Is not that water though so dearly bought,
That any comfort to my heart can bring.
That which the Angels love, and Saints require,
That holy water does my soul desire.
Open thy gate kind hearted Pharise,
Oh give me way, and leave to enter in:
That I may prostrate, humbly on my knee,
Show to my God the greatness of my sin
On stage of black, the Actor be my heart,
My soul the Chorus, and my sin the part.
O but (says one) art not thou Magdalen,
Notorious for thy sin in this our City?
Yes sure I am; will ye not therefore open?
May not a sinners tears move ye to pity?
Whose that says Christ? Mary shows her repentance:
O let her in; thus mercy gives me entrance.
Woman come forth says he, stand not behind,
May I a wretch (O Lord) obtain such favor?
Mercy to penitents is always kind,
O kind Physician! say on my Savior.
For never shall these tears of me be spent,
Till thou bid rise, sin pardoned penitent.
Pardon thou have, be free from Satan's den,
Arise, and sin no more: good God Amen.
The souls comfort in Midst of affliction. Or the penitent theefes passion.
TO whom shall death, The Almighty's Trumpeter
Seem sowerie sharp, fell-cruell-bitter pain:
When meager death is but as messenger,
To tell our souls, that we with God shall reign.
Come gentle death, since it is my Saviors will,
(O blessed will to dye I am not sorry)
Seize on an Essence which thou can not kill,
Whilst Angels waft it to the place of glory.
He that is framer of the earth and heaven,
Tells me that these my now frail mortal eyes:
(So soon as soul from body is bereauen)
Shall see heavens Pharus blessed-Paradise.
This day my soul, mercy infusing grace,
(O triple happy soul, t'obtaine such favor:)
In Angels bliss shall see him face to face,
That did descend from heaven to be my Savior.
This day my life shall dye, in bliss to reign,
This day I shall be freed from every foe:
This day I dye a death to live again,
This day I cease to weep, and laugh at woe.
This day's the (...) of an eternal reign,
And the (...) of my now dying pain.
Since it is so, sweet death come let me dye,
Whilst mercy shuts the windows of mine eye.
Deus mihi totum in toto.
LEt wicked worldlings fall away from God,
No earthly cross shall cause my soul to fear
Afflictions staff, and persecutions rod,
True patience wills me, and I well can bear.
Who would not suffer here a little pain,
And dye, to live, that he with God may reign?
If I of friends and country be neglected,
Yet ere I loose my faith, I Will beg my bread:
He that from youth has always me protected,
From his foode-giuing hand shall I be fed.
He keeps the fragments of a feast in store,
Where mercy wills me knock at bounties door.
If poorest roof disdain to cover me,
Ny building's not on earth but all on hye:
Mean while the Dens and Rock, shall succor me,
And stubborn earth shall welcome misery.
Better it is, mong Wolves to have abode,
Then live in house and not to live in God.
If I with prisons chain fast fettred be,
My persecutions chain shall prove a crown:
If all the world oppose it self at me,
And death (the worst to fear) begin to frown.
Yet he that for my life, his life did give,
Will k^^^ my death, that I with him may live.
What though no (...) see me buried,
It Is not a toombe that I desire to have:
What boots that earth, to earth be carried,
My bliss is not contained in a grave.
And for an unction to this bitter gall,
Heaven couers him that has no burial.
Hear me sweet Jesus, hear me when I call,
Since thou to my poor soul art all in all.
Mors Christi, mihi vita.
The Eternal Father, guider of the heaven,
To his all-glorious and immortal Host:
No other license to them has he given,
But that their garlands, and their crowns of cost
(While heavenly quiers do sing, as it is meet)
Be laid at his great Sons immortal feet.
Yet see the malice and the cruelty,
Of these hard-hearted and inhumaine men:
With purple cloth (aye me) in mockery,
They cloth the flesh of this great God; and then
To him they bend the knee (their sin the more)
Whom Angels worship, and the Saints adore.
See, see, from his deep wounds out issues blood,
Dying the purple Dye, more perfect red;
Woe's me that for my sin should spring that flood,
Great was his love that so my comfort bred.
Dye (oh my God) make purple my hard heart.
So shall it cloth thy wounds, my sin, thy (...).
Ego sum tus causa (...).
Dives in his passion.
RIch men laugh at me your fill,
Since to laugh it is your will:
Make a jest of me and hell,
Till ye buy that I would sell.
Christ did tell ye but in vain,
Of my torture and my pain:
I, as ye, at hell did smile,
Satan so did me beguile.
Were I now to live again,
Life should be a living pain:
Ye should laugh, but I would weep,
I would wake, when ye should sleep.
Ye should not relieve the poor,
I would so bestow my store:
You, not I, should hunt for hell,
I, not ye, with God would dwell,
But o my soul plunged in pain,
Do not Echo thus in vain:
Worldlings laugh to hear thee moan,
Harder hearts, then hardest stone.
For the rain makes flintes to mourn,
When that Athiests, tears do scorn:
But those scorners all shall dye,
And hell laugh when they shall cry.
Lazarus in his happiness.
Poor men if ye beggars be,
Learn to bear your Cross of me:
Crosses are the way to bliss,
Where true patience leader is.
Patience poor men's treasure chief,
That does give the soul relief:
Such relief as rich men want,
That the beggars alms is scant.
Joy in heart, ye poorest souls,
Whom the hand of heaven inrowles:
In the care of worldlings cross,
While the rich dye with their dross.
Grieve not that the dogs do lick ye,
Hellish stings shall never prick ye:
Let them sing while ye do cry,
Ye shall live when they shall dye.
Ye shall live in endless joys,
They live dying in annoyes:
They in soul tormented sore,
Ye rejoicing evermore.
Do but then the difference see,
That twixt rich and poor may be:
They with Dives lie in hell,
Ye, with me, in heaven shall dwell.
A passion of the souls desire.
OH had I wings to fly unto that place,
Where Hierarches and Angels praise my God:
That I might taste of that eternal grace,
That frees the faithful from afflictions rod.
Then should I hear the Cherubins, that sing
To God, all holy holy Sanctities:
Then I my self unto my God and King,
Should humbly tune their heau'nlie unities.
Then should I be a free man of that City,
The gates whereof are pearl, the bars of gold;
The Lamps no stars, but glories Majesty,
And Saints the souls that there their freedom hold.
Then should I see the Prophets in their bliss,
And the Apostles seated on bright thrones:
Then should I see that world where no woe is,
While Angels hands do crown the Martirs groans
Then should I see the Virgins freed from tears,
Crowned in the heavens for holy Chastity:
Blessed should I see those babes whose tender years,
Abode the stinge of sharpest cruelty.
Then should I see, that now I cannot see.
Through the dark hindrance of my deadly sin:
Yet mercy says, his wounds makes sinners free,
His blood the key that lets them enter in.
O then my God make this world hell to me,
That I in heaven may see all this with thee.
Christ's Crown is sharp.
THe cruel thorns with wc our Lord was crowned
Were sorely sharp that shed his sacred blood:
A gracious love, in glorious life renowned,
To hurt it self to do his servants good.
But while those points did prick his sacred head,
Sin, death, and Satan, all were deadly wounded:
O blessed Christ that so my comforts bred,
As by thy death, both death and hell confounded!
Blessed were the drops of so divine a nature,
As shed by sinners were the death of sin:
And blessed Christ that so did bless thy creature,
As by thy death did his best life begin.
Yet let me weep to see his head so bleeding,
That is my heart and spirits only feeding.
Doloris finis gaudium.
MY heavy soul have patience with thy self,
The tides will turn the ebb may haule a flow
A Ship sometime may run upon the shelfe,
And yet be saved from her ouer-throw.
Say that thy griefs do gripe thee every hour,
While that thy life is near the point to dye:
And weakened nature hardly has the power,
To bear the burden of thy misery.
Yet, do thou know, thy sinful soul deserves,
Far greater death, if Justice do thee right:
And know withal that mercy still preserves,
A Sunney blessing for the faithful sight.
Where thou shall find that all the worlds annoy*
Is far unworthy of the smallest joy.
Benedictus deus in eternum.
SOme wicked spirit thought my heart accursed,
Because it saw, how I was woe begone me;
Sorrow, and death and hell, did seek their worst,
With all their forces, all to fall upon me.
Sorrow, did lock my heart with many a sob,
And brought my life unto the door of death:
And when death saw how my poor heart did throb
He showed the horror of the hell beneath.
But, when my God did in his mercy see,
My soul besiedged thus on every side:
With one fair look he made their forces fly,
Nor death, nor hell, nor sorrow durst abide.
But left my soul in such a blessed case,
By mercies living love to be relieved:
That I must sing in glory of his grace,
That helped my soul when it was so agreeued.
The sinful souls sob.
SOrrow and Sin, to my heart are no wonder,
Since sin and sorrow rent my heart asunder:
My soul in sin, has long time had abode,
While sorrow wept that I offended God.
My Sin (I must confess) is much more great,
Then is the sorrow of my grieved heart:
Yet sorrow wills me humbly to entreat
For mercy, to assuage my woeful smart.
Therefore to thee, that can throw down to hell,
And after fetch into the Heaven of bliss:
To thee in whom sweet mercy still does dwell,
In whom all comfort was, shall be, and is:
To thee a wretched soul nigh drowned in sin,
With sorrow weeps, that he may mercy win.
Laqueus contritus est.
Sin and despair, both at a banquet met,
And in their feasting that they might have joy:
My yielding soul in have from me they fet,
And made it drunk, and drowned it in annoy.
But tasting of sins cheer* I wot full well,
Despair, that never wished the soul but harm:
Had well nigh brought my life to that same hell,
Where sins more thick the^ Bees in summer swarm.
Which when I did perceive all woe begone me,
With bleeding heart I looked up on high:
And God in mercy so did look upon me,
And to my grief such medicine did apply:
That b^ing healed of my dispayring sin,
I might by faith his gracious favor win.
Par nulla figura dolori.
IF I were set to seek out sorrows muses,
And all at once, were come to wait upon me:
With all the grief that greatest sorrow uses,
To show the world how I am woe begone me.
If all the world had brought their woes together,
And all set down, in their extremest kind,
And all the kinds had brought their crosses hither,
To show the death of a tormented mind.
If all the figures that the Poets feign,
Should in their nature truly be expressed:
And every sorrow in a sun dry vain,
Could show the horror of a heart distressed.
If these and more then ever yet were known,
To crucify a poor unhappy creature:
In pleasures spirit wholly overthrown.
Could show the pride of sorrow in her nature.
I think they all would fall out short in fine,
To sound but where the depth of my distress,
And leave this heart, and woeful soul of mine,
Unto the comfort of the comfortless.
But since I see God only knows my grief,
Which is too great for any man to guess:
And in his mercy lives my souls relief,
And he alone can give my heart redress.
I will beseech his Majesty divine,
In mercies height the hope of happiness:
For to receive this humble soul of mine,
And bring my heart out of this heaviness.
Non est Deus sicut noster.
AT Christ's Ascension heau'ns-vast womb did wonder,
whilst Angels hearts did bleed and cleave a sunder;
Immortal passions so did wound and pain them,
That all amort they sit and thus complain them.
O thou bright morning star thou glories glory,
Make us partakers of a woeful story.
By thee we know, sin, death, and hell confounded,
But cannot show how wisdom came thus wounded;
Then began the spirit of that be-slaughtered lamb,
To tell how by those wounds his goodness came.
Amid the Center of an earthly Cell,
Accompanied with friends I long did dwell:
At length they wound, and bring me to my end,
And he that most did hurt was most my friend.
Life of all lives they killed and put to pain,
My harm, their good, sour, sweet, my loss their gain.
O fountain of all mercy, mercies wonder,
What heart can hear this and not burst asunder?
It Was I (woe's me therefore) that caused thine end,
Whom thou in mercy do account a friend.
Within the closure of some obscure Cell,
My soul be-murdering-Lord till death shall dwell;
There shall it weeping sit, and read this story,
Till heaven assume it for to see thy glory.
A passion.
LEt me go seek some for-lorne place,
Where nothing lives but sorrows love:
Where I may sit and wail my case,
Unto the blessed heavens above.
For to the world to tell my woes,
It were a breath but spent in vain:
A labor that my soul might lose,
Or with a sigh return again.
For all the thoughts of pitties eye,
On earth are buried long ago:
And all the ways of misery,
Are to despair, or dye in woe.
For virtue she that heavenly Queen,
That only keeps the soul a crown:
Whose faith has in her favors been,
Though here by fortune beaten down,
Even she is forced to keep her seat,
Among the Angels blessed arms:
Because she sees the world entreat,
Her servants with such wicked harms.
And since I do so plainly see,
That in the world there is no place
For vetue, pity, not for me,
Nor any in my heavy case.
Let me go seek some sorry Cave,
With sorrows love to sit alone:
And like a Ghoast within the grave,
Unto the heavens to make my moan.
For in the heavens I know he is,
Who has subdued the power of hell:
And in that heavenly hand of his,
Does my assured comfort dwell,
Where Virtue, Mercy, Love and I,
Shall live together in such joy:
As though unto the world I dye,
My soul shall think of no annoy.
His farewell to the world.
Vain world adieu, since vain is thy best pleasure,
Thy self a toy:
In better things then thine consistes my treasure,
In heau'n's my joy.
A joy that does detest Such pleasing goods,
As sorrow brings the heart in flowing floods.
Thy baits are sweet at first, yet sower in end,
From heaven they part;
A Be which has a sting that does offend,
And wound the heart.
A Friend that sees a life all woe begone it,
And wishes ten times more to fall upon it.
Thy best things are in fine a world of woe,
A sincke of ill:
A garden where bad weeds are set to grow,
The soul to kill.
Thy Paradise a dungeon, layle, or hell,
Where light in dark for evermore does dwell.
Thy glory has no Sunshine, but a mist
To blind the eye:
And therefore let them love thee they that list,
So will not I.
I seek a glory that is all above,
Sweet Jesus I seek thee my truest love.
When most thou smilest then thou most do frown,
And seek'st to kill:
Thou do advance to honor then pull'st down,
Such is thy will.
Sing in the sweetest key thou can devise:
While I with wisdoms wit stop ears and eyes*
FINIS.

