AN EXTRACT Translated out of the French Copy, and taken out of the Registers
of the French Kings Privy Council.
Between John Potter, William Woollestone, Henry Morris, and Thomas Church,
English Merchants, as well for themselves, as for the other English Merchants,
trading in the town of Rouan, appealing from the sentence given by the
Bayliffe of the said town, the seventh of April 1598. on the one party, and
the Masters and Wardens of the Art and Mystery of the Company of the Drapers,
as well in the whole sale, as retaile, Cloth-workers, and Shearemen of the said
town intimated, on the other party, By the King in his Council being seen
the said sentence, whereof appeal is made, the aduertisements and evidences of
the said parties, the decree of the said Council, by the which the examining
of the said appeal is referred to the said Council of the four and twentieth
of November 99. the product^o^ of the said parties, on the which the said
sentence is made, Another decree of the said Council, by the which it is
ordained, that the Masters and Wardens of the art and mystery of the Company
of the Drapers of the town of Paris, shall be called before the Commissioners
in that behalf appointed, to give their advise on the difference of the said
parties, and articles by them delivered, to the end that this being done, and
their advice seen, right to be done unto them according to reason, of the
seventeenth of March 1600. the verbal plea of the said Commissioners
containing the said advice, the request of the Ambassador of the Queen of
England to moderate the said suit, the means of the moderation of the said
Ambassador, and all that which by the said parties has been produced before
the Commissioners thereunto appointed. His report being heard, The King in his
Council has made, and does make void the appellation, and that whereof
appeal is made, and in mending the Judgment, has ordained, and ^oth ordain,
that within three months after the signification which shall be made of this
present decree, all sorts of woollen cloth which, shall be brought by the said
Englishmen or Strangers, white, or died, in wool, and not otherwise, before
entering into this Realm, shall be wet and shrunk, not drawn out upon the
Tenters with pullies, engines, wheels, not made of diverse sorts of woolles,
barred, striped, cockled, and filled with flocks, on pain of confiscation,
according to the ordinances. Which marchandizes being loyal, and of such
condition as is aforesaid, may be sold in wholesale by the said English or
Foreign Merchants, after having been duly visited by the said Masters and
Wardens of the said art and mystery of the Company of the Drapers and none
others: which marchandizes shall be put in the halles and public places, if
there be any, and not elsewhere. And if in case it should be found, that
there were no public place, (visitation being formerly made) a place shall
be demanded of the Judges of the places: and it shall not be lawful for the
said English or Foreign Merchants to open their Bales, before they have called
thereunto the said Masters and Wardens of the said art and mystery of Drapers,
who also shall be subject within twice four and twenty hours, to make the
said visitation gratis. And in case the said Merchants do not sell their said
marchandizes in the same places, after the said visitation, and after three
market days, in the which the halles shall have been opened, and that the
said marchandizes shall have been exposed to sale, it shall be lawful for the
said Merchants to carry them where they shall think good, for to make sale of
them: And touching the measuring of the said marchandises, the said Council
has ordained, and does ordain, that the Edict thereupon made in the year
1543. shall be kept and observed, and without expenses.

Done in the privy Council of the King, holden at Paris, the one and
twentieth day of April, 1600. subscribed thus, Des baigneaulx.

Imprinted at London by Simon Stafford, dwelling on Adling hill, near
Carter-lane.


