THE CHRISTIAN CONFLICT, AND CONQVEST.

SET FORTH IN A SERMON AT Pauls-Crosse, upon Sunday the 19th of IVLY, 1635.

By W. E. B. D. of St Mary Hall in Oxford.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, and are to be sold by William Webb. A.
D. 1636.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
IN the entrance of our Christian profession, we have all promised to fight
under Christ's banner, against all Antichristian power. And namely, against the
flesh, the world, and the Devil. To make good this promise, I have ventured
(being thereunto called) to fight a combat with these adversaries, in an
eminent place, before many and great spectators: Having so done, I remembered
that I must finish my course, and keep the faith, or else I cannot say with
the Apostle, that I have fought the good fight, 1. Tim. 4. 7. 8.
and so expect the crown of righteousness. Therefore having begun contendere
verbis, to encounter with these adversaries, by way of preaching; I resolved
further pugnare manu, to set upon them, by way of writing. But here
peradventure you will say, Quorsum haec? to what end is this writing! There are
books written already of all kind of arguments, and of this also. I grant,
there are so. But yet it does not follow for all that, that there should be no
more written, for as long as the Devil and his Agents, do daily multiply
their temptations, and thereof set forth still new impressions, and editions,
able to seduce, if it were possible, the very elect; I see no reason, but that
the Ministers, and servants of Christ, should be as forward to multiply
replies, and to set forth new answers to the same. Sure I am, the Lords will
and command is, that we should resist the Devil; Iam. 4. 7. Ephesians. 4. 27. c.
6. 13.
that we should give no place to his temptations; that we should put on the
whole armor of God, that is, use all good means to withstand his wiles, and
to repel his assaults. And S. Austin does instance in this means of writing,
saying, that in places infected with heresy (or other dangerous temptations)
all men should write, that have any faculty therein, though it be but the same
things in other words; that all sorts of people, among many books, might light
upon some, and the enemy in all places might have one, or other, to encounter
him. And the same Author further says, utile esse, that it is profitable, Vtile
est plures a pluribus fieoi libros, diverso stilo, sed non diversa fide. Etiam
de iisdem questionibus etc. August. de Trinit. l. 1. c. 3.
that there be many books, of many persons, made of like matters, in a
diverse style and method, so that they be not contrary, in a diverse faith;
that from the same the truth may more clearly appear, to some in one manner,
to some in another.

Now that which S. Austin speaks positively, saying, utile esse, that it is
profitable, that there be many Books of many persons, made of like matters,
etc. I hope may be said of mine. Certain I am the matter is profitable, and
necessary for any man's study, that desires to approve himself a good soldier
of Jesus Christ. And for the manner also, though it be not elegant, yet here is
order, which is the maine thing requisite in abattell. And for matter and
manner, it has gained the hearing of honorable, learned, and judicious
auditors. Now if it may also gain your reading, and liking, I shall count my
pains well bestowed, and be the more encouraged to go on in my studies, and
to set forth further, and larger testimony of my desire to do you good. And
verily my intention was to present you with a larger testimony thereof at this
second time, but I am feign to fall short of that purpose, and to desire you to
accept of this for the present, as from

Your unfeigned well-willer, and in that I am able, your well-doer WILLIAM EVANS.

Errata.
PAge 13. line 5. read not for cannot, p. 24. l. 10. r. one Captain f. our
Captain, p. 35. l. 31. r. by being for being, p. 40. l. 17. r. overcharged f.
overchared. p* 58. l. 30. r. more care of f. more of, p. 69. l. 28. r. final
f. small.

THE CHRISTIAN CONflict and Conquest.
EPHESIANS. C. 6. V. 12. 13. We wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
principalities and powers. Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God,
that ye may be able to withstand etc.
Steadfastness of faith, The scope of the text.
with a direction how to stand therein, and to withstand all the opposers
thereof, is the argument of the Apostle in these words. And this argument
(Right honorable, Right worshipful, and beloved) I thought the fittest for me
to treat of, at this time, in this place; in as much, as ye are all by
profession, the servants and soldiers of Christ. And by practice also his
faithful servants, for all I know. So that I have no cause to incite you to
begin, but rather to continue in well doing: to continue Christ's faithful
servants and soldiers, unto your lives end. This continuance is the Apostles,
and my scope.

And the occasion this: The occasion.
The Apostle, having in the former part of this Epistle, delivered many holy,
and heavenly exhortations, as that we should walk worthy of the vocation
wherewith we are called, c. 4. 1. That we should endeavor to keep the unity
of the spirit in the bond of peace, v. 2. That we should put off the old man,
even the corruption of our nature, which is as old as mankind; and to put on
the new man, even Christ Jesus, with his merits, and manners, v. 22. 23. That
we should have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but
rather reprove them, c. 5. v. 11. That we should train up those that belong to
our charge, in the instruction, and fear of the Lord, c. 6. 4. In a word, that
we should all live in obedience, performing our several duties, to each other,
c. 5. 21. c. 6. 1. having delivered these, and many other pious exhortations:

And withal, perceiving that no man can set himself to follow these precepts,
and to do these duties, but that he shall find many discourageme^ts, many lets
and hindrances, some from flesh and blood within, others from Satan and the
world without. Yea, and such discouragements, as that man of himself is not
able to withstand, and to stand perfect in all things. Perceiving this, the
Apostle, like a faithful Minister, and a good Leader of the Lord of hosts,
animates and incites his fellows, and followers to stand fast in the faith, 2.
Cor. 16. 13.
to quit themselves like men, to be strong, saying, My Brethren be strong in
the Lord, and in the power of his might. v. 10. Heb. 12. v. 1.
Run on with patience the race (or the conflict) that is set before you.
Run on, notwithstanding all the wrestling, and striving of the flesh, the
world, and the Devil to the contrary. And this that they might the better do,
he tells them how to strengthen, and arm themselves to that purpose, saying,
Take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand, in the
evil day, and to stand perfect in all things. And thus you see the scope, and
the occasion of the words.

Now that I may go on in a method, The general parts of the text.
in the further opening and handling hereof, may it please you, to observe with
me these 2 parts. First a conflict.

The conflict in these words, A Conflict wherein 3. things.
(...), we wrestle.

The conquest in these, (...) put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be
able to stand. In the conflict, note with me these three things: 1. the
combatants. 2. the cause of the combat, and 3. the time.

The combatants of the one side as defendants, The combatants of both sides.
as assaylants, are the flesh, the world, and the Devil. We wrestle against
flesh and blood, against principalities, and powers, against spiritual
wickednesses. Indeed, the text faith here, we wrestle not against flesh and
blood, as if that were not an assayling enemy. But the meaning is not so; the
Apostle, in saying, we wrestle not against fle^sh and blood, does not mean,
not at all; but not so much, as Bullinger; not alone, as Calvin and Zanchius
upon the place; not only, as appears by collation of scripture. For in another
place, the Apostle says that the flesh lusts against the spirit, Gal. 5. 17.
So then, the flesh, that is, our own corrupt flesh and blood. And again, the
flesh, that is, other wicked men, which are flesh and blood, as we are, these
together with Satan, here called principalities, and powers are the enemies
that we are to combat with.

in coelestibus, The cause of the combat.
in heavenly things, that is, pro coelestibus, as Chrysostom, Oecumenius, and
Musculus upon the place. Illud enim in coelestibus, est pro eo quod est pro
coelestibus. The English renders in coelestibus, in high places, not in
heave^ly things, but (...) (1.) places: the substantive, is not in the
original, but only the adjective, (...) (1.) heavenly, so that we may refer
the adjective Coelestibus, either to locis, places, or rebus things, according
as our Church does elsewhere, Dominicall Epist. 21. and both true, for it is
true, that Satan, the enemy of mankind, fights against us in coelestibus
locis, in high places, for he is the Prince of the air. Ephesians. 2. 2. And it is
true likewise, that he fights against us in coelestibus rebus, about heavenly
things, as Gods glory, our own salvation, the graces of Gods spirit, and
eternal happiness. And this, non ut ipse victoriam adeptus, aliquid
consequatur, not to do himself good, sed ut nos privet, to do us hurt. And
so here, he fights against us, in coelestibus, about heavenly things, ut nos
illis spoliat, that he might deprive us of them. And this is the cause of the
combat.

The time thereof, is the time present, (...), says the text, that is, The
time of the Combat.
there is a wrestling, speaking quamdiu nos, and principes tenebrarum, as long
as the servants of God, and sons of Belial, the seed of the woman, and the
seed of the serpent do last together, that is, as long as the world lasts,
that is the limited time of this combat. And these be the particulars of the
Conflict.

In the Conquest likewise we have three things A Conquest, wherein 3 things.
the means how it is to be obtained. 2. The manner how the said means is to
be used. And 3. the motive. The means.
The means is, the armor of The manner.
is to put it on. The The motive.


And first of the Conflict, Conflict. 1. Part. Combatants of the one side, we.
and therein of the combatants, we, (...), we wrestle. We, that is, we that be
faithful in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 1. v. 1. v. 1. we that come to serve the
Lord, Ecclus. 2. v. 1. specially we that serve at the Altar, and are the
Ministers of Jesus Christ; as S. Paul, we must wrestle, and fight the Lords
battles against his, and our enemies.

The condition of the children, A Christians life military.
and servants of God in this life, is military: (...) a warfare upon earth, as
Job says, c. 7. v. 1. God that is a man of war, Exodus 15. 3. made man also
to be-a man of war, Genesis 3. 15. putting enmity between the woman, and the
Serpent, and between the seed of the woman, and the seed of the Serpent, and
saying, it shall break thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel. And this
breaking and bruising, this warring and wrestling, which the Lord did then
proclaim between the woman and the Serpent, and between her seed and his
seed, has gone along, and continued to this very day, even to us, so that
nobis Lucta, we wrestle.

We, all we that have given up our names unto Christ, and taken the oath of
allegiance unto him, in our Baptism, and renewed it by receiving the Lords
supper, and so professed open hostility against Satan, the world, and the
flesh, we must wrestle. Hic in castris, ille in rostris, in scholis, in
nemore, in agro, in pelago, in palatio; hic ferro corpus, ille animum dolis,
hit argutiis linguam; hic pedibus, ille equo, hic currit, ille navigat, omnes
militant, as Petrarch has it. Whosoever will live godly in Christ, must war
with the Dragon, and his Angels, Revel. 12. 7. 17.

Specially if we be any thing zealous for the Lord of hoasts, Act. 20.
As Elijah, 1. Kings 17. or earnest in in Gods cause, as S. Paul, or forward
for the word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus Christ, as S. John, Revel
1. 9, then we must look for sharp affronts, and hard oppositions, harder then
if we be remiss and careless in Gods cause. Satan is no opposer of such as
live securely in their sins. His kingdom is not divided against it self,
Ma^k. 4. 25.
he is more crafty then so. His bent is against the good, and the best most.
The greatest temptation that ever he made was against Christ, and so is still
against good Christians. He will sift them, Luke 22. 31. they shall be sure to
feel his fiery darts, they must wrestle.

Yea, and this wrestling or Conflict is not a matter of sport, as the word
(...) is sometime taken; but such as makes the body of him that striveth to
shake again: (...) enim dicitur quia corpus (...) (1) quatitur. 7 Properties
whereby to approve ourselves good soldiers of Jesus Christ.
The Christians war is a fierce war.

Now this being so, that our life is a soldiers life, a warfare upon earth, a
continual wrestling and fighting with Satan and his accomplices; Let us
consider our calling, and endeavor to walk worthy of it, in showing our
selves good soldiers of Jesus Christ. Let us not think it enough to take
press money, and to bear the name, and to receive the pay of good soldiers,
but let us approve our selves such, by our good service, and performance of the
parts of good soldiers, and amongst other, in these.

First in forethinking of the Cross, and providing

Aestas non semper fuerit, Virgil.
componite nidos.

A good soldier cares but little for the world, things of this life, that he
may please him who has chosen him to be a soldier, says the Apostle, 2.
Tim. 2. 4. And so, if we be for Christ's service, we must not be for the world,
for we cannot serve two Masters, two such contrary commanding Masters, as God
and Mammon, Mat. 6. 24. yea to war a good warfare, we must abstain not only
from the care of this life, but from every wicked thing, Deuteronomy. 23. 9.
so says the Lord, when thou go out against thine enemy to fight, abstain
from every evil thing. For this weakens us, and turns God against us.

A good soldier will endure hardness, hard Non est in terris mollis ad astra
via.
And so must we; if we will approve our selves good soldiers of Christ, we
must abate of our dainty feeding, of our soft clothing, and lazy living. We
must moderate our selves of our too many pleasures, and endure hardness. So
says the Apostle, endure hardness as a good soldier of Jesus Christ, 2.
Tim. 2. 3. and so he did himself, he was in labors abundant etc. 2. Cor. 11.
23. and so Christ our captain he endured the cross, Heb. 12. 1. leaving us an
example.

A good soldier will keep his rank, knowing Ordo est matter and conservatrix
rerum omnium. Arist. polit. l. 2.
the victory is in hazard: And so must we, says the Apostle; let all things be
done in order, 1. Cor. 14. 40. Let every one abide in the vocation wherein he
is called, 1. Cor. 7. 20. Study to be quiet, meddling with your own business, 1.
These. 4. 11. not with the business of Princes, and prelates, teaching them what
laws and orders to make, this is to break our rank. If a more be in the eye,
the feet is no fit member to pull it out, the hand is to do that: And so if
things be amiss in church, or commonwealth, private men may not presume to
be reformers therein, they must leave that to Moses and Aaron the Prince and
the Priest, the two hands of the body politic, Psalm. 77. 20.

A good soldier will obey his captain, and Mat. 8. 9. Intenti fuerunt ad
Ducis verbum imo and ad nutum. Curt. l. 4.
if he say come, he comes, or go, and he goes, or do this, and he does it,
so the Centurions servant, and the soldiers of Alexander, as Curtius writes.
And so we, if we will approve ourselves good soldiers of Christ, we must obey
his commands, in coming, going, and doing as he bids us. If we be his servants
we must obey him, for his servants we are, to whom we obey. Romans 6. 16.

A good soldier the more trust is committed Nehemiah, shall such a man as I
fly? a man so honored, so advanced above others, shall I so much forget my
Lord, and the trust which he has committed to me, as to sin against him? I
will never do it. And so we, the more honor, the better place, and the
greater pay we have, the more faithful we should be, for to whom much is
given, of them much is required. Luke 12. 48.

A good soldier will be helpful to his fellow soldiers. It is reported of
Trajan, that he Xiphlin. in vita Trajan.
rather then his soldiers should want a ragge to bind up their wounds: And so
if we will approve our selves good soldiers of Christ, we must help and
succor one another. Romans 12. 13. Gal. 6. 2. 10.
We must distribute to the necessity of the Saints; and help to bear one
another burden, as the Apostle says, we must do good to all, specially to
them of the household of faith; and among them to your faithful Ministers and
preachers. (Indeed having food and raiment, we ought therewith to be contented,
as the Apostle says. 1. Tim. 6. v. 8.
And food we have, that are called to this place, and we thank you for it.
But raiment, (1.) a gown we want, we are feign to seek for, and sometime to
go without, at least to be content with that which is not fit. If this defect
be for want of information, I pray take this. Having gone through with the
weightier matters, do not stick at the least: without any more ado, afford I
pray you, your fellow soldier, a coat fit for his place.)

A good soldier is watchful to foresee dangers, Mark. 13. 33. 37.
Thus says our Savior often, watch. And so the Apostle, be sober and watch,
because your adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion, walks about, seeking
whom he may devour, 1. Pet. 5. 8.

most, where he thinks the enemy will make his greatest assault. And now
Satan our deadly enemy labors most to overthrow our faith, Romans 10. 8.
and to oppose the Scripture which is the word of faith. Luke 22. 31. 32.
He labors specially to shake our faith, 2. Cor. 5. Psalm. 1^6.
so says Christ, Satan has desired to winnow your faith. And this, because
it is the special gift of Gods elect, Tit. 1. 1. The mother grace, the ground
of obedience, of fear, of joy, our choicest weapon, even our shield and
buckler, the victory whereby we overcome, 1. Ioh. 5. He endeavors likewise
with great earnestness to oppose the word of God, and to call in question the
truth thereof, and to bring it out of credit. Thus he dealt in tempting of Eve,
saying, has God said ye shall not eat of every tree in the garden, least ye
dye? he knew God had said it, and that in the day they should eat thereof, they
should dye. Genesis 3. 1. 3. 4.
And yet he labors to make them doubt of that truth, which he and they knew
too well. And so again in tempting of Christ, whereas God the Father said,
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Mat. 3. 17. C. 4.
Satan he comes with his, If thou be the Son of God, and so would make a
doubt of it.

Knowing then what Satan and his agents labor most, even to call into
question the truth of Gods word, and to overthrow our faith therein, there let
us fortify our selves most; seeing there he oppugnes most, thither let us
bring our greatest strength.

A good soldier will rightly discern betwixt the head of the body, and other
inferior parts, so that if he put any to the hazard, he will put those that
are less principal. But as for the head, which like the tower of David, has
a superintendency above the rest, this he will be sure to ward.

And so above all, we must be sure to look to our head Christ Jesus, that he
be not wounded: specially that he be not put down, and deprived of his kingly,
2. These. 2. 3. 4.
priestly, and prophetical office, by that man of sin, the Son of
perdition, who opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God, or
is worshipped. The head, as Plato says, is the seat of life, and being. But
certain it is, in Christ the head of the Church, and of our faith, is life,
and eternal life, as the Apostle says. In him is life, 1. Ioh. 11. 12.
and no where else to be had, according to that of the same Apostle, he that
has the Son has life, and he that has not the Son, has not life.

I say then with our Savior, Mat. 10. 16.
be wise as Serpents, in saving the head, for therein their chifest wisdom
consists, as Pliny writes. This is the sure hold, in capite, to hold the head
Christ. But alas there be too many now adays that do not hold this head. Of
this sort are they who worship Saints and Angels, as the Apostle says, Colos.
2. 18. Specially those Qui Mariam Virginem Christo ipsi anteponunt, dum eam sic
inclamant, roga patrem, jube natum, jure matris impera. Item dum ei epitheta
Christo propria attribuunt, dicentes, felix Coeli porta, Item regina
misericordiae, vita and spes nostra, etc.

These do not hold the head, and so do not show themselves wise soldiers,
not so wise as Serpents in their kind.

A good soldier will set upon his enemies betimes, while he is in his best
strength, in the spring of his youth, and cannot defer it till the winter of
old age. And so must we, to approve our selves good soldiers, we must resist
the Devil and his temptations, while our power is at the best, and not put it
off till we be old, Ovid.
and decrepit. Turpe senex miles; Old decrepit men are not fit for the field, A
man upon his deathbed is not fit to master a Giant. And no more is a man so
fit to fight with a Dragon and his Angels, the Devil and his Accomplices, when
his power is at the weakest. Eccles. 12. 1.
I say then with the wise man, remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth,
before the old and evil days, come, or the years draw nigh, when thou will
say, I have no pleasure in them. Set thy self to wrestle against thy
adversaries, 2. Sam. 11. ^.
when Kings go forth to war, that is, at the beginning of the year, in the
Prime of thy time, before Satan's temptations by continuance get strength, and
thy power is lessened.

A good soldier will have special care to strengthen himself where he is
weakest, and there to lay most matter of defense. And so it is wisdom for us
to observe our own weakness, and personal corruptions, and there to fortify
our selves; Though there be in every one of us the seed, and spawne of all
sins, yet there is none but is more prone to some one sin then to another.
As some to walk after the flesh, Susanna.
as the two Judges of Israel. 2. Tim. c. 4. 10.
Others to love the present world, Judith c. 12. 20.
as Demas. Dan. 5. 2.
Others to overcharge themselves with surfeting and drunkenness, Isa. 36. 4.
as Holofernes and Balthazar. Others to swear and blaspheame Gods name, as
Rabshaketh etc. Whatsoever our weakness and personal infirmity is, let us
observe it and there lay most matter of defense, so that we may be able to say
with David, I have eschued mine own wickedness, Psalm. 18. 23.

Goliath in the forehead, tread down sin in the shell, and dash Satan's
brood against the stones while their are infants. Satan is more easily driven
back at the first, then afterward, therefore principijs obsta, put back the
first assault.

veni, then an ito. As Circero reports of Caesar, to his eternal praise, that
is, more by pattern, then by precept: And so to prove our selves good
soldiers of Jesus Christ, we must not only call upon others, doing nothing
our selves; but we must call by our own forwardnes and example, which is the
strongest authority and the most persuasive argument.

captains colors; or to confess his name; or of wounds which he has
received in his service: And so to prove our selves fathfull servants and
soldiers of Christ, we must not be ashamed to confess the faith of Christ
crucified, or of his livery and cognizance, which is the hearing of his word,
and receiving of his Sacraments, or of suffering for his names sake. The
Prophet David did profess to speak of Gods testimonies before Kings, and not
to be ashamed. Psalm. 119. S. Paul said to the Romans, that he was not ashamed
of the Gospel, Romans 1. 16. or of suffering afflictions for preaching the
Gospel 2. Tim. 1. 12. neither may we; if any man suffer as a Christian, let
him not be ashamed, but let him glorify God on this behalf, 1. Pet. 4. 16.

A good soldier is primus in pralio, and postremus in fuga, as it is said of
Xerxes, that is, the first in the fight, and the last in the flight. Nay he
will not fly at all, except his captain sound a retraite, or otherwise
command him, knowing that there is Martial law, present death, if he should
do so: And so if we will approve our selves good soldiers of Christ, we
must be ready, and forward to fight under his banner against sin, the world,
and the Devil. We must be forward and continue faithful in the fight, and
that unto the death. Thus S. Paul, he fought the good fight and finished his
course. 2. Tim. 4. 7. And so must we, Finis coronat opus.
Qui fugit huic merito nulla corona datur. If any man draw back, my soul shall
have no pleasure in him, says the Lord, Heb. 10. 38. There is no safety in
flying; here is no piece of armor appointed for the back in all this Panoply,
but only for the fore-parts; Psalm. 78. v. 10.
but only for the fore-parts; to signify that we, should not like those of
Ephraim, turn our backs in the day of battle, but look our enemies in the
face, and, as the Numantine, rather dye then fly.

Siria, being to fight with an army of the Israelites, at Ramoth Gilead, he
commanded his thirty and two captains which had rule over his charets, saying,
fight neither with small nor great, but only with the King of Israel, 1. Kings
22. 31. And thus must we in our spiritual warfare; we must fight against the
whole army of sin, but specially against the King, and ruling sin, against
chief leaders of sin, those being taken, the rest will never stand. If
Holofernes be slain, his soldiers will fly. Judith c. 15. 1. 12. If the
sheapheard be once struck, the sheep will soon be scattered, Mat. 26. 31.

Neither need we to go far, Combatants of the adverse part. 3.
to take a view of our chiefer enemies. Here they are near at hand,
personated, and deciphered unto us, in number three, in quality most notorious.

The flesh.
or blood and flesh, as the original runs. That is, that corruption of
nature, which has defiled both body and soul, being spread and mixed, with
every part of both, even as the light mingled with darkness, in the twy-light,
or dawning of the day. This corruption and depravednesse of nature, here called
flesh and blood, is one of the chief enemies, that we have to combat, and
wrestle with in this world. Indeed, the Apostle here, does prefixe a non to
this, saying, (...) that is, we wrestle not against flesh and blood. But this
non, is not to be understood, simply, as not at all, but not only, (as is said
before) our own corrupt nature is one, but not our only enemy. It is one of
our enemies, so says the Apostle, the carnal mind is enmity against God, Romans
8. 7. it lusts against the spirit, Galat. 5. 17. it rebelleth against the law
of the mind, Romans 7. 23. 24. Let a man but will that which is good, and evil
is present with him; as the Apostle says, Romans 7. 21. If a man have a mind to
pray, or to praise God, to give, or to forgive, to do, or to suffer any thing
according to Gods will, the corrupt flesh is ready to contrary it, and to say
with the sluggard, Prove. 6. v. 10.
yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep,
or to say as Peter did to Christ speaking of his death, this be far from
thee, this shall not be unto thee, Mat. 16. 22.

A man's own heart is as arch a traitor, as any he shall meet withal, and as
dangerous; and the more, because he is not a foreign but an homebred enemy,
fighting not as a tall soldier, but as a crafty traitor rebelling against the
spirit; like Dalilah in Sampsons bosom, or Judas in Christ's company; like the
moth in the garment, it is bred in us, and daily cherished by us, and yet frets
and destroys us. The heart is deceitful above all things, as the Prophet
says, Ier. 17. 9. Yea more deceitful then Satan himself in some respect,
for our own hearts can deceive us of themselves, without Satan: but not
Satan without our hearts. Nemo laeditur nisi a seipso, is a true saying. There
is no mischief that we fall into, but we ourselves are at least coadjutive
causes, and do help to further the matter. Indeed Satan is as the father
begetting, but our corrupt heart is as the mother conceiving, and bringing
forth sin. Satan the father of sin, could do nothing without this Mother.
The Devil cannot prevail against us but by the help of our own corruption;
he might strike fire long enough, ere there would be any burning, did not we
find him tinder. Grande malum voluntas propira, as Bernard says, Ser. 71. in
Cant. a man's worst foes are they of his own household, of his own bosom, even
his own naughty heart and corrupt affections. Every man is tempted by his own
concupiscence as the Apostle says, Iam. 1. 14. This carries the chiefest
stroke in our sins. The Devell has astutiam suadendi, a persuading slight,
but he has not potentiam cogendi, an enforcing might, as S. August. in Psalm.
91. He cannot make us sin against our wills, if he plow not with our heifer,
Judges 14. 18.
he can get no advantage over us.

Behold then and consider who is your enemy, it is not so much a foreign, as a
domestic foe, a man's foes are they of his own household, the headstrong
passions, and the unruly affections of our own corrupt hearts, are the
greatest enemies that we are to wrestle with. We wrestle against flesh and
blood.

Now knowing this to be so, let us put this knowledge in practice, knowledge
without practice is nothing worth, ignis fatuus, it is like the blazing lamp
of the foolish virgins, that could not light them to the Bridegroomes chamber,
it will do no good unless we do thereafter. Psalm. 111. v. 10.
Let us do then. Which is thus.

First in regard that flesh and blood, 7 Things to be done by us, because the
flesh is an adversary of ours.
that is, our corrupt nature, is an enemy of ours, hereby let us learn to take
heed of our selves. Ita cave tibi ut caveas teipsum, is the counsel of the
wise, that is, so take heed to thy self of other enemies, as that thou take
heed of thy self as an enemy. A me, me salve, Domine, was the prayer of S.
Austine, that is, from mine own self, good Lord deliver me. And so we had
need to pray; for our own hearts, though they would be taken for our familiar
friends, yet they will deceive us, if we take not heed, Quocunque ingredimur
sequitur, una adest in tuis aedibus, una bibit una comedit, una dormit. Terent.
as they did the Gentiles. Romans 1. 21. Yea and though we resist never so much,
yet these deceivers will stick close to us, and follow us at all times, in all
places, upon all occasions, still ready furnished with deceit to beguile us.
And therefore let no man repose too much confidence in his own heart. He that
trusts in his own heart is a fool, says Solomon, Prove. 28. v. 26.

Secondly, hereby let us learn not to be overforward knows to be mere
deceit and consenage? That were to overthrow himself and his cause. Now the
flesh is a traitor, and seeks thy destruction. A deceiver that gives ill
counsel, 1 Kings 12. v. 10.
as the young men to Rehoboam. Consult not then with it, in nothing follow the
counsel of the flesh. But as S. Paul when he was to go to Jerusalem, to
take upon him the calling of an Apostle, did not consult with flesh and blood,
as himself says, Gal. 1. 16. So when any thing is to be done, be not
over-forward to consult with flesh and blood, but with Gods spirit, in Gods
word, for the wisdom of the spirit is life and peace, Romans 8. 6.

Romans 8. 7. it perceives not the things of the spirit, 1. Cor. 1. 14. Men that
are dimme-sighted, and cannot discern without spectacles, if they be put to
descry a thing a far off, the most of them would be of diverse opinions of
it; And men enlightened and regenerated in this life, 1. Cor. 13. v. 32.
do but see in a glass darkly. But the natural man sees not, neither can
he discern at all the things of the spirit. I say then with Solomon, Prove. 3.
v. 5. 7.
lean not to your own understanding; specially in matters of religion. Be
not wise in your own conceits, least in seeking to be wise, ye become
foolish, as the Gentiles, Romans 1. 22.

Fourthly, because flesh and blood is an adversary Mat. 16. 17. If we have any
good in us, we are not debtors to the flesh for it, as S. Paul says, Romans 8.
12. Let not any then glory of their own good nature, Ier. 9. v. 23.
but he that glories, let him glory in the Lord, from whom comes every good
and perfect gift, Iam. 1. 17.

Further, because flesh blood is an enemy, let Ioh. 3. 6. And the flesh without
a regeneration is but a rebel, Mat. 3. v. 9.
Romans 7. 23. say not then, ye have Abraham to your father unless ye do the
works of Abraham, boast not of great blood, unless it be great and good:
corrupt flesh and blood, such as every man's is by nature, being conceived in
sin and brought forth in iniquity, Psalm. 51. v. 5.
cannot inherit the kingdom of heaven, neither does corruption inherit
incorruption. 1. Cor. 15. 50. We must be borne again, having our old
corruption done away, and new grace restored, before we can see the kingdom
of heaven. Nobilitas sola est atque unica virtus.
Ioh. 3. 3. therefore gaudeant been nati, quando renati. Let no man boast of
his birth, except it be his new birth, for therein is the true nobility.

1. Cor. 9. 27.
as the Apostle did: plain fare, and course array is good enough for an enemy.
Bread and water is sufficient, if not too much for him now and then. We mistake
our selves too much, when we are so careful for our bodies, saying, what
shall we eat? and what shall we drink? and wherewith shall we be clothed? For
in so doing, we do as the Israelites did with the Canaanites, even nourish a
snake in our own bosom. We strengthen our enemy to cut our own throats. For
our flesh is of slavish disposition. If a slave be well used; he will grow
saucy, and malepert: he that brings up his servant delicatly, he will be
as his son, as Solomon says, Prove. 2. 21. Nay he will overtop him, as
Jeroboam did Rehoboam. This slave then, the flesh, must have a straight hand
over it, we must keep him short, if we deal wisely, specially we must make
no provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lust thereof, that is the counsel
of the Apostle, Romans 13. 14.

Lastly, because the flesh is an enemy that we Pet. 2. 11. what those fleshly
lusts are, the Apostle sets down, Galat. 5. 19. saying, the works of the flesh
are these, adultery, fornication etc.

But there are some fleshly lusts which fight against the soul in a special
manner, which I beseech you to abstain from. And namely these, fury,
fornication, drunkenness, gluttony, avarice, idleness, pride: fury fights
against the soul like a mad Turk; the furious man's execrable oaths are so
many scabbs to the soul: fornication like treacherous Ioab, 2. Sam. 20. 9.
and false hearted Judas does kiss to kill: drunkenness is the master-gunner,
that sets all on fire: Gluttony will stand for a corporal: Avarice will stand
for a pioner: Idleness for a gentleman of company: And pride must be the
captain. All these are sore enemies to the soul, most deadly enemies; to be
carnally minded is death, Romans 8. 6. Let us then carefully look to them, and
wrestle against them, and endeavor to withstand them. Do this, and show your
selves courageous indeed; for, Fortior est qui se, quam qui fortissima vincit

Moenia, he that is slow to anger, is better then the mighty, he that rules
his spirit, then he that co^quereth a city, Prove. 16. 32. Again do this, and
do all other commandments, even the hardest. The heardest thing in the
judgment of Caesar, is seipsum vincere, for a man to overcome himself; so that
Tunc omnia jura tenebis, cum poteris Rex esse tui. Finally do this, and ye are
made, made kings to God, Revel. vel. 1. 6. kings of great rule.

Latius regnes avidum domando
Spiritum, quam si Libiam remotis
Gadibus jungas, and uterque Poenus
Serviet uni.
Of greater rule, then if thou had the heathen to thine inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth, to thy possession.

But are these all the enemies that we have, to wrestle with? not so. This is
but our captain, with his company, even the flesh, with the unruly affections
thereof.

The second adversary of christians, the world.
and to encounter with, that is, the world. Mundus immu^dus, the unclean,
unbelieving world, with the temptations, and allurements thereof. For we
wrestle not against flesh and blood only, that is, our own flesh and blood.
But against flesh and blood, that is, other wicked men, which are flesh and
blood, as we are.

The wicked world is another enemy, that we, and all other christians are to
wrestle with. John 16. 33.
Of this our Savior speaks, saying, the world hates you, Ioh. 15. 19. In
the world ye shall have tribulations. And so does the Apostle, saying, in the
world there are many adversaries, 1. Cor. 16. 9. There are some violent, as
persecuting Emperors: Others fraudulent, as subtle Heretics. A third both
violent and fraudulent, as pestilent Antichrists, in the kingdom of Popery,
The army of the world against christians.
where the temporal power, and the spiritual are joined together, against all
that is called God, as Luther has it, Loc. Com. Tit. de persecutione verae
Ecclesiae.

The army wherewith the world fights against the faithful servants, Aquinas in
prima.
and soldiers of Christ, John c. 5. 4.
consists of two wings, as Aquinas notes. One is the wing of adversity, on the
left hand. And the other is the wing of prosperity on the right. By the wing of
adversity, the wicked of the world do set upon the Christian soldiers,
diverse ways. As sometime in their body, sometime in their goods, and sometime
in their good name. And in all, many times, they give them the foil, provoking
them, and sometime prevailing with them to forget their vow, and promise with
God; and to make shipwreck of faith and a good conscience. By the wing of
adversity Pseudoapostles were overcome; 1. Tim. 1. v. 19.
even for fear of persecution for the cross of Christ, Galat. 6. 12.
and so was Peter also, when he denied his Master, Mat. 26.

But for one that falls by the onset of adversity, on the left hand, a thousand
more are overthrown by the incursion of prosperity on the right. By this
Balaam was overcome, who loved the wages of unrighteousness, 2. Pet. 2. 15. By
this Demas was overthrown, who forsook the Apostle Paul, for love of the
present world, 2. Tim. 4. 10. yea and by this David was foiled, whom grievous
adversity in the days of Saul, could not overcome. 1. Sam. 11. 2. And hereby
also many are foiled in these days. Worldly hopes have drawn many from the
sincerity of religion, whom outward violence could not move. The sunshine of
prosperity, has made many to unbutton, and to unlase themselves, whom the
storm of adversity made to gird up their loins. As those women of Israel sand
of David, and Saul, by way of joy and gratulation, Sam. 18. 7.
saying, Saul has slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands: so we
may truly sing, of these two, by way of mourning, and lamentation, saying,
adversity has slain thousands, Mundus obsidet me utrinque and per quinque
portas, quinque sc: corporis sensus, sagitiis suis me vulnerat. Bern. medit. 14.
prosperity ten thousands. So that look we on what side we will; either the
left side of adversity or the right side of prosperity, Retia vides, quaecunque
vides. We shall find that we walk in the midst of snares, as the wiseman
says, Ecclus. 9. 13. we shall be sure to find the world an enemy, at all
hands.

What shall we do then in this case? My advise and counsel herein, 5 Things
to be done, because of the enmity of the world.
is that of the Apostle, love not the world, neither the things of the world.
1. Ioh. 2. 15. And that of Christ, take heed least at any time your hearts be
overcharged with the cares of this life, Luke 21. 34. should a man desire much
to eat of choking fruits? And such are the cares of the world, they choke the
word, Mat. 13. 22. should a man excessively love that, which will do him much
harm, prick as thorns, and pierce with many sorrows? And lo, 1. Tim. 6. 9.
10.
so it is with those that love the world, they pierce themselves with many
sorrows, as the Apostle says, they fall into many temptations, and snares,
and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown them in perdition and
destruction. That which I said before then, I say again with the Apostle, love
not the world, neither the things of this world. Raise your affections from
things that are on earth, Colos. 3. v. 2.
and set them on things above. Some will say with the Pharisees, that they will
love their friend, and hate their enemy. Make that good in this, and ye do
well, for the world is an enemy, that we should hate, and not love.

Secondly, because the world is an enemy, wonder 1. John 3. v. 13.
S. John says: or if ye see good men, and good things opposed, and keept
down: Is it any wonder to see one enemy oppose and keep down another? Oderunt
hilarem tristes tristeque jocosi, Sedatum celeres, agilem gnavumque remissi.
Horat. lib. 1. epist. 19.
to see righteousness and unrighteousnes, Christ and Belial, light and darkness
at discord and disagreements? surely no. Oderunt hilarem tristes etc. Contrary
dispositions, have always occasioned contentious oppositions. And therefore I
say with the Apostle, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial,
marvel not if the world hate you, 1. Pet. 4. 12.

Thirdly because the world is an enemy, remember Amb. Ser. 87.
And such are these, and all other workers of iniquity, yea majores sunt
inimici mores pravi, qua^ hosts infesti; there are none more deadly enemies
then ill company. Ephesians. 5. v. 11.
Avoid then, have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness:
Remember that there must be always enmity between the seed of the woman, and
the seed of the serpent, Genesis 3.

Moreover, because the world is an adversary of Cor. 1. 10. let no man then
build his faith and salvation upon it: but upon the foundation of the Prophets
and Apostles, Eph^s. 2. 20.
that is, upon Jesus Christ, for other foundation can no man lay, to make sure
work, 1. Cor. 3. 11. he is the foundation of foundations, he is the sure rock,
the the chief corner stone, elect, precious, on whom he that believes, shall
not be confounded, 1. Pet. 2. 6.

Israel, 2. Kings 2. 21.
and the horsemen thereof, Romans 13. 4.
the Ministers of God to take vengeance on them that do evil, you must look
to it, that ye bear not the sword in vain, but that ye truly, and
indifferently minister justice, to the punishment of wickedness and vice, and
to the maintenance of Gods true religion and virtue. In the entrance of your
profession, you have proclaimed, and vowed war against the world, witness
your Baptism, do not prove runnagate soldiers, and Apostates, in leaving
Christ's colors, to follow the world, away with such perfidiousnesse, be
faithful, be men of your words, and fight manfully under Christ's banner,
against this present evil world.

This is a hard service indeed, to wrestle and fight, contra gentes, against a
world of wickedness. But yet we must set to it, and verify these words with
our practice, that we wrestle, if we will approve our selves, the true
servants, and soldiers of Christ.

Even a service against principalities, The third adversary Christians the
devil.
and powers, against the Rulers of the darkness of this world, against
spiritual wickedness in high places. That is, in a word, against the Devil.
Quem Apostolus hic pluribus epithetis insignit, whom the Apostle here does set
forth by many names, and titles, ut intelligant lectores, quam non sit hostis
ille contemnendus, says Calvin; Calvin in so
that the readers might know, that he is not an enemy to be slighted at, but a
chief, and an arch enemy, for so it is, he is (...), the enemy as he is
called, by way of eminence, Mat. 13. 25. he is Coryphaeus, the chief captain
and ringleader of all forces against us. As for the flesh and the world, qui
nobis molesti sunt, who vex and trouble us, nihil aliud quam jacula ex Satanae
manu emissa; They are no other then the Devils instruments, even darts shot at
us, by his hand, as Calvin upon the place. Nihil aliud sunt omnes impii,
Gregor. Moral. l. 13. c. 15 Ioh. 12. 31. Ephesians. 2. v. 2
quam membra Diaboli, as Gregory in his Morals: (...), the Devil is (...), the
prince, yea (...) principality, as he is here termed, having rule and dominion
over the children of disobedience, by Gods permission, his own usurpation, and
their subjection, so that he is a principal enemy.

Again the other titles here given unto him declared as much, (...) powers,
this shows that he is a potent enemy, (...), spiritual wickedness, or
wicked spirits, this shows that he is a wily and crafty enemy. And all these
together, show that he is a mighty, cruel and cunning enemy. And this the
Scripture does further witness unto us, calling him a Lion for his might, a
roaring Lion for his malice, 1. Pet. 5. 8. A Dragon for his fury and felnesse.
A great Dragon for his power and might. A great red Dragon for his bloody
malice, ^el. 12. 3. 4.
and madness against Christ, and his members. A Dragon with 7 heads, for his
manifold sleights and subtilties, wherein he is his crafts master. A Dragon with
10 horns for his dreadful power. With 7 crowns upon his head, for his
manifold victories over the world. A Dragon whose very tail drew the third
part of the stars of heaven, and cast them to the earth, for his victory over
many Ministers, which shined in life and doctrine as the stars of heaven, by
the means of ambition, and covetousness, and other fleshly lusts. Further he
is called a Serpent for his subtlety, and an old serpent for his great
subtlety, Genesis 3. 1.
Revel. 20. 2. -- Cui nomina mill,
Mill nocendi arts --
He has a thousand names, and a thousand ways to hurt us, as Hierome to
Heliodorus de vita eremitica.

Afford your attention a while, 9 Stratagems of the Devil to entrap men in.
and I will discover some of his wiles, and stratagems unto you, that you may
the better avoid them. Mala eius cognita facilius evitantur. For it is easier
to shun known, then unexpected dangers.

wanton glaunces, to loose the reins of our tongues to friske it out a little
in some idle and lascivious speeches. To unshackle our feet to carry us a
little to such and such places of lewd resort. Thus he begins with little
things. As if a little leaven leavened not the whole lump, 1. Cor. 5. 6.
as the Apostle says. And a little leake in a ship did not drown all,
unless it be stopped: And so a little sin did not sink us in the pit of
perdition, unless it be repented of.

A second sleight of Satan is to tempt us to yield Iam. 2. 10. or that one act
of licentiousness did not engender the desire of two, and two the desire of
four, and ten the desire of twenty. And so, Quo plus sunt potae plus
sitiuntur aquae, The more this stolen water is drunk, and this vice committed,
the more the desire is increased.

A third wile of Satan, is to promise great matters Mat. 4. v. 9.
pleasure, preferment, saying, Omnia haec tibi dabo, all these things will I
give thee. That is, I will make thee Pope, as the Centuriators interpret it: Or
I will give thee this Bishopric, that Cardinallship, such a living, so much
money, or maintenance, etc. All these will I give thee, if thou will worship
me, by idolatry, superstition, blasphemy, profaneness, or otherwise by
breaking Gods commandments. As if Godliness were not the greatest gain, 1.
Tim. 6. v. 6
and the sweetest pleasure to please God; even sweeter then the honey and the
honey comb, yea more delightful then all manner of riches, as the Prophet
David says, Psalm. 119. 14.

Ioh. 7. v. 48. This sect is every where spoken against, Act. 28. v. 22.
is their plea in another place, As if many did not run the broad way, as
Christ says, Mat. 7. 13. or that many and mighty were called, 1. Cor. 1. 26.
or if called were chosen, Mat. 20. 16.

Malac. 3. 14. 15. As if Christ's kingdom were of this world, John 18. 36. or
that being killed for Christ's sake, they were not therein more then Conquerors,
Romans 8. 37.

A sixth sleight of Satan is to set out foul sins and errors, with a fair
face, color and countenance, even with the color of grace and virtue, even as
the the crafty pyrate does sometime hang out the same colors that the honest
Mariner does, thereby to entrappe him. 2. Cor. 11. 4.
So Satan will sometimes transform himself into an Angel of light. As thus,
he will set out licentiousness under the name of liberty, drunkenness under
the color of good fellowship, covetousness under the name of good husbandry,
fury under the name of mettle, or manhood, whoredom under the name of loving a
mistress, Simony under the name of gratuity, unlawful sports under the name
of honest mirth and recreation, Popery under the name of old Religion, or the
Catholic faith. Depopulation, and enclosing of commons under the name of
using ones own; or doing with ones own as he list etc.

Thus he dies all his bad clothes in good colors, guilds over his false coin,
sugars over his temptations, and paints the foul faces of sin with the fine
colors of virtues and graces.

Yea he will not stick to adventure to deceive Saul, 1. Sam. 18. v. 14.
under Samuels mantle. Prove. 8.
O then, what need have we to fly to Jesus Christ, who dwells with prudence.
What need have we not to be carried with every thing that has a show of
goodness, or indifferency. But to bring these painted strumpets of the Devil,
to the light, yea and to the heat of the word of God. And then their painting
shall melt away, and we shall see their beauty came out of the Devils box.
Beloved, nimium ne creed colori, be not carried away with colors, and shows.
The Devil has a fair color for the foulest sin.

A 7th trick of the Devil is to put a vizard of evil heresy, and the
Professors thereof Heretics, so the Papists: to call the wholesome discipline
of our Church Popish superstition, so the Schismatics. To call conscience of
sin, and a desire in all things to live honestly, precise niceness, so the
carnal Gospellers. Thus by calling evil good, and good evil, he would bring
it to pass that there should be nothing but evil and so in the end nothing
but woe? For woe shall be to him that calls evil good, and good evil, Isa. 5.
20.

egg, as for the rosting of an Ox; I mean to be as zealous for the small,
as for the weightier matters of the law, for the swaddling clothes, as for the
body of religion, for the circumstance, as for the substance. A thing very
dangerous to the Church, as we may see in the example of Auda Bishop in Persia,
who in an excess of zeal throwing down a Temple of the Pagans, was the cause
that the king thereby incensed, threw down all temples of the Christians, as
Theodoret writes, Lib. 5. Remember then to keep the mean according to Gods
word, Isa 30. 21. Be not righteous overmuch, make not thy self over wise,
Eccles. 7. 16. If ye cannot do that good ye and desire, do that ye can, and
so be zealous according to knowledge, Romans 10. 2. If with Paul ye cannot put
down Castor, and Pollux, the badges of heathenisme or Papisme, yet do not run
out of the ship, S. Paul did not so, Act. 28. 11. or if ye dwell in Ephesus
an idolatrous place where the great Goddess Diana is worshipped, so that with
S. Paul ye cannot hinder it, yet for all that, do not in an undiscreet zeal
leave your Minister, run out of Ephesus, S. Paul did not so, Act. 19. 10. I
take it, that wisdom is not from above, when men will do nothing, unless
they may do what they will. Surely such fiery zeal has some of the Devils
powder in it.

Another policy of Satan to overthrow Gods Peter, for curiosity, with Quid ad
te? what is that to thee? follow thou me, Ioh. 21. 21.

Many other wiles, and Stratagems Satan has, to ensnare, and entrap us; which
I have now no time to relate, these be they which be now most in use. And by
these you see what a dangerous enemy you have.

What remains then, but that we shake off all security, and provide, and
prepare to withstand him? What remains but that we should be sober and
watch, seeing our adversary the Devil goes about and seeks so many ways to
devour us? That is the counsel of the Apostle in this case, let us follow it,
and watch.

Specially let us be careful that we give him no advantage against us, 8
Ways whereby we give the Devil advantage against us.
and so betray our selves into his hands. There be many ways whereby advantage
is given unto Satan. And whereby as it were we tempt the Temptor.

One is being too wordly minded, so much the Quia praevalet adversus eos qui
mundana cogitant. Says Aretius upon the place, that is, because he prevails
much against those that are wordly minded. And this the Apostle witnesses more
plainly, in another place, saying, that they which be rich fall into
temptation, and a snare of the Devil. 1. Tim. 6. 9.

Rector tenebrarum, (.i.) Ruler of the darkness of this world, for this is,
because he rules, and domineires most over them that live in darkness, and
blindness of mind, in dark and blind ignorance of the Scripture. And this our
Savior speaks in more plain terms, saying, ye err, not knowing the
Scriptures, Mark. 12. 24. so that if we will not fall into errors and the
snares of the Devil, we must beware how we live in dark ignorance.

Patente porta impossible est malum ulterius non procedere. Set open but one
gate of a besieged city, and the enemies will come in as certainly, as if all
the walls were demolished. Let error get but once into the belfrey, and it
will never leave till it be in the chancell, as learned Fulk has noted. Suffer
it to be but in the porch, and it will not be long, but you shall see it
possessed of the Church it self, yea and jetting in the pulpit also. As then
Moses would not yield to Pharaoh in a hoof, Exodus 10. 20. or orthodoxall
christians to Arrius in a letter, so as to say (...) for (...), no more let us
yield to any error in life or doctrine, in profession or practice, specially
not to idolatry. No, not for all the kingdoms in the world, and the glory
thereof. So would not Christ, Mat. 4. 8, 9. no not for an hour, so did not
Paul, Galat. 2. 5. est leo si fugias. If ye give place but a little to his
temptations, on he goes. Acrius urge^hostis.
And the more we give place to him, the more he encroaches. Therefore beware
how you yield to him in the least motion, in an apple, as Eve, or in a look,
as Lots wife. Give a hot horse his head at first, and he will surely run away
with you. And so will this beast if we give him the bridle, if we but a little
yield to him. Satan can use small finnes, as the fisher uses small hairs, to
hold the fish as fast, or faster then greater tackling, and secret sins to
do more harm in the soul then open.

A 4th way, whereby we give advantage to the S. Cyprian, his throne as S. John
calls it, Revel. 2. 13. Now can a man be safe where Satan's throne is? Amongst
the children of disobedience where he bears rule? Ephesians. 2. 2.
Can a man take fire in his bosom, or walk upon coals and not be burnt?
Surely the sweetest waters by running into the sea, become salt and brackish:
And so men of sweet natures, and excellent graces have been perverted by the
company of the wicked. Witness Joseph, who was snared to swear by the life of
Pharaoh, in the court of Egypt, And the Apostle Peter who was tempted to deny
his Lord and Master, in the Hall of Caiaphas. To give the Devil therefore no
advantage over us, we must have no company with the wicked.

^tium pulvinar Diaboli: idleness is the Devils pillow, to rest on, Quem non
invenit occupatum ipse occupat, he will employ those that will not employ
themselves. The crabfish when as the oyster does open, flings into her a little
stone, so that she cannot shut her self again, and so the crab devoures the
oyster: Even so says Hierome, our adversary the Devil, like the crab, when
he finds us idle, and gaping, like the oyster, takes his opportunity to
confound us. When we sleep and are secure, then he will be sowing of tares, in
the field of the church, and in the ground of our hearts. Mat. 13. 25.
Therefore let us follow the counsel of Christ which says, occupamini donec
veniam, that is occupy or be doing, till I come. Luke 19. Res age tutus eris.



marketplace of a Town, or City, be safe from the siege of an enemy, if the
gates be cast open, or the walls demollished, or the ramparts bared of their
fence, and munition? or can a kingdom be safe from an invading enemy, unless
the cinqueports be carefully looked to, and watched? Now the senses, specially
our seeing, and hearing, are the gates of our hearts, and the cinque ports of
our souls, If we do not then look well to them, and keep a diligent watch
over them, we make our selves a prey to the enemy, we open the gates for him to
come in, and therefore if we will not give the enemy too much advantage, let us
with David turn away our eyes from beholding vanity, Psalm. 119. 37. Vrit
videndo foemina, active, and passive
and our ears also from hearing vanity. Let us look to all the senses of our
bodies, as so many gates and doors of our souls, that Satan enter not in
that way, lock them, bar them, bolt them fast.

Finally, if you desire not to give the devil advantage Mat. 8. 31.
entreated Christ that he would suffer them to go into the herd of swine,
because the chief place of the Devils residence, is the soul of the swilling
drunkard, as Bonaventure gives the reason. In dry places he finds no rest,
says Christ, Mat. 12. 43. that is, in sober minds he gets no footing, as the
same Author interprets it, he dwells in low countries and wet grounds, that
is, with such as are filled with wine, wherein is excess: Invadunt urbem somno
vinoque sepultum; V^gil.
When the Trojans were dead drunk, then the Grecians did set upon, and
overcame them, says the Poet. When Benhadad king of Syria, with two and
thirty kings more in his company, were coming against Achab king of Israel
and perceiving Achabs power to be small in respect of his, did fall a banketing
and drinking with the Kings, 1. Kings 20, ^2.
his aiders, and made themselves drunk, Achab with his small power overcame
them all: And so when we have distemperd our selves, by eating, or drinking,
then instead of over coming the Devil, our enemy, he overcomes us making us to
kill our dear friend Clitus, with Alexander, or to commit incest, with Lot, or
to commit all ungodliness, Genesis 19. 32.
even with greediness, as the Sodomites. Therefore if you will not give place
to the Devil, follow the counsel of Christ, that is, take heed least at any
time your hearts be over chared with surfeiting, and drunkenesse, Luke 21. 34.

There be many other ways whereby we give place, and advantage unto the Devil
against us, As by immoderate anger and wrath, Ephesians. 4. 26, 27. By being
wavering minded, and unsettled in the faith. Iam. 1. 6. By impatience and
discontent, by pride and ambition, by yielding to any corruption, we give the
Devil so much ground, and instead of beating him out of our borders, we let
him in, and betray our selves into his hands, and lead our selves into his
temptations, contrary to our form of prayer.

And now (Beloved) we have no need to do so; we have no reason at all to give
any odds, or advantage to Satan in this combat, by these, or any other
ways, for we are not so strong, as that we may afford it. But especially we
may not presume to encounter with this adversary, naked, or without our sword,
the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God; as the seduced Papists are
put to, by their most injurious leaders. No, no, the truth is, let us look to
our selves as well as we can, and arm our selves as strongly as we can, and
take all the advantage and helps that may be had, we shall have ennough to
do, with these principalities and powers, with the Rulers of the darkness of
this world, with the spiritual wickednesses, or wicked spirits, those secret
and invisible enemies. Yea, and more then we can well acquit our selves of, as
of our selves, for of our selves we are not sufficient to think, much less
to do it, 2. Cor. 3. 5. so that we have no reason to give any advantage herein.

And beside, the cause or matter of the Conflict, The cause of the Conflict.
non de parvis quibusdam rebus, is no small matter, that we should be secure
and careless. Sed de rebus quae sunt in coelestibus, hoc est pro regno
coelorum, and adoptione, nobis lucta, says Aretius upon the place; But a
matter of heaven, and heavenly things, a matter of a kingdom, and our right
and interest to it, that is the thing in question, the matter of the quarrel,
and combat between us. And is not this a weighty matter, that we should
bestirre our selves about it? Surely how light soever we make of it, it is a
matter of life and death. It is such a matter, that we must either kill or be
killed. For if we do not crucify the flesh with the affections and lusts, the
flesh will be our death, for to be carnally minded is death, Romans 8. 6. If
the world be not crucified unto us, and we unto the world, the world will be
our ruin; for the world shall be damned, 1. Cor. 11. 32. If we do not dash
Babilons children against the stones, Psalm. 137. v. ^9.
suppressing the first motions of sin, and temptations of Satan, they will
be sure to dash us to death; for the wages of sin is death, Romans 6. 23.

So then it concerns us near to look to it; being a matter of so great
consequence, and importance, a matter of life and death, the winning or loosing
of our heavenly inheritance in high places. And that in strife with so potent
and politic enemies, let us consider then, and think of the matter, that we
have in hand. A high place in heaven is worth the striving for, specially when
it may be had for striving, according to that, the kingdom of heaven suffers
violence, and the violent take it by force, Mat. 12. 12. It is worth somewhat
that Satan does so much strive, and struggle to get from us. A theife will not
meddle with a poor beggar, that has nothing to loose, a pirat will not set
upon empty ships, a mighty enemy will not invade a kingdom, or lay siege to
a City, with great violence to win it, where there is no great matter to be
had: and so surely it is not for nothing that Satan with all his forces, does
make such fierce and violent assaults upon the servants of God: no, Coelestia,
these high places, or heavenly things, for which he wrestles with us, are great
things, and so let us with great care contend for them.

The time of the Conflict.
for the time of the warfare and wrestling with Satan, and his forces is now,
even this present time. The Apostle here sets it down so, saying, (...), we
wrestle, or there is a wrestling, and as he says it, so we find it indeed, for
as heretofore he that was borne after the flesh, Galat. 4. 29
persecuted him that was borne after the spirit, even so it is now. Now the
world is full of such as scoff at Isaac, Act. 7. 51. c. 13. 8.
like Ismael, of such as resist the holy Ghost, as the stiffenecked Jews, of
such as withstand Barnabas and Saul and seek to turn the Deputy from the
faith, like Simon the Sorcerer; of such as be accusers of the brethren, like
the Devil, Revel. 12. 10. of such as greatly withstand the word, like
Alexander the Copper-smith, of such as war with them that keep the
commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ, as the Dragon, 2.
Tim. 4. v. 15.
Revel. 12. 17. Now the world is full of such warriers and wrestlers against
the true worshippers of God, yea and never more, for now the Devil wars with
great wrath, because he knows he has but a short time, v. 12.

And seeing it is so that there is such warring and wrestling of the enemies
side against us at this time, Let us of the other side be as ready, and
forward, to war and wrestle against them, so that we may truly say, nobis
lucta, we wrestle.

Yea, and this let us resolve to do, Job. 7.
not for a day or two, but for as long as we live, for militia vita hominis
super terram, as Job says, the whole life of a Christian is a continual
warfare here on earth.

Nunquam bella bonis, nunquam issidia cessant,
Et quocum cert et men's bona semper habet.
Good men must not look for peace upon earth, Christ came not to send it, Mat.
10. 34. The Dragon and his Angels will fight with the Michael and his Angels,
as long as the world lasts, so that we must war as long as we live. They will
be sure to war, and wrestle with us, either by inward or outward temptations,
by violent persecutions, or fraudulent Heresies, by sharp tongues or sharp
swords, or, both, and we had not need to lie still, and to let them alone,
without any resistance, surely no, we have cause to war and wrestle with
them, as well as they with us, and more too, for if we fight the good fight,
and finish our course, and keep the faith, we shall obtain the crown of
righteousness, but so shall not they. Therefore let us resolve upon it, and
wrestle against flesh, and blood, against principalities and powers, against
Rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickednesses in high
places, against the Devil, and all his forces, of persecuting Tyrants, of
subtle heretics, of pestilent Antichrists, of wicked worldlings and carnal
Gospellers, And this unto the end.

But (here some will say) how shall we, Ob.
that are weak and frail, be able to wrestle and encounter, with so potent
and politic enemies, with so many and malicious adversaries? or if we do
presume to wrestle and fight with them, how shall we prevail against them? Sol:
The truth is we cannot prevail against them, by our own strength, we must
have some other means, even the strength of the Lord. And therefore the
Apostle says, be strong in the Lord, v. 10. We must have other armor then our
own to fight in, even the armor of God. And therefore the Apostle says, ^
General part (1) Conquest wherein 3 things*
put on the armor of God, that ye may be able to stand in the evil day, which
is the true means of the Conquest, and the last point.

The means of the Conquest*
not the armor of the flesh, for cursed is he that makes flesh his arm, Ier.
17. 5. Not the armor of the world, Haec sunt sarcasmi Diaboli Chemnitius.
for our enemies are worldly Governors, and the chief of them the Prince of
this world. Ioh. 2. 31. Not the armor of the Devil, as Popish exorcisme,
Superstitious crossing, Holy water, Masses, Diriges, Crucifixes, Consecrated
hosts, Grains, Oil, Relics of Saints, Agni Dei, and such like trumperie
which the Papists use. Not the wooden dagger of fabulous histories, or the
rusty scabberd of old traditions, as the same Romanists use. These are weapons
of the Devils own making, and forging, not of Gods appointing, here are none
of these among the armor of God, and yet here is (...), the whole armor of God.
Again, we may not use charms, and such like, which coniurers use, here are
none of these mentioned. These are the Devils watchword, not Gods word, this
is to cast out the Devil by Beelzebub, not by the finger of God, further we may
not use wanton sonets, thundering oaths, or mad mirth, as carnal protestants
do, nor yet lies and libels, as undiscreet schismatics do, and the Papists
also, who call their lies and cheating tricks, Pias frauds, godly deceits.
These are the Devils weapons and engines, framed in his shop, who is a liar
from the beginning, Ioh. 8. 44.
and given at his appointment, and therefore little feared by him.

These are not the weapons that we must fight with, or if fight that we can
over come with; no, no, 1. Sam. 17. 9. 10.
he that trusts in his own strength shall prove weak like Goliath, or in his
own wit, shall prove a fool, 2 Samuel 17. 23.
like a Achitophell, Luke 18. 13.
or in his righteousness, shall prove most unrighteous, as the Pharisees,
before whom the Publicans and sinners (repenting of their own
unrighteousness, and relying by faith on the righteousness of Christ) shall
enter into the kingdom of heaven. He that trust in Princes, or any child of
man, shall find true, Isa. 36. v. 6.
which Rabshaka spoke of the king of Egypt, that they are but broken reeds to
lean to. He that trusts in his strong hold, great wealth, in his chariots,
horses, forces, in any thing besides God, for his defense and safety, shall
find as little help and comfort in time of need, as the Priests of Baal had of
Baal, at their need, even none at all, 1. Kings 18. 29.

Outward means are good and necessary to be used, but in no wise to be trusted
in. If we set them up in Gods room, they become very pernicious, or most
unprofitable, specially if they be unwarrantable means. While others then
strengthen themselves in their own might, lane to their own wisdom, repose
themselves on their own righteousness, betake themselves to their own
freedom, follow their own ways, trust to their own forces, let us (with
David) remember the name of the Lord our God, Psalm. 20. 7. And as the Apostle
says, so say I unto you; My Brethren be strong in the Lord, and in the power
of his might.

Put on the armor of God, 2 Cor. 10. v. 4.
that is, the grace of God. For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, as
the Apostle says; But spiritual, even the grace of Gods spirit. By this we
are saved, Ephesians. 2. 8. By this we stand, 1. Pet. 1. 12. This is the armor of
proof, that is mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds, to
the casting down of imaginations, and every high thing, that exalts it self
against the knowledge of God, and to bring into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ, 2. Cor. 10. 4, 5.

Give diligence then to arm and furnish your selves with grace, that you may
be able to encounter with your spiritual enemies, and to withstand their
assaults.

Take unto you the whole armor of God, that is, the manifold graces of Gods
spirit, all christian virtues, and thereby adorn the understanding, the will,
Particular means of the conquest.
the affections and the whole inner man. And namely, and specially take unto
you the graces and virtues here mentioned, and commended unto us, that is.

First, take the girdle of truth, that is, the knowledge Ioh. 17. 17.
the true knowledge of the word of God, which is the word of truth, and thereby
inform and adorn your understanding. Danda inprimis operimis opera est, ut
Deum noscamus, quotquot felices esse volumus: The first thing that we must
labor for, is to know the truth, that is it which is here first commended by
the Apostle. And it is the first charge which king David gave unto his son
Solomon, saying, and thou Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy fathers,
2. Chron. 28. 9.
and serve him with a perfect heart, and a willing mind etc. he bids his son
serve God with a perfect heart, but first he bids him know him, because
without knowledge, we cannot serve him: or at least not rightly and
acceptably, as we may see by the example of the Jews, Romans 10. 2. who had the
fear of God, but not according to knowledge. Without knowledge of the word of
truth, we know not where we are, nor which way to go to save our selves, and
to escape the enemy. He that walks in darkness knows not whither he goes,
says Christ himself, Ioh. 12. 35. And it is impossible, till we come to the
knowledge of the truth, that ever we should come out of the snare of the
Devil, says S. Paul. 2. Tim. 2. 25. 26.

Let us labor then first of all to know the truth, out of the word of truth,
that thereby we may discern right from wrong. And when we have known it, let
us gird our selves therewith, that is, stick close to it, and then fear not,
Vincet veritas, Truth will prevail, for truth is great, and mighty above all
things. 1. Esdras 4. 41.

1. Pet. 1. 22.
and to speak the truth. We must go further, and obey the truth, and with
Gajus, walk in the truth 3. Ioh. 3. And namely in this truth, of serving the
Lord in righteousness, so says the Apostle, in the next place, put on the
breast plate of righteousness, that is, endeavor to keep a clear conscience,
void of offense, toward God, and toward man, as S. Paul did, Act. 24. 16.
endeavor to walk inoffensively toward all men. Scire, vel de virtute loqui
minimum est. To know, or to speak the truth, and to give good precepts, is no
great matter, it is the least of a thousand, who cannot do it? But, virtutibus
uti, to join truth and righteousness, sound knowledge and sincere obedience
together, hic labor, hoc opus est. This is the maine matter, this is a work of
moment, and to the purpose: hic murus ahaeneus esto, Nil conscire sibi, nulla
pallescere culpa. This is to make a brazen wall, a strong tower of defense
against the face of our enemies: even to put on the breast plate of
righteousness, as well as the girdle of truth, to join science and conscience
together. With this S. Paul did support, and bear himself out, against the
obloquie, and troubles he endured; in that he had lived in all good conscience
before God, Act. 23. v. 1.
and had his conversation in simplicity, and godly sincerity, 2. Cor. 1. 12.
This made him as bold as a lion, the breast plate of righteousness, the
testimony of a good conscience. With this let us also arm our selves, join to
the girdle of truth, the breast plate of righteousness, knowledge and
obedience, science and a good conscience, Non eget Mauri jaculi^ etc.
and then we need not fear. Qui vadit plane, vadit sane, he that walks
uprightly, walks surely, Prove. 10. 9. walk on then, walk and march in this
armor of truth, and righteousness, of science and a good conscience.

Moreover, let me advise you to take the shoes of David did furnish himself,
according to that, I have sworn, and am steadfastly purposed to keep thy
righteous judgments. Psalm. 119. 106.
And thus did S. Paul also arm himself, when he said, I am ready, not to be
bound only; but also to dye at Jerusalem, for the name of the Lord Jesus, Act.
21. 13. Without this preparation, and firm resolution of the heart, to believe
and obey the Gospel of peace, we shall never be able to hold on in the race of
Christianity, and to pass through the many tribulations, that we shall meet
with, for a wavering minded man is unstable in all his ways, (...) 1. v. 8.
and ready to be carried away with every wind of temptation, and therefore let
us balance our hearts with preparation, and put on a firm resolution to
believe, and obey the Gospel of peace.

Ioh. 25. 5.
though we can do nothing of our selves, in this Conflict, yet through him,
and his righteousness we are able to do all things, Philip. 4. 13. to quench
all the fiery darts, and fierce temptations of the wicked, to overcome the
world, the flesh and the Devil, 1. Ioh. 5. And therefore put on the shield of
Christ's righteousness, by the hand of faith, shroud your selves under this
defense of the most high, Psalm. 1. v. 1.
cleave to Gods promise of grace in Christ.

And because the promises of God in Christ, Psalm. 115. 2. Here again, we are
to remember to furnish our selves with another piece of armor, against this
assault. And namely, with the helmet of salvation, that is, with the hope of
salvation, as the Apostle expounds it, 1. These. 5. 8. A sure and certain hope
of all promised good things, which be yet for to come. This hope and patient
expectation of the performance of Gods promises, is very needful. So says the
Apostle, ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye
may receive the promises, Heb. 10. 36. And so let your patient mind be known
unto all men, as the Apostle advises, hold fast the confidence of your hope
firm unto the end, for hope makes not ashamed, Romans 5. 5.

And in the mean space, while we hope and expect do assault us with their
temptations, we may be able to answer and to repel them, as Christ did, with
a scriptum est, a place of scripture, and thereby cut off their temptations, as
with a sword. The word of God is mighty and powerful to that purpose, being
rightly applied, as we may see by the example of Christ in the fourth of Mat.
yea sharper then any two edged sword, as S. Paul says Heb. 4. 12. Take it
then, put it on, far be it from us, to disarme you of the scriptures, to
wring this special weapon out of your hands, and so to turn you naked unto
all Satan's temptations, as the Romanish teachers deal with their people, or
instead of the sharp two edged sword of the spirit, to put other weapons, of
the Divills forging into your hands to fight with us, as the holy water,
Crosses, Grains, and dirty relics etc. as the same teachers deal with their
people, no, no, we teach you with S. Paul to take the sword of the spirit which
is the word of God, and to put it on, not by spells, and charms, as ignorant
people use to do, but by reading, hearing, meditating and hiding it in your
hearts, and applying it as occasion is offered, to answer, and to put off any
evil temptations. Thus Christ himself did do, Mat. 4. Thus he taught John,
Ioh. 5. at the 39 verse, and so do we saying with Christ, scrutamini
scripturas, search the scriptures, let the word of God dwell in you plenteously
in all wisdom, Colos. 3. 16.

v. 18. vere coelestis armatura est deprecatio quae Deo funditur, says
Chrysostom De orando Deum, Lib. 1. that is, prayer unto God, is the very
armor of God indeed, a heavenly armor, for by this we call, and get God and
all the host of heaven to be of our side, to help us against temptations, and
to deliver us from evil. By this Paul obtained help and grace against inward
temptations, the thorn in the flesh, 2. Cor. 12. 7. 8. 9. By this Moses
obtained help of God against outward tribulations, the army of the Amalekites,
Exodus 17. 11. and this also is the way for us, to obtain help against the
enemy, yea and without this no victory. When we have provided all that we can,
and all is done, except Moses hold up his hands, Exodus 17. v. 11.
Amaleck will prevail. Lift up holy hands unto God, as the Apostle teaches,
1. Tim. 2. 8. Pray always with all prayer, and supplication in the spirit,
pray with private prayer unto God; and pray with public prayer. The prayer of
one righteous man avails much, Iam. 5. 16. but the prayer of many righteous
men avails more, vis unita fortior, Eccles. 4. 9. Mat. 18. 20.
two are better then one, a joint army will do more then two or three men.
Where two or three are gathered together there is Christ, but where more, there
he is more graciously, Act. 2. 1. forsake not then the assembling of your
selves together to common prayer as the manner of some is, Heb. 10. 25. but
come to the habitation of Gods house, and the place where his honor dwells,
the Temple, and their come, not to hear a sermon only, but to pray public
prayers, for we must pray with all prayer, and supplication, with private, and
public, in the secret closet, Mat. 6. 6. and in the public Sanctuary, Psalm.
150. 1. and we must do this in the spirit too, as the Apostle says, that is,
not out of fashion, but of pure devotion, not out of fained lips, but with a
true and sincere heart, Psalm. 17. 1. 1. These. 5. 17. Mat. 17. 21.
Heb. 10. 22. yea, and we must watch hereunto, with all perseverance; without
this, the Devil will not away, he is not cast out but by fasting and prayer,
yea, and watching too, Mat. 26. 41. watch therefore and pray that ye enter not
into temptation, or if ye do enter, that ye be not overcome, but delivered
from the evil thereof. Mat. 6. 13.

These be the several pieces of the armor of God, with these we must arm our
selves, and fight, if ever we will prevail, in this spiritual warfare. It is
not here, as in the bodily warfare, illic enim humanis viribus resistitur
gladius opponitur gladio, homo cum homine confligit, vis vim, ars artem
excipit. In the bodily warfare men do commonly resist their adversaries, with
such weapons as their enemies do impugn them withal, but here alia est
ratio, it is otherwise, as Calvin notes upon the place.

In the spiritual warfare, if we fight against Satan, and his accomplices, with
such weapons as they use in fighting against us, then we are gone. That is if
we render evil for evil, and rebuke for rebuke, and give as good as they
bring, as the saying is, then we are foiled by Satan and his power. For, Quid
interest inter provocantem and provocatum? Says Tertullian, that is, what
difference is there between him that does provoke to evil, and him that is
provoked to evil, by ill words or deeds? Nisi quod ille prior in maleficio
deprehenditur, and ille posterior. But that one sins first, and the other
next. And so both are foiled by Satan, causing them both to sin.

We must not then fight with Satan, and his accomplices, with such weapons as
they bring, rendering evil for evil, or rebuke for rebuke. But if we will
fight to overcome, we must not be overcome of evil, but overcome evil with
good, Romans 12. 21. That is, if our enemies curse, as they do sometimes with
bell, book, and candle, we must not curse again, but bless. If they
persecute, we must not persecute again, but pray for them, and do good to
them, that hurt us, Mat. 5. 44. Against spiritual harms, we must use
spiritual arms. Against the works of darkness, we must put on the armor of
light, that is, virtues against vices. As David being to fight with Goliath, did
cast from him the armor of Saul, and took to him weapons far unlike those
that Goliath brought against him: So must we, when we go out, in the name of
God, against that uncircumcised Philistine, we must cast from us carnal
weapons, and put on the armor of God, even the grace of God, his manifold
graces, as a complete armor. And namely, and specially these graces here
mentioned, as the grace of truth and syncerity of religion, the grace of
righteousness and upright conversation, the grace of preparation and purpose
of heart to profess and practice according to the Gospel of peace, the grace
of faith in the promises of God in Christ, the grace of hope and expectation of
the promises believed, the word of grace, the grace of prayer and supplication
to God, both public, and private.

These graces are the armor of God, and they are so called by way of
comparison with corporal armor, as that, because they are given us of God,
Why the graces of God are called armor.
for our defense against our spiritual enemies, as that is, against our
corporal, and are defensive, and offensive both, as other armours are, and do
declare the bearers, and wearers thereof, to be the servants and soldiers of
Christ, as men's armor, and coats show to what Captain they belong to, and
they are the means which we must use, and whereby we must fight against our
spiritual enemies, as corporal armor is the means, that we must use and
fight in, against our corporal enemies.

But herein, as there is a paritie, or liknesse; so there is a great disparity,
or unlikenesse, betwixt these, and other corporal armor, for that many times
is not sufficient, and therefore broken in pieces, but this is always
sufficient, so says the Lord to this Apostle in another place, my grace is
sufficient for thee, 2. Cor. 12. v. 9.

Take then unto your selves this whole and sufficient armor of God, these
special graces, here mentioned.

But here it may be enquired, Q:
may not we also take the armor of men, Corporal armor, as well as
spiritual?

I answer, R:
we may: it is lawful for Christian men, at the commandment of the
Magistrate, to wear weapons, and to serve in wars; according to the doctrine
of our Church, Eccles. 2. 8.
Art. 37. and also according to the scriptures, which say, that there is a time
of war, as a time of peace, that the Magistrate is not to bear the sword in
vain, Romans 13. 4. that he that has none should buy a sword. Luke 22. 36. That
many good men did wear, and use humane weapons, as Gedeon, Sampson, David, who
subdued kingdoms Heb. 11. 33. and Cornelius the Centurion Act. 10. All these
did arm the body, and use corporal weapons, and so may we.

But here I say again, that the body is not the first part that we must arm,
nor humane weapons the first weapons that we must take to our selves. The first
part that we must arm, is the inner man, the soul, which is the life of the
body. And the first armor that we must arm it withal, is the armor, or
grace of God, which is the life of the soul. Thus says the Apostle, in the
former chapter, at the 14th verse etc. I bow my knees unto the father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, of whom all the family of heaven and earth is named, that he
would grant you, according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with
might by his spirit, in the inner man. And thus S. Peter, your adorning, let it
not be outward adorning, 1. Pet. 3. 3. 4.
but let it be the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not corruptible,
even the ornament of a meek, and quiet spirit, the ornament of faith, and a
good conscience, here called the breast plate of righteousness. Without this,
and the rest of the ornaments, and muniments here mentioned, even the
strongest, and best armed man, will prove a coward, and fly when none
pursues, as Solomon says Prove. 28. 1. And as the Syrians did, 2. Kings 7. 7.

I say then unto you (Brethren) arm your selves as well as you can, both for
the inner, and outward man, both with the corporal and spiritual armor: but
first of all, and above all, arm the inner man, with the armor of God. Take
unto your selves the armor of God, his grace which is sufficient for you; 2.
Cor. 12. 9.

The manner how to use the means of Conquest.
which is the manner how this means is to be used; and the next point. This
armor is not only to be taken, and hung up at home or sometime to be showed
abroad, to be seen of men: but to be used and employed daily, in the Lords
service, which is meant by putting on. God gives us his gifts and graces, to
the end that we should use and employ them. And therefore he says in another
place, stir up the grace of God that is given you, 2. Tim. 1. 6. occupamini
donec veniam, occupy and employ your talents till I come, Luke 19. 13.

If ye have then the armor, App^re quod sis, vel esto quod appares. Parum
sepultae distat i^^rtiae caelata virtus.
these grace of God in you, show what ye are, show them by your profession, and
practice, and appear in your colors. If a man has his armor on, and does
use it, it will appear and be seen on him. So let it be with you, play not
the unprofitable servants, to hide your talents, your armor in the ground, use
it, put it on.

Put on the whole armor of God. Not only the girdle of truth, and the
breast plate of righteousness, but all the whole armor, head and foot, for if
you should arm the head only, the Devil happily would strike at the foot. If
the foot only, then he might hurt the head. If both, and leave our breast
unarmed, he might wound us at the heart. Therefore to make sure work, put on
the whole armor, that ye may repel all the assaults of the Devil; lay not
open any part to his blow.

Or if you will have more of some one part, 3 Parts specially to be armed.
then of another; why then look well to the head, the heart, and the outward
senses, that ye arm them strongly.

city, labors most of all to gain the tower, or the castle; knowing that if
he can take hold and possess that, he shall instantly command the rest of the
whole town: So likewise the Devil, who daily does assault our little city,
plots specially how he may be possessed of our Capitol, and sconce. Knowing
assuredly that if our head be tippling, our eyes will be wanton, our tongue
blaspheamous, our throat an open sepulcher, our hands ready to stabbe, our
feet swift to shed blood. Romans 6. v. 13
In brief, all our members at his service, to become servants of
unrighteousness, to commit all manner of ungodliness, even with greediness;
Therefore it is good for us, to have special care to arm the head, with
sobriety, and watchfullnes.

And so likewise for the heart, for that is the hold Prove. 4. 23.
And therefore, as Solomon says, so say I unto you, Omni custodia custodi cor
tuum. Keep thine heart with all diligence, have it in an holy suspicion, so as
to examine and search it daily, and to observe the treacherous and deceiveable
lusts, that lurk therein. And when by the light of the word, you have found
any, do not stay till they assault you, but do you assault them, and beat
them down with the armor of God, using Martial law, presently condemn and
crucify them.

And in like manner, for the outward senses, we he plants his chief munition
and ordnance. And so must we keep a special watch and ward, at the gates of
the little city, of our soul, even our senses, and there plant our munition,
that the enemy may not enter in thereat. Job. 31. 1.
Thus did Job, when he made a covenant with his eyes, that he would not look
upon a maid. And Daniel when he would not taste of the Kings dainties, Dan. 1.
8.
nor defile himself therewith. And David when he vowed that he would not
hear, Psalm. 26. 6.
nor see, nor touch any wicked thing, Psalm. 101. 3.

But though I commend unto you a special care of these parts, and passages of
the soul, by these reasous, and examples, yet I would not have you neglect the
rest, but to have a care of all, and to put on all the armor of God, as the
Apostle here teaches.

Yea, Gods armor to be put on in Gods service^
and remember further to put on the armor of God, in Gods service, in his
wars, against his enemies only, not against one another in private grudges
and bickerings, not against the faithful servants, and soldiers of Christ,
Gods own friends, not against God, but against the wiles of the Devil, and
the fiery darts of the wicked. Not in suppressing, but in maintaining of true
religion, and virtue: Not in secret contentions one with another, but in the
public quarrel of the Gospel, against the common enemy.

Many there be, The abuse of Gods armor.
who put on Gods armor, and employ his gifts, not in Gods, but in sins, and
Satan's service.

Of this sort are they who-cite scripture in defense of errors in doctrine, as
of the supremacy, or headshippe of the Church in the Pope, of justification by
works, of transubstantiation in the Sacrament, of invocation of Saints, of
worshipping of images, of equivocation or mental reservation, etc.

Of this sort are they likewise, who cite scripture in defense of errors in
manners, as of swearing, of profaning the Lords day, of adultery, of
drunkenness, of covetousness, of uniustice, of presumption, or any other
sin.

These imitate that grand tempter, Mat. 4.
the Devil, who abusively cites scripture, in tempting of Christ, and thought
to beat him with his own weapon.

Of this sort also are they, who employ their learning and wit, in curious
prying, and searching into hidden Mysteries, in inventing and setting forth
vain and wanton books, and other allurements of sin, or in cheating and
deceaving of others.

Of this sort are they also who make their eyes windows of vanities, who have
their ears open to all filthy talk, songs and ribauld speeches, who use their
tongues to cursing, and swearing, and blaspheming of the sacred name of God
which they should fear and reverence, who employ their hands in fighting,
filching, and the like, who employ their feet in walking in the ways of
sinners, as to bawdy-houses and other such like places of uncleanesse, who
spend their time in eating and drinking and playing, who apply their power to
oppress, and their authority to pervert justice.

Of this sort also are they, who employ their silver and gold in the service of
Baal, Hos. 2. 8. 9.
and to the glory of God, that abuse their outward blessing to glutto and
drunkenness, Amos. 6. 4.
that spend their riches on gorgeous attire, unbeseeming their places; upon
stately buildings for the shreeke-owle and bat to dwell in, upon excessive
cheer, and vain pleasure, spending more at one banquet, then would keep
twenty poor members of Christ Jesus, in good sort all their days.

These, all these put on Gods armor, but not in Gods, but in the enemies
service, they shoot in Gods pieces, but it is in Gods own face, they draw out
Gods sword, but they sheath it in his bowels, they take Gods gifts, but they
give them to the Devil, by their blasphemy, drunkenness, pride and uncleanes.
O horrible perfidiousnes, and treachery, thus to receive large gifts with the
one hand from the Lord, and to give them with the other unto the Devil his
enemy.

Beloved I hope better things of you, and things that accompany salvation,
though I thus speak. And I beseech you, in the bowels of Christ Jesus, our
Savior, after whose name you be called, under whose banner you profess to
fight, whose armor you profess to wear, that you will wear it in his
service, and use it to his glory. Employ Gods gifts in his own service, in
serving God in your own persons, in setting forth his service in others, in
maintaining his service and servants, in building, repairing, and beutifying
the place of his service. And here you have begun well, be not weary of well
doing, perfect this work began, A passage of the preacher touching the
repairing of Paul's.
finish it, employ Gods gifts and talents, not in sins, but in Gods service,
and then you shall never want money, to go through with this worthy work, do
but abate daily one dish of your superfluous courses, and I believe that will
do it.

And here let every one be an actor in his own person, Every one is to use
Gods armor personally.
let every one put on Gods armor, and employ his gifts in his service, for the
Apostle speaks, saying, put on the armor of God, not only to some, but to all
the faithful in Christ Jesus. c. 1. v. 1. We have all need to arm our
selves, 1. Pet. 5. v. 8.
for our adversary the Devil, Mat. 25. Rhem. Annot on Luke 10. 35. 2. Cor. 8.
14. 1. Cor. 9. 16.
as a roaring Lion walks about, seeking whom he may devour, without
exception of any. Let not any then trust to the oil of others, as the foolish
virgins, and the seduced papists, who would make us believe, that if our own
lamps be without oil, we may go and borrow of our neighbors, to supply our
wants: no, no, the best have little enough for themselves, and therefore let
every one look to himself, and arm himself, so wills the Apostle, saying,
have rejoicing in thy self alone, and not in another. Gal. 6. 4. Another man's
meat cannot nourrish me, another man's garment cannot warm me, another man's
eye cannot guide me, neither can another man's work save me. I must work out
mine own salvation with fear and trembling, and so must every one put on Gods
armor, Philip. 2. 12.
and do Gods service not by a Deputy or Attourny but in his own person.

Yea, We are to use Gods armor without delay.
and we must do this presently, without delay, here is no time expressed in
the text, and therefore the time present is to be understood, according to that
legal maxim, ubi nullum tempus praescribitur, praesens intelligitur. It is to
day then, and while it is to day, that we are to hear his voice, and to put on
the armor of God. Isa. 5 5. v. 3.
Now God opens his armorie unto you, which is the holy scripture, whereby you
may furnish your selves, without money, and without price.

Behold, now is the accepted time, now is the day of salvation, 2. Cor. 6. 2.
wherein you may provide for your selves. And now likewise is the day of
temptation, wherein Satan goes about like a roaring Lion, and sometimes like
an Angel of light, seeking whom he may devour. So that we have cause
presently, and instantly to arm our selves, even while it is to day, and this
not for a day only, We are to put on Gods armor constantly.
but every day, as long as we live. For Satan is restless in his temptations
against them that keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of
Jesus Christ, he will never leave tempting them as long as they live in the
faith, and the fear, and the love of God, not quite leave them, Luke 4. 13.
he will sometime leave tempting of them, for a season, as he left tempting of
Christ, but he will come again, with a fresh assault upon them. He is called
Beelzebub, the master fly; and flies though they be never so much beaten away,
yet they will come again and again to the same place, and so will Satan
being repelled, renew his temptations. This unclean spirit, when he is cast
out, will seek to reenter, and where he finds a fit house, a secure heart,
Mat. 12. 44.
he will bring in seven Devils worse then himself. His going away, is but to
renew his assaults, his flight is but to draw us out of our holds, to make use
of his ambushment against us. Let us not then at any time put off the armor of
God, let us not be secure, as the Amalekites, having taken a great spoil of
David, and burned Ziglag, 1. Sam. 30. 16.
lest we be suddenly surprised, and destroyed, as they were: As in the fight we
have an eye unto the victory, so in the victory let us have an eye to the fight
again. Let us stand still upon our guard, put on the armor of God, as long as
you live. Psalm. 1.
Delight in the law of the Lord, and therein exercise your selves day and
night. Pray always, pray, and watch thereunto, with all perseverance, make a
continual use of all the armor, and graces of God stowed upon you. This is
the counsel of our great General, Christ Jesus, here given, by one of his
chief commanders, S. Paul, that we should put on this armor, always, with
all perseverance. And so let us do, as obedient soldiers, of Jesus Christ.

And this the rather, that we may be able to stand The motive to use the said
means of Conquest.
in the day of temptation, which is the motive, to put on this armor, and to
fight this battle, and the last point. And a good motive it is, for who would
not be forward to put on armor, and to fight in a good cause, if he were sure
to overcome. And so it is here, Dicendo enim, ut possitis resistere, innuit
certo nos staturos, si modo armis Dei induti, alacriter pugnemus idque usque,
ad fine^, says Calvin upon the place. That is, in saying, that ye may be able
to stand, he does imply, that we shall surely, and certainly and overcome in
this battle, if being furnished with Gods armor, we fight manfully under his
banner, and that unto the end. Nil desperandum est Christo duce, we need (...)
doubt, or despair of victory, if we fight in Go^ ^rmour, under Christ's banner,
and conduct, for the ^^rd of truth, against the father and favorers of lies.
He that overcomes the servants of God thus fighting, must overcome God
himself, Nemo nos laedit nisi qui Deum vincit.
who is the Lord of hoasts; and falsify his word, who has promised that they
should as soon overcome and discomfit his son, and our Savior Christ Jesus
(...) is the General of the field; yea and beat in pieces Gods own armor,
Mat. 16. 18.
as weak and unsufficient, which I believe, the gates of hell shall never be
able to do. For let Satan, and all the powers of hell, do what they can
against the Church and people of God, Genesis 3. 15.
they can but calcaneum conterere; bruise their heel, and lame them a little,
their head they can never break, and quite overthrow. Though they fall, yet
they shall not be cast down, for the Lord upholdeth them with his hand, Psalm.
37. 24. Though the Dragon, and his Angels, that is, the Devil, and his forces,
fight with Michael and his Angels, that is with Christ, and his members, yet
they shall not prevail, Revel. 12. 7. Though Satan be strong, yet Christ is
stronger, and will bind that strong man, and spoil his house, Mat. 12. 29. he
will save his servants, and soldiers, fighting with his armor, in his
battle.

I, Q:
but does not the Apostle say, of the servants, and soldiers of Christ, that
they are killed all day long, and counted as sheep to the slaughter, Romans 8. 36.

True, R:
and yet in all these things they are more then Conquerours, through him that
loves them, as it follows in the next verse of the same chapter.

This may seem a Paradoxe to flesh and blood, to conceive how they that bear
away the blows, and are killed by their enemies, should be said to overcome.
And yet, so it is, in all these things they are Conquerours, says the Apostle,
more then Conquerours, that is, then ordinary Conquerours, even famous, and
noble victors.

But how does this appear, Q:
you will say?

I answer, R:
thus, the sword whereby we are said to overcome, is of two sorts, spiritual,
and material. The true and faithful servants of God have been, and many
times are at this time killed, and overcome by the material sword, so Christ
has foretold, saying, they shall kill you Ioh. 16. 2. And Revel. 11. at the
7th verse, it is said of the two witnesses, that is, of the faithful preachers
and professors of the truth, that when they have finished their testimony, the
beast that comes out of the bottomless pit, that is, Antichrist with his
adherents, shall make war against them, and kill them, that is, with the
material sword: But not with the spiritual. With that they overcome him, even
with the breath that comes out of their mouths, so it is said there, at the
fifth verse, if any will hurt them, fire proceeds out of their mouths, and
devoureth their enemies, even the fiery, and powerful word of God, which is
able, and shall consume the adversary, 2. These. 2. 8. so that there is a
victory on both sides. The enemy many times kills, and overcomes the faithful
witnesses, and true servants of God, with the material sword. And they
overcome the enemy with the spiritual sword, slaying them in their souls,
though not in their bodies, for the word is the savor of death unto death, in
them that perish, 2. Cor. 2. 16.

Again, the servants and soldiers of Christ, even in all their tribulations,
obtain a noble victory: for what is victory? Tertul. Apol.
victoria est obtinere pro quo certas, says Tertullian, victory is to obtain
that which we strive for. And now, what is the strife, between the Christian
and the tormentor, but this? the tormentor seeks to drive the Christian to
deny Christ, and his Gospel, the Christian for all his torments confesses him
the more, the tormentor fumes, and chafes, and sighs that he has not his
will, and therefore is overcome. The Christian rejoices that he is counted
worthy to suffer for Christ, Act. 5. 41. and cap. 16.
and is constant, and therefore goes away with the victory. The tormentors in
the execution of a woman, Blandina by name, ^^usebius.
confessed themselves overcome, as Eusebius writes in the fifth book, and first
Chapter of his Ecclesiastical history. And Christians in their torments, have
gloried of their Conquest, over their torments, and tormentors. Thus the
Apostle Paul, Romans 8. 35. 37.
who shall separte us, from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or
distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? Nay,
in all these things we are more then Conquerors, through him that loved us. Of
this Conquest likewise of Christians, in their afflictions and persecutions,
diverse others have given notable proof, yea, and those of our own Nation, as
Glover, Farrar, Hawks. This last, was desired by some godly friends, for their
confirmation, to give some token, when he was in the flames, whether the pain
were tolerable, or not: (A strange time, one would think, to attend upon
signs, or friends) but so he did, after his eyes were started out of his head,
his fingers consumed with fire, and when ever one thought him dead, and did
expect the fall of his body. Lo suddenly he lifts up his stumps, and thrice
(as famous Conqueror) he clapps them over his head, Fox. Acts and Mon. p. 1447.
in token of victory and triumph. Thus the faithful famously conquer, when
they seem to be conquered by their enemies. Though they be cast down one
way, either in body, goods, or good name; yet they stand another way, the best
way; they stand in the faith, they stand in the grace, and favor of God. They
stand in their souls, before the Son of God, though they fall in their bodies,
before the Sons of men. They stand in great boldness, before the face of
such as have afflicted them, Leo ser. 7. de jejun, 10. mensis.
and made no account of their labors, Wisdom (...) ^1. formido sublata est,
non pugna, as Leo says, their fear is taken away, though not their fight;
their fear of being overcome, and utterly cast down. So that the state of the
faithful servants and soldiers of Christ, Mat. 16.
is full of comfort, and assurance, though Satan and all his forces set
against them, yet they shall not prevail. Let the Dragon, and his Angels do
what they can, yet Michael, and his Angels shall overcome them, by the blood of
the lamb, and by the world of the testimony, Revel. 12. 11. it is not here, as
in the temporal war, there, incertus belli exitus, it is uncertain which way
the victory will go, till the event declare it. But here in the spiritual
warfare, pugna, and certa victoria est, says Tertullian, fight, and be sure of
victory. Having then such encouragement, let us put on, put on the whole
armor, all the graces of God, here mentioned. And then, fight the good fight,
and finish your course, in wrestling against flesh and blood, against
principalities and powers, against the Rulers of the darkness of this world,
against spiritual wickednesses in high places, against all the fiery darts,
and fiery temptations of the wicked. Doing so, ye shall not need to fear a
small fall, ye shall stand, as the Apostle says here. Ye shall stand, as in
the grace of God here, so in the glory of God hereafter, and receive that
crown of righteousness, 2. Tim. 4. 7, 8.
which the Lord has prepared for them that love him. All which the Lord grant
us, for the alone merits of Christ Jesus, to whom with the father* and the holy
spirit, be all glory, praise, (...) power, both now, and (...). AMEN.

FINIS

