An exhortation unto prayer, thought mete by the kings majesty, and his
clergy, to be read to the people in every church before processyons.

Also a Letanie with suffrages to be said or song in the time of the said
processyons.

coat of arms or blazon

FORASMVCHE as prayer is the very true mean ordained of almighty god, and
taught us plainly in his holy word, whereby not only we may, but also by gods
holy commandment be bounden to have a recourse and a refuge for help and aid
of almighty god our heavenly father, not only in all our necessities, and
tribulations of this world, but also universally in all our affairs and
businesses, what soever shall be fall unto us, orels what soever thing we shall
enterprise or take in hand. And forasmuch also as our father in heaven, of his
mere mercy and infinite goodness, has bounden him self by his own free
promise, and certified us of the same, by his own son, our only savior and
lord CHRIST IESV, in his gospel, that what soever we shall ask of him, we
shall have it, so that we ask such things, and in such sort, as we ought to
do. For these causes good christian people, being thus grounded upon the sure
foundation of goddis holy and blessed word, which can not deceive us, We are
here at this time gathered together, to make our common prayer to our heavenly
father. But now good christian people that by the true use of prayer we may
obtain and enjoy his gracious promise of aid, comfort and consolation, in all our affairs and necessities, two things, concerning prayer, are specially
to be learned. The first is, to know, for what things we ought to make our
request and petition in our prayer. The second is, in what wise we should make
our prayer, in such sort as it may be acceptably heard, and graciously
granted of our heavenly father.

As for the first, we ought instantly to ask of our heavenly father, his holy
and blessid spirit, godly wisdom, faith, charity, and to fear and dread
him, and that his holy name in all thingis, and every where thorough all the hole
world may be glorified, that his kyngedome may come unto us, that is to say,
that here he may reign in us, by the faith of his well-beloved son our savior
IESV CHRIST, and after this life also to reign in us, and over us
everlastingly in glory.

We ought to pray, that his blessed will may be fulfilled here in this world
emo^ges us his mortal creatures, as it is of his immortal angels, and of all the holy company of the heavenly spirits. We must pray for our daily bread,
that is, for our necessary fode and sustena^ce both of body and soul. Of
body, as meat, drink, and necessary apparaile, peace, health, and what soever
god knows to be necessary for the behofe and conservation of the same, that
we may do to our lord god true service therewith, every man in his state and
vocation, whereunto god has called him. Of the soul, as the word of god, and
the true knowledge of the same, the true conservation of our heavenly fathers
holy and blessid co^mandementis, the lively bread of the blessed body of our
savior Jesus Christ, the holy and sacrate cup of the precious and blessed
bludde, which was shed for us upon the Cross, to purchase us pardon and
forgyuenes of our sins. Furthermore we must pray for the forgiveness of our
sins, that our heavenly father will be merciful unto us, and forgive us our
sins both many and great, whereby we offend against his infinite goodness,
as we do forgive the offenses of them that offend us. which, how great so
ever they appear unto us, yet in comparison of the offenses that we do against
god, they be both small and few. We must pray, that our heavenly father
suffer us not to be led into temptation, for without his continual aid and
protection, we are but weke and soon overthrown. Our gostely ennemy is
strong, violent, fierce, subtle, and exceeding cruel. And therefore we must
continually pray, with all insta^ce that in all his assaults we may be
delivered by the mighty hand of our heavenly father, from al evil. Finally,
and before all thing, as saint Paul exhorts us in the first epistle to
Timothe, Let us make our prayers, and supplycations, rendrynge and gyuyng of
thanks for all men, and namely for kings, princis, and al other set in chief
dignity and high roumes, that by their godly gouerna^ce, their true faithful
and diligent execution of justice and equity un to all their subjects, our
heavenly father may be gloryfied, the commonwealth may be daily promoted and
increased, and that we al, that are their subjects, may live in peace and
quietness, with all godliness and virtue, and our christen princis and heads in
unity and concord emonges them selfs, ever calling upon their heavenly
father, which is the king of all kings, and the lord of all lords, which
shall judge without respect of person, according to every ma^s doing or
works, at whose hand the weak shall take no wrong, nor the mighty may not
by any power escape his just judgment. That our princes I say, thus calling
upon their heavenly father for grace, may ever in all their affairs be
directed and governed by the holy spirit of god, and both rule, and be
ruled, by his holy fear, to their own endless joy, comfort, and consolation,
and to their own everlasting salvation, thorough our savior Jesus Christ.

AND here specially let us pray for our most dear and sovereign lord the
Kings majesty, who does not only study and care daily and hourly for our
prosperity and wealth, but also spares not, to spend his substance and
treasure, yea redye at all times to endaunger him self for the tender love and
fatherly zeal, that he bears toward this his realm, and the subjects of
the same. Who at this present time has taken upon him the great and dangerous
affairs of war. Let us pray, that it may please almighty god, lord of
hosts, in whose hands is only wealth and victory, mercifully to assyst
him, sending his holy angel, to be his succor, keeper, and defender from all
his adversaries, and from all euyls. Let us pray for our brethren, that bend
them selfs to batail for goddis cause and our defense, that god may grant
them prosperous success, to our comfort, and the increase of his glory. Let us
pray for our selfs that remain at home, that almighty god defend us from
sin, sickness, derth, and all other aduersyties of body and soul.

The second thing to be learned, concerning prayer, is to know, how we shall
make true prayer, so that it may be graciousely hard, and mercyfully granted
of our heavenly father. First of al we must, upon consideration of our
heavenly fathers mercy and goodness toward us, and of his everlasting truth,
and free promise made unto us in his own holy word, conceive a full affiance
hoope and trust: and that without waueryng or doubtful mistrustyng, either in
his truth, his goodness, or in his almighty power, certainly assuring our
self, that both of his omnipotency, he may do what soever shall please his
goodness, and also for his infinite goodness, and fatherlye affection toward us,
that he woll both here and grant al our lauful and godly requests, after that
measure, sort, and degree, as he of his infinite and incomprehensible wisdom
knows the thing to be most mete, most convenient, and behofeful both for
his own glory and honor, and for the profit, behoufe, and commodity of us
his children.

Furthermore also it is necessarily required to that, that our prayer may be
acceptable unto our heavenly father, to have charity, and brotherly love
betwixt neighbor and neighbor, and toward all our even christen. So CHRIST
him self teaches us, saying, when you stand to pray, forgive, if you have
any dyspleasure against any person: that your father, which is in heaven,
may forgive you. It is a true saying that saint Augustine says: There is no
good fruicte, no good deed, no good work, which springs not out of the
root of charity. And saint Paul teaches plainly, that where as charity
lacks, nothing can avail us.

And moreover we must in our prayer, be ware of vain glory and praise of man,
outwardly showing a great pretense of holiness, and being vain of true godlynes
inwardly, only to have the commendation of men before the world. for if we so
do, we shall lose the reward and benefit of our prayer, as our savior CHRIST
says his own self. We must take heed also, that we think not the virtue
of prayer, to consiste in multiplying of many words without faith and godly
devotion, thynckyng as the heathen does, that for our many words or much
speking, we shall be herd of our heavenly father. Who so ever does think so, he
shall deceive him self. for god does not regard neither the sweet sound of
our voice, nor the great number ber of our words, but the ernest feruentnes and
true faithful devotion of our hearts. Finally we must beware in our prayer of
that common pestilent infection, and venemefull poison of all good prayer, that
is to say, when our mouth prays, and our hearts pray not. Of the which the
prophet Esaie complayneth sore. And our savior in saint Mathewes gospel
rebukes the pharisees, for the same, saying thus: O hipocrites, Esaie the
prophet prophected well upon you, when he said thus: This people draws
nighe me with their lyppes, but their hearts are far from me, that is to
say, they speak with their tongue and lips, the words of prayer, but in
their heart, they mind no thing less then they speak, as that the goodness of
the prayer stood in the outward speking only of the word, and not in the
inward, true and faithful request of the heart. And to the intent therefore
your hearts and lyppes may god together in prayer, it is very convenient, and
much acceptable to god, that you should use your private prayer in your mother
tongue, that you understanding what you ask of god, may more ernestly and
ferue^tly desire the same your hearts and minds agreing to your mouth and
words. Wherefore let us eschew (good people) in our prayers, all the before
rehearsed vices, for else we shall not obtain our petitions, and requests,
but contrary wise we shall hyghly displease god and grievously offend him.
Therefore good Chrystian brethren, seeing we are come together to pray, let us
do it according to our bounden duty, and as it ought to be done. Let us truly
pray with a faithful heart, and a sure affiaunce of our heavenly fathers
infinite mercy, grace, and goodness? let us make our prayers, being in love and
charity with all and every one of our neighbors, ever having in our heart an
ernest request and desire of those godly benefyttes, which are appointed in
gods word, that we should pray for, and yet not prescribing unto god, either
the time, place, measure, or degree of his gracious benefittes, but holly
committing our selves to his blessed will and pleasure, receyuyng in good
woorthe, and with thanks giuinge, what so ever, and when so ever, it shall
please his gracious goodness, to bestow his gracious gifts upon us. Let us
also fournishe and beautify this our prayer, that it may plese god the better,
and delight the ears of our heavenly father, with fasting and wholesome
abstinence, not only from all delicious living in voluptuouse fare, and from
all excesses of meat and drink, but also to chastyse and kylle the sinful
lusts of the body, to make it bow and ready to obey, unto the spiritual
mocions of the holy gooste. Let us also furnish it with alms deed, and with
the works of mercy and charity. For prayer is good and acceptable unto god,
when it is accompanied with almose deeds, and with the works of mercy, as the
holy man Thobye says, with the which, and vsyng the virtues before rehearsed,
and also eschewyng dyligently the foresaid vices, our prayers shall be of much
price and value, as was the prayers of Hely, Danyel, and Moses, before our
heavenly father, and that for our savior Jesus Christ's sake, which has
redeemed us with his preciouse blood, and has signed and sealed us up to
everlasting life. To whom both now and ever, with his father and the holy
ghost, be glory and honor without end.

AMEN.
AS THESE holy prayers and suffrages following, are set furthe of most godly
zeal for edifying and stirring of devotion of al true faithful christen
hearts: so it is thought conueniente in this common prayer of procession to
have it set furthe and used in the vulgar tungue, for stirringe the people to
more devotion: and it shall be every christen ma^s part, reuerntly to use the
same, to the honor and glory of almighty god, and the profit of their own
souls. And such among the people, as have vokes, and can read, may read them
quietely and softly to them self, and such as can not read, let them quietly
and attentifely give audience in time of the said prayers, having their minds
erect to almighty god, and devoutly praying in their hearts, the same petitions
which do enter in at their ears, so that with one sound of the heart, and one
accord, God may be glorified in his church.

And it is to be remembered, that that which is printed in black letters, is
to be said or song of the priest with an audible voice, that is to say, so
loud and so plainly, that it may well be understand of the hearers: And that
which is in the red, is to be answered of the quiere sobrely and deuoutely.

O GOD, the father of heaven, have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O god, the father of heaven, have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O god, the son, redemer of the world, have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O god, the son, redemer of the world, have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O god, the holy ghost, proceeding from the father and the son, have mercy upon
us miserable sinners.

O god, the holy ghost, procedyng from the father and the son, have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

O holy, blessed, and glorious trinity, one God, have mercy upon us miserable
sinners,

O holy, blessed, and glorious trinity, one god, have mercy upon us miserable
sinners.

Saint Mary, mother of god our savior Jesus Christ, Pray for us.

All holy angels and archangels, and all holy orders of blessed spirits, Pray
for us.

All holy patriarchs, and prophets, apostels, martyrs, confessors, and
virgins, and all the blessed company of heaven, Pray for us.

Remember not lord, our offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers, neither
take thou vengeance of our sins, spare us good lord, spare thy people, whom
thou haste redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be not angrye with us for
ever. Spare us good lord.

From all evil and mischief, from sin, from the craftis and assautes of the
devil, from thy wrath, and from everlasting damnation, Good lord deliver us.

From blyndnes of heart, from pride, vaynglory, and hypocrisy, from envy,
hatred, and malice, and all uncharitableness, Good lord deliver us.

From fornication, and al deadly sin, and from all the deceites of the
world, the flesh, and the devil, Good lord deliver us.

From lightnyng and tempest, from plage, pestilence, and famine, from
battle and murder, and from sudden death, Good lord deliver us.

From all sedition and priuey conspiracy, from the tyranny of the bishop of
Rome, and all his detestable enormities, from all false doctrine and heresy,
from hardness of heart and contempt of thy word and commandment, Good lord
deliver us.

By the mystery of thy holy incarnation, by thy holy nativity and
circuncision, by thy baptism, fasting, and temptation, Good lord deliver us.

By thine agony and bluddy sweat, by thy cross and passion, by thy precious
death and burial, by thy glorious resurrection and ascension, by the coming
of the holy ghost, Good lord deliver us.

In all time of our tribulation, in all time of our wealth, in the hour of
death, in the day of judgment, Good lord deliver us.

We sinners do beseech the to hear us, O lord god, and that it may plese the
to rule and govern thy holy church universal in the right way. We beseech
the to hear us good lord.

That it may plese the to keep HENRY the. VIII. thy servant and our king and
governor, We beseech the to here us good lord.

That it may please the to rule his heart in thy faith, fear, and hole, that
he may ever have affiance in the, and ever seek thy honor and glory, We
beseech the to hear us good lord.

That it may please the to be his defendour and keeper, gyuyng him the
victory over all his ennemies, We beseech the to here us good lord.

That it may please the to keep our noble queen CATHERINE in thy fear and
love, gyuynge her increase of all godlynes, honor, and children, We beseech
the to here us good lord.

That it may plese the to keep and defend our noble prince EDWARD, and all the
kings majesty's children, We beseech the to here us good lord.

That it may please the to illuminate all bishops pastors and minysters of
the church, with true knowledge and understanding of thy word, and that both by
their preaching and living, they may set it forth and show it accordingly, We
beseech the to here us good lord.

That it may please the to endue the lords of the counsel, and all the
nobility, with grace, wysedom, and understanding, We beseech the to here us
good lord.

That it may plese the to bless and keep the magistrates, gyuyng them grace
to execute justice, and to maynteyne truth, We beseech the to hear us good
lord.

That it may plese the to bless and keep all thy people, We beseech the to
hear us good lord.

That it may please the to give to all nations unity peace and concord we
beseech ye to here us good lord.

That it may please the to give us an heart, to love and dread the, and
diligently to live after thy co^mandementes, We beseech the to hear us good
lord.

That it may please the to give all thy people increase of grace, to here
mekely thy word, and to receive it with pure affection, and to bring forth the
fruits of the spirit, We beseech the to hear us good lord.

That it may plese the to bring into the way of truth, all such as have erred
and ar deceived, we beseech the to here us good lord.

That it may please the to strengthen such as do stand, and to comfort and
help the weak hearted, and toraise up them that fall, and finally to beat
down Satan under our fete. We beseech the to hear us good lord.

That it may please the, to succor help and comfort all that be in danger
necessity and tribulation, We beseech the to here us good lord.

That it may please the to preserve all that travail by land or by water, all
women labouryng of child, all sick persons and young children, and to show thy
pity upon al prisoners and captives, We beseech the to here us good lord.

That it may please the to defend and provide for the fatherles children and
wydowes, and all that be desolate and oppressed, we beseech the to here us good
lord.

That it may plese the to have mercy upon all men. We beseech the to hear us
good lord.

That it may please the to forgive our enemies, persecutours and sclanderours,
and to turn their hertes, We beseech the to hear us good lord.

That it may please ye to give to our use the kindly fruits of the earth, so
as in due time we may enjoy them: and to preserve the^. We be seche the to
here us good lord.

That it may please the to give us true repentance, to forgive us all our
sins, negligences and ignorances, and to endue us with the grace of thy holy
spirit, to amend our lives according to thy holy word, We beseech the to here
us good lord.

Son of god, we beseech the to hear us.

Son of god, we beseech the to hear us.

O lamb of god, that take away the sins of the world, Grant us thy
peace.

O lamb of god, that take away the sins of the world. Have mercy upon us.

O Christ, hear us.

O Christ he are us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our father which art in heaven. with the residue of the Pater noster.

And suffer us not to be led into temptation.

But deliver us from evil. Amen.

The versicle.

lord, deal not with us after our sins.

The answer.

Neither reward us after our iniquities.

Let us pray.

O GOD, merciful father, that dispisest not the sighing of a contrite heart,
nor the desire of such as be sorrowful, mercifully assiste our prayers, that
we make before the in all our troubles and adversities, when so ever they
oppress us.

And graciousely hear us, that those euyls, which the craft and subtlety of
the devil or manne works against us, be brought to naught, and by the
prouidere of thy goodness, they may be dispersed, that we thy servants, being
hurt by no persecutions, may evermore give thanks unto the, in thy holy
church, through Jesus Christ our lord.

O lord, arise, help us, and deliver us for thy honor.

O god, we have heard with our cares, and our fathers have de clarid unto us
the noble workis that thou did in their days, and in tholde time before
them.

O lord, arise, help us, and deliver us for thy names sake.

O lory to the father, the son, and to the holy ghost, as it has been from
the beginning, is, and shall be ever world without end. Amen.

From our enemies defend us, O Christ.

Graciousely look upon our afflictions.

Pitifully behold the dolor of our heart.

Mercyfully forgive the sins of thy people.

Favorably with mercy hear our prayers.

O son of David have mercy upon us.

Both now and ever vouchesaufe to here us Christ.

Graciousely here us, O Christ, Graciousely hear us, O lord Christ.

The versicle.

O lord, let thy mercy be showed upon us.

The answer.

As we do put our trust in the.

Let us pray.

WE humbly beseech the, O father, mercifully to look upon our infirmities, and
for the glory of thy name sake turn from us all those euilles, that we most
rightuously have deserved. Grant this o lord god, for our mediator and
advocate Jesu Christ's sake. Amen.

O God, whose nature and property is ever to have mercy, and to forgive,
receive our humble petition, and though we be tied and bound with the chain
of our sins: yet let the pitifulnes of thy great mercy leuse us, for the
honor of Jesus Christ's sake, ourmediatour and advocate. Amen.

ALMIGHTY and ever living god, which only workest great meruailes, send
down upon our bishops and curates, and al congregations, committed to their
charge, the healthful spirit of thy grace, and that they may truly please
the: power upon them the contynuall dew of thy blessing. Grant this (O
lord) for the honor of our advocate and mediator Jesu Christ. Amen.

WE beseech the, O lord, to show upon us thine exceeding great mercy, which no
tongue can woorthily express, and that it may please the to deliver us from al
our sins, and also from the pains, that we have for them deserved. Grant
this, o lord, thorough our mediator and advocate Jesu Christ. Amen.

GRAVNT, we beseech the, O almighty god, that we, in our trouble put our hole
confidence upon thy mercy, that we may against al adversity be defended under
thy protection. Grant this, O lord god, for our mediator and advocate Jesu
Christis sake. Amen.

ALMIGHTY god, which A prayer of Chsostome.
haste given us grace at this time with one accord, to make our common
supplicatio^s unto the, and do promise, that when two or three be gathered in
thy name, thou will grant their requests: fulfill now, O lord, the desires
and petitions of thy servants, as may be most expedient for them, grau^ting us
in this world knowledge of thy truth, and in the world to come life euerlasty
ng. Amen.

IMPRINTED at London in Pletestrete, by Thomas Berthelet printer to the kings
highness, the. XXVII. day of May, the year of our Lord. M. D. XLIIII.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


