CERTAIN GODLY EXERCISES MEDITACIONS AND PRAYERS, VERY necessary and
profitable for all persons and for all times, set forth by certain godly
learned men, to be used daily as you shall be godly disposed, and shall feel need
thereunto. And also the Letany daily used in Churches annexed to the end hereof.

Ephesians. vi. and. i. Timothe. ii. Pray always every where with all manner
of prayer, and that in the spirit, lifting up pure hearts and hands, with out
wrath or doubtinge.

IMPRINTED. London in Fletestrete at the sign of the George near to saint
Dunstons church by VVyllyam Powell.

Use often and hartye prayer to God, knowing that it is no less necessary for
your soul thereby to live and continue in godliness, then water is for the life
of fish, or dew is for the growth of grass and herbs: but if you will have
your prayer accepted of god, se that you accept his word. For accursed be
they (says Sallomon) and their prayer, that will not hear the word of god.
If I behold with favor any wyckednes (says David) in my heart, god will not
hear me, for he hears no such sinners as retainethe still the purpose to
continewe it sin, as he stoppethe not his ears to hear the prayers of the
pore penitents, but often before they pray he grants them their hearts
desire.

I B.

Occations to meditate and to stir up the heart to prayer.
IN your prayers think upon the remission of sins promised by and for
Christ, and let there be in your remembrance some most euidente and plain
sentence to inflame and stir up the mind, as this. Ask and ye shall have.
etc. And verily verily I say unto you, what so ever you shall ask the father
in my name, he will give it you. etc. Asking al spiritual gifts without
condition, and all temporal upon condition. As Christ did: Father if it be
thy will let this cup pass from me. etc.













us our asking.









Let us therefore in our necessity and troubles, ask of god our father and he
for his sons sake will give us our askinge, whose very nature and property
is to relieve such as are in necessity, and in deed our necessities are as
loud cryinges in his merciful ears.

A meditation upon the Lords prayer.
QVr father which art in heaven.

We gloriousely formed unto the Image of thy divine majesty, created by thy
gracious goodness unto highest honor, how be it by our own sinfulnes
diffigured with vileness deserving dampnation, and yet by Christ's death
redeemed and restored unto grace to be Citizens with saints of the family of
God: Now altogether in Christian unity as members of one body, we pray,
desire, and trust to obtain of thee our heavenly father, according unto thy
gracious goodness mighty power, and faithefull promise, unto us that ask,
abundance of thy grace.

That, thy name may be hallowed.

That thy divine power, and glorious majesty, may be certainly known and
reverently honored. That the hearts of us men by thy word and prayer may be
sanctified from all sin and vanity, so that we with all that we have serving
thee in holiness and righteousenesse, may so shine before men upon earth, that
they thereby may be occasion to honor thee our father which art in heaven.

Thy kingdom come.

Thy word be so fruitfully preached amongst us thy people, that we may be
thoroughly instructed and taught to bridle our sensual apetites by natural
reason, and to submit our wits and reasons unto a good godly spirit, and to
try our spirits by the true scriptures. So that within us may reign the
kingdom of God, which is neither meat nor drink which is neither
supersticious ceremonies, voluptuous pleasures, nor vain glory, but
righteousness, peace, and comfort in the holy ghost, by the which we now
tasting of thy heavenly joys, may be made from henceforth weary of al worldly
vanities, continually loking and prayinge for the apperance and coming of thy
eternal and everlasting kingdom.

Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.

In heaven the angels of reuerente love do thy will and commandment, with
comfortable courage and joyful pleasure. In hell the wicked spirits through
malice and envy, repininge and grudging, do torment and vex them selves, what
so ever they be doing. And upon earth, men being subject unto sin, do think
it a labor and pain, to be occupied in any thing that is good and godly.
Wherefore we pray that the grace of thy heavenly spirit, may so work in our
earthly bodies, that we being delivered from sin and vanity, may freely
delight and take pleasure to do thye will and commandment, being men upon
earth, as thy glorious angels do which be in heaven.

Give us this day our daily bread.

We having great need, not hable of our selves to deserve any thing, beseech
the of thy fatherly goodness, to give freely unto all us in general: So that none
be hurt nor hindered severally this day when as we cry constrained by present
need, not craftily craving for vayn care against to morrow, our daily bread, our
daily and necessary food and relief, both bodily and ghostly. And especially
so: that the spiritual food of Christ's flesh and his blood, by daily
preachinge of the gospel, and ministracion of the sacraments, may replenishe
our hearts and minds with continual remembrance of Christ's death, and his
passion, daily to be used for necessary and spiritual consolation.

Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.

Give unto us that feling and knowing our own sinfulness, do need, and
desire thy merciful forgeuenes of our fautes and trespasses, which we have
committed against thee, so that we freely forgeuing all other, that have
offended us in any thing what so ever it be, may be sure that mercy springyng
in thee has proceeded unto us, and being graciousely offered of thee, has been
thankefully received of us, and being charitably used of us toward other,
shall most certainly be confirmed and enlarged of thee toward us: So that by
free mercy sprynging and proceeding from thee, al fautes may be freely
forgeuen: even as those which other has committed against us, so likewise
those which we have done a against thee.

And lead us not into temptation.

Suffer not the devil by the abuse of thy benefits, to lead us captyues into
deceitefull and dampnable temptation, drawing us by deinty meats, unto gredy
glotony, by money and richesse, unto insatiable couetousenes, and by wealth and
prosperity, unto pride and vain glory, and by all thy godly gracious gifts,
unto every devilish abominable sin.

But deliver us from evil.

Deliver our goods from abuse, our bodies from corruption, our souls from
damnation. Deliver us by Christ Jesus, from the bondage of sin, unto the
lybertye of the Gospel, so that from all danger of diuelishe temptation,
trayning and enticing men toward damnation, we may be delivered to serve thee
in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life, with most certain
and sure hope of everlasting salvation, through Christ Jesus, in whom our hope
and thy promise is most certain, that is to say. Amen.

Your time is short, your dangers be great: you are well warned by Gods
word written. Mar. xiij. Take heed, watch, and pray.

Take heed, that your hearts and minds be not made heavy, hard, and dull, with
meats and drink, vain plesures, or worldly cares.

Watch, with dilligence to do your own duties, in desirous lokynge for
Christ's coming.

Pray, that ye may escape all dangers, and stand in grace and favor before
the face of Christ, at his coming.

T. Lever.

APOCAL. XXII. Behold I come sone. A prayer to be said in the morning.
O Almighty and most gracyous God, we heartily thancke thee for the sweet sleep
and comfortable rest which thou have given us this night, and for as much as
thou haste commanded by thy holy word that no man should be idle, but all
occupied in godly and virtuous exercises, every man according to his calling,
we most humbly beseech thee that thine eyes may attend upon us, daily defend
us, cherishe, comfort, and govern us, and al our counsayles studies and
labors, in such wise, that we may spend and bestow this day according to
thy most holy will, without the hurtynge of our neighbors, and that we may
diligently and warely eschew and avoid all things that should displease
thee, set thee always before our eyes, live in thy fear, workyng that may be
found acceptable before thy divine majesty, through Jesus Christ our lord. So
be it.

A Confession of our sins.
O Merciful and most loving father, whose Love is infinite, whose mercy
endures for ever, we sinful creatures trustinge in thine unspeakable goodness
and love toward us, do appear this morning before thy dyuyne majesty, most
humbly confessing our manifold sins and innumerable transgressions of thy
commandments and fatherly will: against thee only, against thee O lord, have
we sinned. we acknowledge our offenses, we accuse our selves unto the O
merciful lord, and will not hyde our unrighteousness, we find in our selves
nothing but ingnoraunce of thye will and disobedience, mistrust, doubtfulness in
thy goodness and incredulity, hatred and contempt of all spiritual things,
self love, confidence in our selves, and fervent lustinge after carnal
things of this world: and this tree of our corrupt nature, brings forth
continually in us, none other fruictes, but rotten and unsavory works of the
flesh, in thoughts words and doings unto condempnation. Wherefore we humbly
beseech thy fatherly goodness, even for thy son Jesus Christ's sake (whom
thou have set forth for a purchaser of mercy unto us through faith in his
blood) make our hearts clean, take away our stony hearts, and give unto us a
true and a lively faith, which shall work continually by love through Christ,
have mercy upon us, forgive us our sins for thy sons sake, certifye our
consciences of remission of the same by thy holy spirit, by whose operation so
mortifye in us, our old man, the whole body of sin, that we continually
dyeng unto sin, may walk in newness of life to the glory of thy holy name,
through Jesus Christ our Savior. Amen.

Before thou prayest, believe that god is not only almighty to help and to
deliver thee: but also that he is gracious and faythefull to fulfill all his
promises made unto us. Then forgive if thou have any thing against any man, And
remember that thou come not to god with a double heart, but lift up pure
hands with out wrath or doubtinge.
O Almighty eternal and everliving god. 1. 2. Corin. 1. and. 2.
1. the eternal father of our Lord Jesus Christ which haste made 2. heaven and
yearthe, 2. Ictes. 4.
the sea, and all that therein is, and of thy great goodness, did open thy self
from heaven, and made proclamation of Jesus christ, saying. 3 this is my
dear son hear him, 3. Matthew. 3.
thou maker of al things, preserver and helper, 4. Philip. 2. Ebre. 1.
with thy. 4. coeternal son our lord Jesus Christ reigning with thee, and
manifested in Jerusalem, and thy holy ghost poured on the apostles, O most
wise, good, merciful, righteous judge, and also strong, which have said by
thy prophet. 5. Ezechi. 18.
5. I will not the death of a sinner, but that he convert and live: I thy pore
creature and work of thy hands, do acknowledge and confess unto thee my
manifold sins and offenses, which I from my youth up unto this time, have
grievously committed against thee, in thought, word, and deed, and am now
taught and moved by thy word and grace, to be heartily sorry for the same,
desiring thee (which have said. 6. Psalm. 50.
6. call upon me in the day of thy trouble, and I will hear thee, and deliver
thee) for the precious bloudde sheading of Jesus Christ thy sons sake our
lord, whom thou would to be made a slain. 7. Eb. 9.^.10
7. sacrifice for our sins, to have mercy upon me, and forgive me all those
mine offenses according to thy great mercy and promise, which haste said. 8.
Eze. 18.
8. at what time so ever a sinner does repent him of his sin from the bottom
of his heart, I will put al his wickedness out of my remembrance. O lord I
acknowledge and confess that I was borne in sin, 9. Psalm. 51. Ephe. 2. Romans
7.
and. 9. conceived in wickedness, and am by nature a. 9. child of wrath, for
that in my. 9. flesh (as saint Paul says) dwells no good thing, and that
of my self I am not able to think a good. 10. thought that can please thee,
10.2. Corin. 3.
much less to wish, and least of al to do that thou in thy law requireste
of me to be done, for. 11. Gala. 3. Romans 7.
11. thou have said, cursed is he that continuethe not in all things that are
written in the law to do them: again, thy law is. 11. spiritual, but I am
carnal, sold under sin: therefore o lord I call unto thee for grace (which
haste said. 12. Math. 7.
12. ask and ye shall have, seek and ye shall find, knock, and it shall be
opened unto you) to prevent and draw my will to all goodness, (for none can
come to thee, 13. Iho. 3.^.6
except he be drawn. 13. again except we be borne from above we cannot see
the kingdom of god) assiste therefore and gyde me also with thy holy spirit
from time to time, draw me there fore and I shall run after thee, and give
me strength and ablenes through christ our lord to accomplish and fulfill
the same, Canti. 1.
lord make me to become poor in spirit, vile and low in my own sight, that
I lift not up my self above my brethren, Ihon. 1.
but that I esteem my self to be as a servant to al men to do the^ good,
after the example of christ, which came not to be ministered unto but to
minister, for he has said. 14. Math 5. James. 4.
14. Blessed are the pore in spirit: again, thou resistest the 14. proud, but
geuest grace to the humble, give me therefore thy grace, that when so ever I
be over taken with any kind of sin and wickedness either in thought, word, or
deed, or that I feel my own infirmity or weakness, I may immediately with
hearty repentance. 15. 2. Timo. 2
15 (which is also thy gift) return to thee again, and not to lie still in
the security of sin. Take from me my stony, unbelieving, blind, doubtful,
unfaithful, and unthankful heart, and. 16. repose in me an heart of flesh, to
bow and incline to thy will: my carnal, idle, secure, and impenitent heart,
take away from me, and give me an heart to fear thee, to love thee, to trust
in thee for ever, write thy law in my heart, grave it in my mind, that I may
believe, trust, and live in thee sor euere. Deliver me from the spirit of pride
and vain glory, all hautines of mind, presumption, self love, and self
trust, that I stand not to hye in my own conceyt, but that I may be willing
rather to learn then to teach. Lake from me that wicked spirit of suspicion
and envy, evil gelousy, vain surmisings, murmuring, and grudging, whispering,
or backbiting of any, especially such as be in auctority, and ministers of thy
word. O lord keep me from al wrath, malice, and hastynesse, all respect of
persons in the faith, all lying, evil words, contention, flatteryng,
dissimulation, I potresy, blasphemy, and vain swering by yt name of god, his
works, or creatures, from all lightness, idle words, and all unstableness of
heart. O lord deliver thou my heart from all filthynesse both of the flesh and
spirit, as heresy, and errors, from al unclean thoughts and unlawful
desires, evil concupisence and lusts of the body. Lake from me also
covetousness and mordinate care of riches, all deceit and guile in my calling
and office, all idleness and sloth, and give me not over unto an unshamefast
and obstinate mende. Make me able and contented to bear occasions with
pactence when they be offered or given me, and not to recompense evil for
evil, neither to swell, nor to murmr, nor to be solemn, nor angry. Good
lord make me very loath to give occasions of evil to any man, and if I chance
to give any, make me willing to confess my fault and to amend it. Grant me
grace yt I may be wylling and fre to give, but loath to take and receive,
because it is more blessed to give the^ to receive. Give me thy grace that I
never envy any good man's love or womans, because they do either love god and
his people more the^ I, or else that they be beloved of him or his more the^ I.
make me to rejoice in other men's gifts, and not to envy them, because they be
better then mine, but rather to give thanks for the^ with all my heart, desiring
yt they may be incresed in the^ and in me. Oh lord take fro me a careful heart
in all worldly things, and grant ye neither poverty opresse me and drive me to
dispatre or falsehod, nether riches lift me up to forget thee or my self, but
that in prosperity I may be thankful, and in adversity pacient and humble.
Lord make me merry without lightness, sad without mistruste, sober without
dulnes, true without doublenes, fearing thee, with out desperation, trusting
in the without presumption: give me also the spirit of humblenes, simplicity,
mekenes, gentleness, goodness, faithfulues, and truth, Braunt me O god the bowels
of mercy and loving kindness toward my brethren, long suffering and patience
to bear al things well that thy providence shall se metee to lave upon me,
regenerate my heart with the spirit of grace daily more and more, give me an
inward taste and feling of thy favor and mercy toward me in Christ Jesus our
lord, that I may know thee to be my god and father, and my self to be thy
child for ever more. Lord merease this my faith in thee and in christ thy
son my redemer, increase and confyrine my hope in thy promyses touching my
salvation. Oh god make perfect my love toward thee and to my reademer and
iustifier, give me a true and vnfamed love to al virtue and godliness, and to
all thy chosen people where so ever they be dispersed throughout all the
world, increase in me strength and victory against all temptations and
assaults of the flesh, the world, and the devil, 18. 1. corin. 1
that according to thy promise I be never further proved or tempted then thou will give me strength to overcome. Give me grace to keep a good conscience,
give me a pure heart and mind, and renew a right spirit within me, give me
also the true understanding of thy holy word, that I may never swerve from
the true sense and meaning thereof, and yt my chief felicity may be in the
same, in hearing, reading, talking, watching praying, fasting, mortifyinge, and
subduinge mine own will and members. O gracious lord Jesus Christ, son of
the living god, which wast. 16. crucified and raised again for us, 10. Act. 2.
and. 3 20. Act. 2. and. 7 21. Psalm. 68. Ephe. 4.22. 1. Timo. 2 1. Ihon. 2
which now sit test and raignest on. 20. the right hand of the father that
thou may. 21. give gifts unto men, and art appointed to be the only. 22.
mediatoure and advocate for us unto god, have mercy upon me, and pray for me
to thy eternal father, and sanctify me with thy holy ghost, as thou have
promised saying, I will not leave you. 23. comfortless, but will send you
the spirit of truth which shall abide with you for ever. 23. Ihon. 14.
Kindle my mind and heart with thy holy spirit, that I may truly believe in
thee, acknowledge and call upon thee, give thanks and obey thee, for I feel
my self so clothed and cloyed with infirmities and sin, that I know not what
to do, but even to offer up my self wholly with all my crooked and corrupt
nature, so much as it is in will and works, unto thy mercy to be corrected
and reformed at thy own will and pleasure. Most mighty god and father, through
our lord Jesus Christ thy eternal son, with thy holy spirit, govern and
keep thy holy catholyke and apostolic church, and every member of the same,
as thou have promised saying, this is. 24. Esai. 56.
24. my couenaut with the^, my spirit which is in thee, and my word which I
have put in thy mouth, shall not depart from the mouth of thy sede for ever,
lighten us always with thy gospel, rule and confirm our hearts with thy
spirit, least the Ipocrisy and superstition of papists, and other heretics,
or ye erroures and wicked life of Epicures and Lybertynes, cause us to fall.
Govern therefore yt studies of thy church, and defend the policies of those
realms and cities which give harborough to thy people, 25. Sacha. 12.
25. power upon us the spirit of grace and prayer, make us diligente and
happy in the works of our vocation, take into thy custody for ever our souls
and bodies, our lives, and all that ever we have. Be gracious and favorable (O
lord) to all Jews, Turks, Infidels, heretics, and even our very enemies, and
according to thy good will and purpose forgive them their sins. Convert unto
thy truth all those whom thou haste appointed in Jesus Christ to salvation. Be
merciful also (O lord) to all our brethren and sisterne that suffer any kind
of persecutyon or affliction, whether in mind or in body, especially such as
suffer for thy name and gospel, give them patience, constancy, and steadfast
hope till thou send them full and good deliverance of all their troubles. Be
gracious to al those whom thou have coupled and linked to us in love and friend
ship, whose hearts thou have moved to pray for us, to wysshe us good, to
succoure and help us in our necessytyes, grant us all thy blessing and holy
spyrite, to sanctify us in the unity of faith, and dwell in us for ever. Finally
oh lord have mercy upon my wife, children, and famely, which thou have given
me, and increase thy fear in our hearts that we may truly love thee, and one
of us an other in thee, so that we may be pure both in soul and body, and
bring them up in virtue, nurture, and information of the lord. Plant and sow
in my heart all virtues that be necessary and required in a christian man,
namely wisdom, discretion, te^perance, patience, strength, and boldenes, and
give me grace so to use them and all other gifts which I have received at thy
merciful hand, as may be most to thy glory and praise, to my consolatyon and
salvation, and to the profit of thy Church. 26. Esai. 64.
which peticions and requests I do not make (O Lord) trustinge in mine own
righteousness (which I do acknowledge with thy prophet to. 29. be stained and
defiled) no but only in thy great mercy and promise. O hear me lord, forgive
me lord, consider me, and tarry not over long, but for thy own sake do it,
and for thy son Jesus Christ's sake (in whom all thy promyses are, yea and
amen) which is our only reademer, savior, and Iustifier, to whom with thee o
father and the holy ghost be al glory and praise now and for ever. Amen. Lord
let it be so.

Robart Coals

FINIS.
A morninge prayer.
WE humbly and heartily give thanks to thee (O merciful father) in and by thy
derely beloneb son Jesus Christ our only savior, that to thy innumerable
benefits hitherto powered upon our souls and upon our bodies, thou have
vouchedsafe to keep us all this night past, from many evils, spiritually and
corporally, and now of thy mercy do offer and give us time to repent, and
to amend our lives, so that we might live hence forth not as we will, but as
thou will: and as our bodies do draw continually nearer and nearer their end,
(ye grave I mean) so our souls might aproche to their end, that is, heaven
and not hell (For in one state we stand not still, but either we are nearer and
nearer ye happy state of life, or else ye infortunat or unhappy condition of
death eternal) Therefore we beseech the to be merciful unto us good father,
that is we pray thee, as of thy goodness thou geueste us time to repent and
to live godly, so of the same thy goodness in christ, we humbly beseech and pray
thee to give us thy gracious gift of true, holy, perfect and perperpetuall
repentance, that we may more and more lamente our former sinful life,
trusting unfeignedly in thy rych mercy, through the merytes of Jesus Christ,
for the pardone of al onr sins, and that we may unfeignedly purpose and
effectually labor to amend our lives this day and so long as we have to live,
in all our doings and words, and even in our very thoughts, to the praise of
thy holy name, and good example of our neighbors and brethren. And for as
much as thou know our weakness, our ignorance, and great untowardness to
carry any geeat cross or affliction, we beseech thee our sweet father, so to
temper and order all things toward us this day and for ever, that we be
never further proved and tempted, then thou will so help us in the same, as
may be most to thy glory and our salvation, thorough Jesus Christ our lord.
Amen.

R. Coals.

An Evening prayer.
Most mercyful God and tender Father, which besides thine inestimable mercyes
declared and given unto us in the making of the world for our sakes, in
redemynge of us by the death of thy dear son Jesus Christ, in the calling
of us to the knowledge of thy blessed word, in keeping of us hitherto in thy
holy Catholic church, and in the most gracious gouerninge of us and all
things hitherto for our most weal, have also most fatherly cared for us,
and kept us this day from all dangers both of soul and body, giving us
bealth, food, apparel, and al other things necessary for the comfort and
succor of this poor and miserable lif, which many other do want: for these
and al other thy good gifts and gracious benefits, which thou of thine own
goodness only, and fatherly prouydence, for Christ's sake have hitherto powered
upon us, and do presently power upon us, and many other, we most humbly
thank thee and praise thy holy name, beseching thee even for the same thy
Christ, to pardon our vnthanckefulnes, our neglecting and abusing of those thy
benefits, and all our sins which this day or any time heretofore we have
committed against thy holy commandments.

And as now we purpose to lay our bodies to rest, so grant the guard of thy
good Aungelles to keep the same this night and for ever. And where or when so
ever our last sleep of death shall come, grant that it may be in thee, good
father, so that our bodies may rest both temporally and eternally, to thy
glory and our joy, through Jesus Christ our Lord. So be it.

R.C.

Certain exercises to meditate, very profitable to every Christian.
Watch and Pray, Part. 4.
that ye enter not into temptation. etc. For the devil your adversary goes
about like a roaryng lion, seking who^ he may devour.

Commit thy self, and all thye doings unto god, with fervent and faithful
prayer: and then doubt nothing at all of the good and profitable success of
the same.

Pray before thou come into any company, that thou give no offense in word
or deed, but rather may give good exaumple to edyfie.

Pray also that thou may mark well and immitate that which is well done and
spoken, and that thou may forget and fly from that which is evil done or
spoken of any one where thou shalt come.

Pray when thou art come alone from company, with any that god will make them to
forgette the evil example thou have given in word or deed.

In every prayer beg of god the spyrite of grace and prayer, zacha. 12.
that thou may have delight in prayer and talking with God, ask (I say)
continually his holy spirit with increase of Faith and Hope.

In every benefit behold gods grace and stay not the considering of the same
till thou come to the oryginall and rote, that is the grace of god in Christ,
before the world was made: so shall every benefit confirm thy Faith.

Speak, think, and do al things as in the sight of god, and as unto god.

Of all thy thoughts, Eccle. 7.
words, and deeds, consider the end: and thou shall never do amiss.

Trust in god when thou felest no cause in thy self: for that is ye gretest
honor thou can give unto him, and a sure token that thou art his Child for
ever.

When thou beholdest any of the works of god, beware thou do it not to
co^prehende him, for so thou loosest thy labor: but look upon them, to
behold him to be a God of might and power, in the diversity of them to be
exceadynge wise, by the multitude of them, to be good and gracious, which
has so done them that they ought to be had in remembrance of us: And when
thou have this profit by them, then be thou thanckful to god who has given it
thee.

The more sure we are of our salvation and that we be the children of god, the
temples of the holy ghost, and the inherytours of heaven, the more we cannot
but love and long for the dissolutions of our bodies. Use therefore to beg of
god by continual praicr his spirit to confirm you in this certain persuasion
that god loves you.

In the law behold god to be thy god, to be holy, to be just, and severe
against sin: and thy self unholy, unjust, and full of contumacie, and
therefore not mete, nor worthy, to be where god is: but to be rejected from him,
and worthy dampnation, and therefore fear him and sin not.

In the gospel behold god to be thye father, to love the euerlastingely, to
for give thee all thy sins, to give thee eternal salvation through his son
Jesus Christ, who has overcome sin, death, and hell, for thee, and has
brought life and ymmortalitie unto light: and therefore love him as a son, love
him, for he loved thee first, love him (I say) in and for his Christ, love his
Christ, love him ever: Only believe in him, forget not to be thanckefull to
him, for that he is thy god, and thy father, for his love, for his Christ, for
thy salvation, for the forgiveness of thy sins, for thy delyueraunce from
despair, for the sure certificate of thine election, for the delyueraunce from
error into his truth, for calling the into this grace wherein thou stand:
and therefore rejoice in hope of the glory of God.

R. Coals

A Complaynt of the Tyranny used against the saints of god, containing a
confession of our sins, and a prayer for the deliverance and preservation of
the Church, and confusion of the enemies. **
Eternal and euerlyuinge god, father of our lord Jesus Christ, who have
commanded us to pray, and promised to hear us, eue^ when we do call from the
pyt of desperation: the miseries of these our most wicked days compel us, to
pour forth before thee, the complaints of our wretched hearts, oppressed with
sorrow. Our eyes do behold, and our ears do hear the calamities and
opressions which no tongue can express, neither yet (alas) do our dull
hearts rightly consider the same. For the Heathen are entered into thine
inherytance, they have poluted thy sanctuarye, profaned and abolished thy
blessed instytutions, most cruelly murdered, and daily do murder thy dear
children.

Thou have exalted the arm and force of our enemies, thou have set us forth as
a pray, to ignomy and shame, before such as persecute thy truth. Their ways
do prosper, they glory in mischefe, and speak prowdely against the honor of
thy name.

Thou go not forth as a captain before our hosts. The edge of our sword,
which sometime was most sharp, is now blunt, and does return without victory
in battle.

It apereth to our ennemies (O lord) that thou have broken that league, which
of mercy and goodness, thou have made with thy church. For the liberty which
they have to kill thy children like sheep and to shed their bloudde, no man
resistinge, does so blind and puff them with pride, that they are not
ashamed to affirm, that thou regardest not our intreatinge. Thy long
suffering and patience makes them hold from cruelty, to proceed to ye
blasphemy of thy name.

And in this mean season (alas) we do not consider the heaviness of our sins,
which long have deserved at thye hands, not only these temporal plagues:
but also the torments prepared for the inobedie^t. For we knowing thy blessed
will, have not applied our dilygence to obey the same, but have followed for the
most part, the vain conversation of the blind world: and therefore in very
justice have thou visited our vnthanckfulnesse. But O lord if thou shall
observe and keep in mind for ever the iniquities of thy children, then shall no
flesh abide, nor be saved in thy presence. And therefore co^uicted in our own
consciences, that most justly we suffer, as punished by thy hand, do
nevertheless call for mercy, according to thy promise. And first we desire to be
corrected, with the rod of thy children, by the which we may be brought to a
perfect hatred of sin, and of our selves: and therefore that it would please
thee, for Christ Jesus thy sons sake, to show to us and thy whole church
universally persecuted the same favor and grace, that some times thou
did, when the chief members of the same, for anguish and fear, were
compelled to cry: why have nations raged? why has the people made vprores?
and why have princes and kings coniured against thine anointed, Christ Jesus?
Then did thou wonderfully assiste and preserve thy small and dispersed
flock: then did thou burste up the bars, and gates of iron: then dyddest
thou shake the foundations of strong prysons: then dyddeste thou plague the
cruel persecutours: and then gave thou some tranquillity and rest after
those ragyng storms and cruel afflictions.

O Lord, thou remainest one for ever: we have offended, and are unworthy of any
deliverance, but worthy art thou to be a true and constant god, and worthy is
thy dear son Christ Jesus, that thou should glorify his name, and reueng
the blasphemy spoken against the truth of his gospel, which is by our
adversaries damned as a doctrine deceiuable and false: yea, the blood of thy
son is trodden under fete, in that the blood of his members is shed for
wytnessyngs of thy truth. And therefore, O lord, behold not the unworthiness
of us, that call for the redress of these enormities, neither let our
imperfections stop thy mercies from us, but behold the face of thine
anointed Christ Jesus, and let the equity of our cause prevail in thy
presence. Let the bloudde of thy saints which is shed, be openly revenged in
the eyes of thy Church: that mortal men may know the vanity of their
counsels, and that thy children may have a taste of thine eternal goodness. And
seeing that from that man of sin, that Romayne Antechriste, the chyefe
adversary of thy dear son, do the all iniquity spring, and myschyefe
proceed: let it please thy fatherly mercy, more and more to reuele his deceit
and tyranny to the world: open the eyes of princes and magistrates, that
clearly they may see, how shamefullye they have been, and are abused by his
deceiuable ways, how by him they are compelled most cruelly to shede the blood
of thy saints, and by violence refuse thine eternal testament: that they in
deep consideration of their grievous offenses, may unfeignedly lament their
horrible defectio^ from Christ Jesus thy son, from henceforth studieng to
promote his glory in the dominions committed to their charges, that so yet
once again the glory of thy gospel may appears to the world. And seeing also
that the chief strength of that odious beast consists in defension of
princes: let it please thee, O father, which have claymed to thy self to be
called the God of peace, to unite and knyt in perfect love, the hearts of all
those that look for the life everlasting. Let no craft of satan move them to
war one against an other, neither yet to maintain by their force and
strength, that kingedome of darkness, but rather that godly they may
conspire (illuminated by thy word) to root out from amongst them, al
supersticion with the maynteyners of the same.

These thy graces, O lord, we unfeignedly desire to be powered forth upon all
realms and nations, that they may be firmly united and godly knitte together
in the unity of thy word: that in their godly concord, thy name may be
glorified, and thy dispersed flock comforted and relieved.

The common wealths, O lord, where thy gospel is truly preached, and
harborowe granted to the afflicted members of Christ's body, and specially
according to our bounden duty this out country of England, we commend to
thy protection and mercy. Be thou unto them a defense and buckler: be a watch
man to their walls, and a perpetual save guard to their cities, that the
crafty assaults of their ennemies repulsed by thy power, thy gospel may have
free passage from one nation to an other: and let al preachers and ministers of
the same have the gifts of thy holy spirit, in such abundance, as thy godly
wisdom shall know to be expedient for the perfect instruction of that flock,
which thou have redeemed with the preciouse blood of thy only and well-beloved
son Jesus Christ. Purge their hearts from al kind of superstition, from
ambicion and vaineglory, by which satan continually labors to stir up
ungodly conte^cion, and let them so consent in the unity of thy truth, that
neither the estimation which they have of men, neither the vain opinions,
which they have conceived by their writings, prevail in them, against the
clear understanding of thy blessed word.

And now last, O lord, we most humbly beseech thee, according to that prayer
of thy dear son our lord Jesus, so to sanctify and confirm us in thy
eternal verity, that neither the love of life temporal, neither yet the fear
of torments and corporal death, cause us to deny the same, when the
confession of our faith shall be required of us: but so assist us with the power
of thye holy spyrite, that not only boldly we may confess thee (O father of
mercies) to be the true god alone, and who^ thou haste sent our lord Jesus to
be the only savior of the world: but also that constantly we may withstand
all doctrine, repugninge to thy eternal truth, reueiled to us in thy most
blessed word.

Remove from our hearts, the blind love of our selves, and so rule thou all
the actions of our life, that in us thye godly name may be glorified, thy
church edified, and satan finally confounded by the power and means of our
lord Jesus Christ: to whom with thee, and the holy spirit, be all glory and
praise before thy congregations, now and ever. So be it.

Arise, O lord, and let thine ennemies be ashamed: let them flee from thy
presence, that hate thy godly name: let the groans of thy prisoners enter in
before thee, and preserve by thy power, such as be appointed to death: let not
thine enemies thus triumph to the end: but let them understand, that against
thee they fight: preserve and defend the vine, which thy right hand has
planted: and let all nations see the glory of thine anointed.

Hasten lord and tarry not.

A prayer against the obstinate enemies of the truth.
Most righteous judge, god of all mercy and comfort, which by thy secret
iudgmente and wisdom, do suffer the wicked to triumph and increase for a
time, for trial of the faith of thy well-beloved little flock, and the
mortifyinge of their lusts, but at length to the utter confusion of the
enemies, and joyful delineraunce of thy people: look down we beseech thee on
thy dispersed sheep, out of thy holy habitation in heaven, and strengthen our
weakness against their furyous rages, abate their pride, assuage their malice,
confound their devises, wherewith they lift up them selves against christ Jesus
thy son our Lord and Savior, to deface his glory and set up Antechrist. We
be not able of our selves to think a good thought, much less to stand
against their assaults, except thy undeserved grace and mighty arm defend
and deliver us. Perform thy promises made to Jacob, and stop the mouths of
the cursed Edomites, call them to repentance whom thou have appointed to
salvation: bring home them that run astraye, lyghten the blind, and teach
the ignorant: forgive al those that wilfully and obstinately rebel not
against thy holy will, let thy fearful threatninges pearce our stony hearts,
and make us tremble at thy judgments. Make the exaumples of them whom thou
haste overthrown in their own devises, as Cayn, Cham, Nimrod, Esau, Pharao,
Saul, Achitophel, Judas, and such other to be a warning for us, that we set
not up our selves against thy holy will: grant free passage to thy holy word,
that it may work effectually in us the work of life and blessed hope of our
salvation, to the eternal praise of thy majesty, through our mediatoure
Christ Jesus, to whom with the father and the holy ghost three persons and one
god, be praise and thankesgeuing in all congregations world without end. So be
it.

Ia. P.

A prayer for the common peace and quietness of our country, necessary for this
our time.
MOst merciful god, which have created man after thine own likeness, to live
thereafter in godly peace and concord, take away all strife and debate, not
only in private causes betwyxte man and man, but especially betwixt realm and
realm, country and cu^trey, douchsaf to pacify the troublous affections of
worldly men's hearts, who inflamed by yt spirit of discord, labor to break
that godly knotte of peace and concord, which most besemeth thy elect
servants and desciples to perform.

Gide thou us in the unity of thy spirit, that we may in thee be of one
mind, as well in matters touching the truth of religion: as also outward and
civil, that all manner grounds of discord and war being taken away, we may
live in holy peace and quietness to the advancement of thy glory, and the
setting forth and spreading abroad of thy gospel. Give good success (O Lord)
to the trauayles and counsels of our gouernoures, directed to the safety and
quietness of this realm.

Defend and aid the ministers, and trauailers about ye same. Bring to naught
all the subtle devises of Satan, of Antechrist and his members, devised
against the verity of thy word, overthrow their counsels, and bring their
conspiracye to naught, beat back their proud boldness in advancing lies, and
suppressing of the truth, and so make an end at last of their outrageous
tyranny, that we thy servants may quietly consent and rest in thy truth,
having both the inward peace of mind and conscience, and also the outward
concord as well amongst our selves, as with all foreign natyons and cuntreis:
grant this O lord, for Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

A prayer for the whole church of christ. and for every state and degree thereof
according to the petitions of the Lords prayer
ALmighty god our heavenly Father, since thou have promised graciouslye to
hear us and grant our requests, which we shall make unto the in the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ thy well-beloved son: Ihon. 16.
And we also are taught by him and his apostelles to make our common prayer in
his name, promisyng that he will be among us, Math. 18.
and make intercession for us unto thee, for the obteinynge of all such
things as we shall godly desire here in earth: And moreover since thou have
commanded us to pray for such as thou have appointed rulers, and governors
over us, 1. Timo. 2.
and also for all things needful for thy people: we therefore co^ceauinge
boldness through thy holy word; and leaninge assuredly unto thy most
undoubted promises, do make our earnest suplication unto thee our most
merciful god, and bountiful father, that for Jesus Christ's sake our only
savior and mediator, it would please thee of thy infinite mercy, freely to
pardon our offenses, and in such sort to draw and lift up our hearts and
affections toward thee, that our requests may both proceed of a fervent
mind, and also be agreeable unto thy most blessed will and pleasure.

We beseech thee therefore (O heavenly father) as towchinge all princes and
rulers, unto whom thou have committed the administration of thy justice, and
namely as towchinge the estate of our most gracious Queen, that it would
please thee to endue her and all her honorable Counsel with thy plentiful
grace and principal spirit, and increase the same from time to time in her,
that ^e may with a pure faith acknowledge Jesus Christ thy only son our
lord, to be the king of all kings, 1. Timo. 6. Act. 17. Math. 28.
and governor of al governors, even as thou have given al power unto him
both in heaven and in earth, and may uprightly and zelously seek and
earnestly maynteine thy true glory, minister justice, punish sin, and
defend the right, rulynge her subjects which be thy creatures, and the sheep
of thy pasture, even as she is taught and commanded by thy word.

We beseech thee also (most dear father) for all Pastors and ministers, unto
whom thou have committed the charge of men's sowles, and the ministry of thy
holy gospel, that it would please thee so to guide them with thy holy spirit,
that they may be found faithful and zealous of thy glory, directing alwais
their whole studies unto this end, that the poor sheep which be gone astray
out of the stock, may be sought out, and brought again unto the lord Jesus
(who is the chief shepeharde and head of al Pastors) whereby they may from day
to day, 1. Pe 5.
grow and increase in him unto all righteous^nes and holiness. And on the other
part, that it would please thee to deliver thye church from the danger of
such idols shepehardes, ^^che. 11.
wulues, and hirelynges, as seek them selves and their bellyes, and not the
settinge forth of thy glory and the safegarde of thy flock.

Moreover we make our prayers unto thee (most merciful father) for all men in
general, ye as thou will be known to be the savior of all the world by the
redemption purchased by thy only son Jesus Christ: even so such as have been
bytherto holden captive in darcknesse and ignorance for lack of the knowledge
of thy gospel, may through the preaching thereof, and the clear light of thy
holy spirit, be brought into the right way of salvation, which is to
knowledge that thou art only very god, and that he whom thou haste sent is
Jesus Christ. Iu. 17.
Likewise that they whom thou have already endued with thy grace, and whose
heart thou have lightened with the knowledge of thy word, may continually
increase in godliness, and be plenteousely enryched with spirytuall benefytes:
so that we may altogether worship thee both with heart and mouth, and render
due honor and service unto thee accordingly.

In like manner (O lord of al true comfort) we commend unto thee in our prayers
all such persons, as thou have visited and chastised, by thy cross and
tribulation, all such people, as thou have punished with pestilence, war, and
famine, and all other persons afflycted with poverty, imprisonment, sickness,
banishmente, or any like bodily adversity, or have otherwise troubled and
afflycted in spirit, that it will please thee to make them perceive thy
fatherly affection toward the^: that is that these crosses be nothing else,
but fatherly chastisinges for their amendment, to the intent that they should
unfeignedly turn unto thee, that they cleauinge unto thee, mays receive full
comfort, and be delivered from all manner of evil.

Finally most dear father we beseech thee to grant, that we may knowledge
truly without hypocrisy bow miserable a state of perdition we are in by
nature, and how worthily we procure unto our selves everlasting dampnation^
heapinge up from time to time thy grievous punishme^tes toward us, through our
wicked and sinful life, to the end that seeing there remains no spark of
goodness in our nature, and that there is nothing in us (as touching our first
creation, and that which we receive of our parents) mete to inioye the
heritage of gods kingedome, we may wholly render by our selves with all our
hearts, and with an assured co^fide^ce, unto thy deroly beloved son Jesus Christ
our lord; our only savior and redemer, to the end that he dwelling in us may
mortefy our old man (yt is to say) our sinful affections, and that we may be
regenerated into a more godly life: obedience, even as thy holy aungells do
apply them selves only to the perfourming of thy commandments: so that
only thy will may be fulfilled without any co^tradiction, and that every man
may bend him self to serve and please thee, renouncing their own wylles with
all the affections and desires of the flesh.

we beseech the pardon us our innumerable offenses,

And for as much as of our selves, we are so weak that we are not able to
stand upright one minute of an hour: and again so belaid and assaulted
evermore with such a multitude of so dangerous ennemies, that the devil, the
world, sin and our own co^cupice^ces, do never leave of to fight against us,
Let it be thy good pleasure to strengthen us with thy holy spirit, and to arm
us with thy grace,

Who can tell whether the lord will turn again and have compassion upon us, and
leave a blessinge behind him.

Joel. 2. A prayer mete for this present time, that god would turn away his
plagues hanging over us for our sins.
OH lord God, strong and mighty, great and fearful, which dwell in the
heavens, and workest great wonders, we thy miserable children here upon earth,
do most humbly beseech thee to be merciful unto us, to pardon our offenses,
and forgers us all our sins. O Lord enter not into judgment with thy
servants, for if thou do, there shall no flesh be saved in thy sight. O Lord
we confess and acknowledge that it is our syns that has caused thee to be
moved unto wrath, and to show such tokens of thy displeasure toward us in
these our days, fyrfte with fire from heaven, which did betoken thy hot
burning indignation, and wrathful displeasure for sin which abounds at
this day, and then with such horrible and monstrous shapes against nature, as
was never seen in our days, nor in no time before us in this miserable
country of ours: which all do betoken to us none other thing, but thye
plagues to come upon us for our degenerate and monstrous life and
conversation: and our wonderful and terryble destruction and desolation
(unless we spedely repent and turn to thee) because we have been so long
taught out of thy most holy and sacred word, and yet no fruits of
repentance or christyan life will appear.

Woe and alas to these our days, that neither preachinge by word most
comfortable, nor preaching by fire most terrible, nor preaching by monsters
most ougly and horrible, will flyrre up our stony hearts, and awake us from our
sins.

We fear (oh Lord) that the turks with all the rest of the unbelieving will
condemn us in the last day: which if they had been so long instructed by the
comfortable preaching of thy word, and sweet promises of thy gospel, or seen
the wonders which we have seen, no doubt their righteousenes would have
shined at this day, to our great shame and confusion. Thou have no less
warned us (oh Lord) of thy fearful displeasure and heavy plagues at hand for
our great wickedness, then thou dyddest the Israelites of that horrible
destructyon which came upon them: who^ thou first in mercy did call to
repentance by the preachinge of thy word, but when no warning would serve,
thou did send them monstrus and fearful signs and tokens, to declare that
thy visitation was not far of. But they, like unto us at this day, did
always interpret these things after the imagination of their own vain
hearts, promising to them selves peace when destruction was over their heads.

Which things when we do call to mind (for as much as they are written for
our learning, exaumple, and warning) it makes us to tremble and quake for
fear of thy just judgments. For if thou have thus dealt with thine own
dears and chosen children, in token of thy great wrath against sin, what
shall we look for? who do no less deserve thy fearful scourge (and of mercy it
is that thou doeste thus lenge forbear us) but live as though there were no
god at all to be revenged upon our sins. It makes us to fear and cry
inwardly in our sowles: Come lord Jesus, Apor. 22.
holy and trus in all thy doings, and shorte^ our days, bring this our
pilgremage to an end, suffer us not to heap sin upon sin unto the day of
vengeance, lest we be taught up amongst the number of the wicked and
reprobate, which shall never see thy loving countenance.

It makes us to cry to thee (o lord) Let thy kingdom come and end this our
sinful life, wherein we do nothing but rouoke thee to wrath. Psalm. 6.
Correct us not O lord in thine indignation, neither chasten us in thine
heavy displeasure: and though to us belongs nothing but shame and
confusion, though our offenses have deserved to be visyted with the rod, and
our sins with scourges: Psalm. 89.
yet in mercy lord and with fatherly correction chasten us, and thy louinge
kindenes take not away from us.

To thee we flee for succor, under the wings of thy mercy shall be our refuge
until thou turn thy wrathful countenance from us. Psalm. 57.
We know that thye mercy is above all thye works, and even as great as thy
self. Eccle. 2.
Therefore will we say with holy Job, though thou kill us, yet will we put our
trust in thee.

Thou cammest to comfort, and pluck out of the dungeo^ of hell, such wretches
as we are: Luke. 10.
thou art the good Samaritane that cameste to heal our deadlye wounds: thou
art that good physician that came to cure our mortal infyrmities: thou art
the good shepeherd that came to seek us wanderinge and lost sheep, Luke. 15.
and to bring us to thy fold again: and more then that thou art our brother,
Ephesians. 5.
flesh of our flesh, and boane of our boanes; which haste tasted of our
infirmities, Esa. 53.
felt our temptations, and borne the burden of our sins: Therefore at thy
hands we look for mercy against the day of vengeance. And though thou
punyshe us, yet our hope is and ever shall be, that thy rod shall no further
touch us then shall make to thy glory, our commodity, and the streng thenyng
and increace of our faith.

Let this thy preaching sundry ways (O lord) be sufficient for our warning,
and grant that we may spedely and from the bottom of our hearts repent,
endeavor to do thy righteouse and blessed will reveled in thy word, and frame
our lives according to the same: that we may here live in thye fear all the
days of our life, and after this our sin full course is ended, may dwell
with-thee in thy blessed kyngedome, through the death and merits of Jesus
Christ our only redemer. So be it.

When thy wrath is kendeled (O Lord) blessed are all they that put their
trust in thee.

Psalm. 2. A prayer for fair weather.
O God and merciful father, we acknowledge that we through our manifold
sins have deserved to be sharply rebuked and corrected of thee. But if thou
should deal with us after our sins, we are not hable to abide thy wrath
and heavy hand. Wherefore deal mercifully with us (O Lord) after the greatness
of thy goodness, and the multitude of thy mercies, that we rather may rejoice
and be thankeful unto thee for the abundance of thy great mercies, and loving
kindenes, then be cast down and discouraged by the heavy weight of thy hand.

In thy hands (O lord) are both heaven and earth: So govern them therefore, we
beseech thee for thy names sake, that we may have seasonable weather to receive
the fruits of the earth. Stay the immoderate plenty of rain and unseasonable
weather, and power rather upon us the plentyfull dew of thy spytite, that we
may daily grow to the perfection of christen men. Take away from us our
stony hearts, and give unto us in the stead thereof, hearts of flesh, that we
may cease at the length thus to provoke thy wrath to bring upon us either
this so great a plague as the loss of the fruits of the earth, either else
other plagues of thy just judgment.

Grant that we may so repent us of our former evils, that hereafter the
worthy fruits of true repentance may continually appear therein, and so to
pass over and to end this our mortal life, that at the last we may attain
unto the blessed resurrection and life everlasting through Jesus Christ our
lord. Amen.

A Prayer to be said before the receiving of the communion.
O Father of mercy and god of all consolation, saying all creatures do
knoweledge and confess thee to be their gouernoure and lord, Apoc. 5.
it becomes us the workmanship of thine own hands, at all times to
reverence and magnify thy godly majesty: First, Gent. 1.
for that thou have created us to thine own image and similitude, but chiefly
because thou have delivered us from that everlasting death and dampnation,
Ephe. 2. Gal. 1. Gene. 3.
into the which Satan drew mankind by the means of sin: from the bondage
whereof neither man nor Angel was hable to make us free, Act. 4. Hebre. 1.
Apoc. 5.
but thou (o lord) rich in mercy and infinite in goodness, haste provided our
redemption to stand in thine only and well-beloved son, whom of very love
thou diddeste give to be made man like unto us in all things, John. 3. Hebre.
8. Hebre. 4. 1. Pet. 2. Es. 43.53. Mat 3.17 Iere. 31. Heb. 8. Romans 5. Heb. 2.
John. 6. Gene. 3. Romans 5. Ephe. 3.
sin excepted, that in his body he might receive the punishment of our
transgressio^, by his death to make satisfaction to thy justice, and by his
resurrection to destroy him that was author of death, and so to bring
again life to the world, from which the whole offspring of Adam was most
justly exiled.

O lord we acknowledge that no creture was able to comprehend the length and
breadth, the depenes and heighte of that thy most excellent love which moved
thee to show mercy where none was deserved, Ephe. 2. Io. 6.17. Ephe. 2. Gene.
6. Romans 3. Esai. 64. Psalm. 5.12 Romans 7. Mat. 10. 1. Cor. 2 Luke. 11. Mar. 10.
Math 26. Luke. 22. 1. Cor. 11.
to promise and give life, where death had gotten victory: to receive us into
thy grace when we could do nothing but rebel against thy majesty. O lord the
blind dulnes of our corrupt nature will not suffer us sufficiently to weigh
these thy most ample benefits: yet nevertheless at the commandment of
Jesus Christ our lord, we present our selves to this his table (which he
has left to be used in remembrance of his death until his coming again)
to declare and witness before the world, that by him alone we have received
liberty and life: Io. 8. Gal. 5. To. 8. 1. Pet. 1. Ephe. 5. Ephe. 2. Heb. 4.
To. 3. Mat. 25. John. 14. Luke. 12. Luke. 22. Apo. 2. Phil. 3. Ephe. 2. Ephe 1.
Apo. 13.
that by him alone thou do acknowledge us to be thy children and heirs:
that by him alone we have entrance to the throne of thy grace: that by him
alone we are possessed in our spiritual kingdom, to eat and drink at his
table, with whom we have our conversation presentely in heaven, and by whom our
bodies shall be raised up again from the dust, and shall be placed with him in
that endeles joy, which thou (O father of mercy) have prepared for thine
elect before the fou^datio^ of the world was laid. And these most inestimable
benefits we acknowledge and confess to have received of thy fre mercy and
grace, To. 3. Ephe. 2. Tit. 3.
by thine only beloved son Jesus Christ. For the which therefore we thy
congregation, moved by thy holy spirit, To. 8.
render to thee all thanckes praise and glory for ever and ever.

A Thankesgeuinge after the receauiuge of the communyon. *
Most merciful Father, we render unto thee all praise, thanks, honor and
glory, for that it has pleased thee of thy great mercies to grant unto us
miserable sinners so ercellent a gift and treasure, as to receive us into the
fellowship and company of thy dear son Jesus christ our lord, 1. Cor. 10.
whom thou have delivered to death for us, and haste given him unto us as a
necessary fode and nourishment unto everlasting life. Romans 4.
Io. 6.
And now we beseech thee also (O heavenly father) to grant us this request,
ye thou never suffer us to become so unkind, as to forget so worthy benefits,
but rather imprint and fasten them sure in our hearts, that we may grow and
increase daily more and more in true faith, Luke. 17.
which continually is exercised in all manner of good works: Gala. 5.
and so much the rather, (O Lord) confirm us in these perilous days and
rages of Satan, 1. Tim. 4. Ephe. 5. 2. Pet. 3. Mat. 5. 1. Pet. 2.
that we may constantly stand and continue in the confession of the same, to
the advancement of thy glory, which art God over all things blessed for ever.

So be it.

A prayer to be said before meat. **
O Eternal god, Ebre. 13.
the very god of peace and all consolation, which broughtest again from death
our lord Jesus the great shep herd of the sheep through ye blood of ye
everlasting couenante, make us fruitful in all good works to do thy will,
and work in us that which is acceptable in thy sight: sanctify us throughout,
and keep our whole spyrite, soul, and body fautlesse unto the coming of thy
dear son our lord Jesus Christ. Thou art faithful O father who haste
promised this, who also shall bring it to pass, to thee therefore be given
everlasting praise, honor, and glory.

Amen.
A Thankesgeuing after meat.
Most bountiful and gracious god, which feedest all flesh, and haste
promised that asking of thee, we shall not lack, if we first seek thy
kingdom, and the righteousenes thereof, we felinge presently the benefit of
this thy gracious promise in feeding our bodies with these corporal benefits,
do render unto the most hearty thaks for the same, besechi^g the likewise to
feed our souls with that heavenly fode which perishes not, Ihon. 6.
but abides into everlasting life: so that we being noryshed by thy goodness
both in body and soul, may be apt and ready to do all good works which thou
have prepared for us to walk in, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Unto him that loved us and washed us from our sins in his blood and made us
kings and priests unto God his father, 1. Pet. 5.
be all glory, power, and dominion for evermore. Amen.

A prayer for true mortification.
O God my creator, preserver, and everlasting defendour, where first in my
creation I was made like unto thine own likeness: the devil (alas) has
since by Adams faule, made me oughlye, monstrous, and like evil favored to
him self. For what are now lord mine earthly me^bres, Colo. 3.
but as is written in the.iii. to the Colloss. adultery, whoredom,
uncleanness, unnatural lusts, evil concupiscence, covetousness (which is the
worshippynge of Idols) and such other, for the which thy wrath is wo^t to
come upon the children of unbelief. Nevertheless (lord) of thy great mercy
and goodness against this very great mischief, a much greater remedy thy
fatherly providence has ordained. 1. Io. 3.
For thou have sent Jesus christ thy dear and only natural son into this
world, the vale of miseries, to lose the works of the devil, and to take
away my sins. Therefore Satan has now nothing to brag of, for through
Christ all that believe in thee and so become thy children, 1. Ihon. 5.
do overcome ye world the flesh and the devil. 1. Ihon. 5.
And this is the victory which overcomes them all, even our Faith. Io. 3.
That Faith I mean which is perswaden that who so ever be leueth in christ
shall not perish but have everlasting life. 1. John. 5.
That faith which beloueth the testimony to be true which thou (God the
Father) doeste testify of thy son, so making thee no liar, and this is that
testimony, that thou haste given us eternal life. To. 8.
That faith wheche believes that thou father, who raysedst up Christ from death
shall also quicken our mortal bodies through thy holy spirit dwellig in us.
Io. 14.
That faith which believes it to be true which thy son Christ affirmed, with
a double oath, saying: Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that believes in me
the works that I do, the same shall he do, and greatter works then these
shall he do, because I go unto my father. John. 12.
And finally yt faith which believes, that now Christ has been lift up on
the cross, he shall draw all things unto him: this faith (I say) is the
victory whicke overcomes our ennemies, the devil, the world, and our
flesh. John. 14.
Thou therefore (lord father) which have promised to give what so ever I shall
ask in thy dear Son Jesus name, for thy great mercy and infallible truethes
sake, do now in me the thing that he came for: lose in me the works of the
devil, 1. Iho. 3.
and take away my sins I beseech thee, make steadfast my Faith confidence in
thy promised mercies and merciful promises: John. 3.
so that I assuredly beleui^g in thee may have (as thou promisest) everlasting
life, and making thee (dear God) no liar, may believe, feel, and know in my
heart and conscience, ye the same everlasting life is thy mere and free gift
unto me, yea already of thy great goodness, undoubtedly given me, being now
translated from death to life. Of a thanckefulnes whereof Lord cause me now
daily to mortify my erthly members. To. 8.
Yea (dear father) sith thy spirit which raised up Christ from death,
dwells within me, do thou (who raisedst Christ from death) quicke^ my mortal
body through thy spirit so dwelling in me, I beseech thee. John. 14.
Yea lord Jesus according to thy promise (because thou art now gone to thy
father) make me work this wonderful great work ye thou speak of: I mean,
make me, Collo. 3.
being of my self but a lump of sin and a monster most ougly (as the vices
whereon the members of my earthly body above declared to be compacte do prove)
make me (I say) yet through thy grace, to hate, abhor, flee and subdue all
adultery, whoredom, uncleanness, unnatural lusts, evil concupiscence,
inordinate desires, wantonness, tenderness, delicatenes, idleness, drunkenness,
gluttony, slouthfulnes, distruste, despair, ignorance, weakness, wilfulnes,
Idolatry, superstition, hypocrisy, heresye, error, sects, variaunce, strife,
wrath, envy, slanders, lyeng, swearing, cursyng, vain glory, pride,
couetousenes, theft, disceite, flattery, and what so ever else (lord)
feighteth or rebelleth against thy holy spirit. And then (lord Father) I will
boast and make vaunte against mine ennemie the devil, that I have done
greater works then thy dear son Jesus did, at what time he spoke these
words among the jews, because, John. 14.
albeit he vanquissehed Satan, yet in as much as he him self was utterly
without sin, the victory seemed the wore easy: But I to vanquishe satan,
being my self altogether synful, yea contrary to my most sinful nature to
subdue sin, the devil, and mine own flesh, it seems a more victory and
greater work then the other. For the which nevertheless, I will with all
submission acknowledge unto thy divine majesty taht ye whole victory lord in
deed is thine, and thy holy spirit the begynner and fynisher both of the will
and work. Now therefore, Lord Jesus, stre^then me with thy grace and might,
that thou may by me a most sinful wretch, draw al these my earthly
members and horrible vices before rehearsed, under my feet, that I may not
only mightily fight against them, but also subdue them, so that they may al
turn to the best for me, Romans 8. Io. 12.
as mete matter whereon I may exercise my faith power forth hearty prayer, and
give thee most hartye thanckes for victory: whereby I may learn and have
experience that thou haste in me drawn althinges unto thee in so much as thou
thus (lord) of thy divine power, drawest both the devil and the sin that
dwells in me, to set forth thy honor and glory. which thing for thy
mercies sake bring to pass, O God my creatoure, preserver, and everlasting
defe^dour.

A Prayer of a christian man, expressing his great anguishe and heuines of
mind that he had before time for his sins, and for that he felt not his heart
comforted in the joy of gods great love toward him, with the manner of his
prayers and groninges which he then made, and now powers forth again unto
god for his grace and assistance in his new assaults. whereby the broken hearted
and afflicted for their sins may learn to stir up and strengthen their
faith and hope in like dangers and trouble of conscience.
1.EVen in the mids of the desperate assaults of my soul, the intolerable
heuinesse of my mind has heretofore (Lord) cried as shrill in thine ears as
though I had shryked and with lamentations cried out, saying: Help, help me
my god, my creator, my most provident keeper, and everlasting defender, for
behold I peryshe.

2 On this occasion (Lord) that heaviness of mind did heretofore assault me I
remembered that thou haddeste many times set before mine eyes the wonderful
greatues of thy most tender love toward me by great multitude of thy
benefits powered upon me, which benefytes every of thy works (as they came
before mine eyes) gave me just occasyon to be mindful of.

3 Would not (thought I) if I had in a manner any grace at all, would not suthe
love bring now into my heart a wonderful delectation, comfort and joy in
god for the same?

4 And again, could such delyghte in gods sweet mercy and tender love
toward me (if I were not as evil as a cast away that were none of gods
children) be without lothing of my syn, and lust and desire to do gods holy
will? And these things thought I (fie upon the unthankful wretch) are either
not at all in me, or else in deed so coldelye and sclenderly that they being
truly waied and compared to righteousenes, Esa. 64.
are more vile then a sylthye clothe starched in corrupt bloudde.

5 Oh (thought I) I am aferd I have deceived my self: for thy servants at al
times (I trow) feel otherwise then I now do, the fruits of thy spirit: as
Love, Joy, Peace and such like.

But my love (alas) toward thee, what is it? my joy (oh woe is my heart
therefore) is not once almost felt of me, for my very soul within me (as
David in his heaviness said) refuses comfort, and fares as though it did
utterly despair. Psalm. 77.
And what peace can I feel then, or certainty of thy favor and love?
Justly may I power out this dolorous lamentation of Sion: the lord has
forsaken me, Esai. 49.
and my lord has forgotten me:

6 Even in the mids (I say) of these my former desperate assaults, mine in
tolerable heuines cried to my god, and from heaven he heard my gronynges, and
thereupon first prepared my heart to ask comfort of him, and then he heard my
prayer and gave me ple^tefully my asking.

7 Oh my soul, consider well that thou art never hable to declare the exceeding
goodness of god in this that he heard the very desires of thee being afflicted.
who is so ready fauourablye to grant the requests of the afflicted, that
often times he taryeth not until they do call, but or ever they call upon him,
he favorably hears the^: as the psalmist says, the desires of the afflicted
thou heareste (O lord) thou preparest their hearts and thine care hears
favorably. Psalm. 10.


8 Oh lord my god, marvelous things are these, whether I consider this
marvelous manner of thy hearing, orels the marvelous nature and propertye of
thy goodness. Marvelous (no doubt) is that thy hearing, whereby the very
desires of the afflicted are heard, but much more marvelous is this thye
goodness which taryeth not until the afflicted do desire thy help, but
prepares first their hearts to desire, and then thou geuest them their desires.

9 Yea Lord (worthy of all praise) it can not otherwise be. For how should
thou do otherwise then thy nature and property is? art not thou very goodness
and mercy it self? how can thou then, but pity and help misery?

10 Art not thou both the creator and also the conseruer of all things? In so
much as the lions whelps roaryng after their pray do seek their food at thy
hands, Psa. 104. Psalm. 147.
and the ravens birds lackyng meat do call upon thee.

11 If then thy fatherly providence and tender care (O lord) upon all thy
creatures be so great, that the very beasts and fowls have this experience of
thy goodness in their necessities, that their roringes and criynges have the
strength of earnest callinges and besechinges: how much rather do these
syghinges, groninges, and desperate heuines of men, but chiefly of all those
which believe in thee, cry and call loud in thine ears, though they speak
never a word at all?

12 Should I then now dispeire of thy fatherly mercy, whiles presently I feel
thee stir up my soul and heart to crave help at thy hand? Psalm. 77.
should I think that thou will absent thy self for ever? that thou will be
no more entreated? that thy mercy is clean gone, and thy promise come utterly
to an end, and that thou will now shut up thy loving kindness in displeasure?

13 Nay god forbydde: for all alterations are of thy right hand and turn away
to the best, to them that fear thee. All this is no more but mine own
infirmity, Psalm. 77.
for god is ever one, his promises be infallible, and his love toward his
everlastingly duringe.

14 I will therefore in this my present temptation and grievous assault, power
out my heuines of heart before thee (dear father) yea I will with gronynges
lift up my soul unto thee, from whence I assuredly know my help is coming.
I will also for my present comfort, Psalm. 77.
call to remembrance (O lord my god) thy tender mercies toward me already
showed, the multitude of thy benefits, the greatness of the same, the long
continuance of them, even from my conception until this instante, and
finally thy continual lust and desire to power them upon me.

15. And moreover since thy goodness is so great (O lord) that thou do not
only pity misery, but also call the heavy hearted and afflicted unto the,
promising that thou will ease their misery: and for as much as, Mat. 11.
by the motion of thy good spirit I loath and abhor my sines, I felt the
greuousenes of them, and thy heavy wrath toward me for the same, and finally
what need I have of thy gracious aid and succoure: therefore (Lord father) in
thy son Christ's name, with sure confidence and trust in thine infallible
promise, in this mine anguish and trouble I come unto thee at thy merciful
calling, and crave comfort at thy hand. For this I know well, that when I loath
my sins, thou do utterly forget the^, when I feel the grievous burden of
them, thy mercy swalloweth them up, when I feel what I want, thou wylt
assuredly grant it me. For since thou mouest my heart to desire help, how
should I mistrust but thou will for thy truths sake, give me mine askinge?

16. Yea, where I know not how or what to desire as I ought, thy holy spirit
graciously workinge in me, makes intercession mightily for me, Romans 8.
with gronings which can not be expressed, and there withal certifieth my
spirit that by adoption, through thy great mercy and goodness, I am become thy
child and heir.

17. Why should I not then be of good comfort and joyful in thee my God? For
if thou be on my side, who can be against me? Romans 8.
who diddeste not spare thine own son, but gave him for me, even when I
was thine enemy, how shall thou not with him now that by his death I am
brought into thy favor, give me all things with him and for his sake? who
shall lay any thing to the charge of thine elects? it is thou lord that
iustifiest me, who then shall condemn me? It is Christ that has died for
me, yea rather that is risen again for me, who also is set on thy right hand,
and has taken possession, yea and perpetually makes there intercession for
me, until that joyful day be come when I shall have full fruition of the most
glorious presence of thy divine majesty in that kingedome which thou have
prepared before the beginning of the world, Ephe. 1.
but in time (to thy gracious goodness thought best) made known to me by
geuinge thy holy spyrite into my heart, whereby when I first Lord believed thy
holy word (which is thine own power to save all that believe) I was sealed, Romans
1.
confyrmed and stablyshed in certaynty of that thine everlasting kingdom and
inheritance.

For the which inestimable benefit of thy rich grace (Oh Lord my God) I
beseech thee (even for the love thou barest to Christ Jesus thy son, and the
mercy thou haddeste on him when he cried on the Cross, Mat. 27.
my God my God why haste thou forsaken me) help, help I say, and inflame my
heart with love so plenteously toward thee again, that I may be eue^
swallowed up in the joyful feling of the same, in such sort that I may of very
thankfulness love thee my God alone, thee I say my dear God, and nothing but
thee and for thy sake. Oh holy spirit whose work this is in me, increase this
thy work, of thine infinite mercy, and preserve me that I never become
unthankful unto thee therefore. Amen, dear god. Amen.

Remedies against sinful motions and voluptuous temptations.
1. FIrst remember that sin is so heinous a thing that god by his justice
might worthily dampne the for the same, and is therefore to be abhorred as a
sweet poison; a flattering death and destruction of thy soul, which would cut
thee of from god thy fauiour, and make thee bond slave to Satan thye deadly
enemy.

2 Avoid therefore even at the first, the occasions thereof, and betymes quashe
out the brains of the children of Babylon against the hard stones, Psalm. 137.
whiles they be yet young and weak, least when they be grown elder and
stronger, they dashe thee to pieces.

3 And for remedy against the same, flee unto god, who commands thee to call
upon him in thy troubles, and promises to deliver thee, and will not suffer
thee to be further tempted then he will make away out whereby thou shalt
escape: 1. Cor. 10.
and doubt not but he that causes thee to hate the sin which thy nature is
to love, will deliver thee also from the danger thereof, and make thee to
triumph over Satan, to his confusion, to gods glory, and to thy great
comfort. which are the causes that our tender loving father sends
temptations unto us and and he that is not tempted, what is he? 1. (...). 1


4 Now after thou have obtained the victory; remember two things, first to
give most hearty thanckes to god for his grace and assistance, whereby thou haste
overcome, and he not unthankful in any wise: and then, that he who
continually goes about like a roaryng lion seeking whom he may devour, will
not be long or far away from the, but will attempt again the same or as
evil ways to overcome thee.

Watch therefore and pray.

A prayer for present help in temptation.**
Dear father, to whom it is more easy to do all things then for me to
thyncke any one good thing, Lo do thou but speak a word and thy deadly sick
servant my soul shall be made whole. Help (O Lord) and let thy strength
suffice against my weakness, and thy holy spirit against my sinful flesh
and old man. Thou art true and faithful (O Father) who have promised that I
shall not be tempted further then thou wile make me able to bear. 1. Cor. 10.
Give therefore thy power unto thy servant, that I may with a strong faith in
thine infallible truth and promised mercy, vanquishe and subdue what so over
rebelleth against thy most blessed wills Do this O Father, for thy son Jesus
Christ's sake our dear Lord and gracious redemer. Amen

A Prayer to God the Father for the true knowledge of the mystery of our
redemption in Christ.
O Almighty God and father of our lord Jesus Christ, and by him also our
father, the father of all mercy and god of all consolation, have mercy upon
us and hear our prayers. We most humbly beseech thee for thy dear son Jesus
Christ's sake, his merits and cruel death, which he suffered to deliver us
from eternal death and the power of darkness, give into our hearts the spirit
of truth, to work in us a true, lively, and steadfast faith, that the clear
light and brightenesse of thy gospel the glory of Christ, may shine unto us
and lyghten our minds, that we may learn and understand the wonderful and
unspeakable richesse of the misteric of our redemption in Christ and by
Christ. O father of glory give unto us the spirit of wisdom, and bring us
unto the true knowledge of this thy beloved son Jesus Christ and the
knowledge of thy self. Open and lyghten the eyes of our minds and
understanding, Ephe. 1.
that we may know what the hope is whereunto thou have called us, and how
rich the glory of thine inheritance is upon thy saints, and the exceeding
greatness of thy power toward us: that by true faith, understanding and
knowledge of thine eternal wisdom (which is Jesus Christ) we may be in
deed as we are called, true christians and unfeigned professors of thye holy
name, to worship thee in spirit and truth, and to set forth the glory of
thy grace given unto us in Christ Jesus our lord. Amen

O dear father write in our hearts love to thy law, hate to all sin,
thankfulness of heart and continual heat of thy holy spirit for thy son
Jesus Christ's sake. To whom with thee and thy holy spirit be all honor,
majesty, glory, thanks, rule, empire, and dominion for ever more.

A prayer to be used of all sorts of men and at all times.
O Lord God for thy great mercies sake, grant unto me these my petycions which
I shall make unto the in Jesus Christ's name, and endue me with thy grace that
I may ask of thee in such sort as thou requirest, to the honor, glory, and
praise of thy holy name, to the furtheraunce of thy word, the profitte of thy
people, and to my consolation and comfort, through Jesus Christ our only
savior and readeuter. So be it.

O Lord thou great and terryble god, thou that kepest covenant and merry with
them that love thee and do thy commandments, let thine ears be open that
thou may hear the prayers of thy servant, which I make before thee at this
time, have mercy upon me thy pore creature, and work of thine hands, for I
have sinned, and done wickedly, and have offended thy majesty grievously, in
that I have gone back, and departed from all thy precepts and judgments,
and have not followed thy servants the prophets ye spoke unto me in thy name,
but have from day to day provoked thy just wrath and indignation against me.

O Lord I knowledge and confess my manifold sins and wickedness, the
which I have vnrighteousely committed against thee in thought, word, and
deed, fro my youth up until this day, for the which I am heartily sorry, and do
unfeignedly repent, purposing evermore through the assistaunce of thy grace, to
walk in a new life.

Remember not lord the number of my misdedes I beseech the, but according to
thy great mercyes think upon me.

Call to remembrance for Christ's sake thy loving kindness and thy tender
mercy, the which has ever been of old.

Hyde not thou thy face from me, nor cast not of thy servant in thy
displeasure, for I confess my sins unto thee, and hide not mine
unrighteousness.

For thy mercies sake deliver me from al my sins, and make me not a scorn
unto the folyshe.

Turn not away thy mercy from me, but let thy most loving kindness and truth
always preserve me.

Help me for thy names sake, and deliver me in thy strength.

Hear my prayer (O lord) and consider the words of my mouth, for my misdedes
prevail against me. O be thou merciful unto my sins.

Let the sorrowful sighyng of thy prisoner come before thee, and according to
the power of thine arm preserve those ye be appointed to dye for thy just
cause.

O Lord comfort the soul of thy servant, for unto thee do I flee for succor.

Teach me to number my days that I may apply my heart unto wisdom.

Satisfy me with thy mercy, and that sone, so shall I rejoice and be glad in
thee all the days of my life.

Look not extremely what is done amysse in me, for I have sinned against
heaven and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son: yet lord
of thy great goodness, power down some of the cromes that fall from thy
childrens table and make me as one of the least of them.

Reward me not according to my deseruings, for then I must needs perish: for
unto me perteyneth nothing but open shame, confusion, and damnation: but with
thee there is mercy, forgeuenes, and salvation.

O Lord therefore do I come unto thee, not hopyng in mine own righteousness,
but trusting only in thy great mercies and promises made unto me in Christ
Jesus my lord, for whose sake, I beseth thee to cleanse me from al my sins,
and do away all mine iniquities.

For thy tender mercy sake, lay not my sins to my charge, but forgive that is
paste and give me grace to amend my life, to declyne from sin, and incline
to virtue, that I may walk in a perfect heart, a cleue comience, and single
eye before thee this day or night and evermore.

Remember not forde mine offenses, nor the offenses of my forefathers, neither
take thou beingeance of my sins, spare me good Lord, spare me, whom thou
have redeemed with thy most precious blonde, and be not angrye with me for ever:
spare me good lord, spare me.

Put me not from thy presence (oh thou god of al comfort) but incline thine
ear unto my calling.

Strengthen thy Servant with the power of thy right hand, and help the
Son of thy handmayden.

Replenyshe my heart with grace wisdom and understanding.

Comfort my soul with thy sweet promyses, and let thy mercies cover my
infirmities.

For the death and bloudshedynge of thy Christ (O Lord) consider mine
infirmities, which are many, and help to heal mine imperfection, and deliver
me from al kinds of euilles, that I do not obey unto them: as from adultery,
fornication, uncleanness, wantonness, ydolatry, good lord deliver me. From
witch craft, lyeng, hatred, varyaunce, zeal, wrath, strife, sedition, good
lord deliver me. From sects, enuiyng, whyspering, backebityng, bringing up
of evil tumors, good lord deliver me. From murder, drunkenness, gluttony,
and from the spirit of evil telosie, good lord deliver me. From enuiynge of
other which love thee and thy people more then I, or be beloved of thee or of
thye people more than I am: from swelling at other men's gifts, good lord
deliver me. From surmisynge, murmuringe, lowering, grudging, mutteringe when
words be not spoken to my mind, good lord for thy great mercies sake deliver
me, and give me grace that I do at no time envy any good man or womaunes
love, but labor to increase it, that their prosperstie in word and praise of
other may be my consolation and reioysynge.

O lord grant me that I may be low in mine own sight, to submit my self to
bear all occasions, to wrestle with flesh and bloudde and get the victory.

Grant me this gift that I may be swyft to hear, slow to speak, and slow
to wrath, that my heart do not go after any evil and wicked imaginations.

Give me grace to walk so that I give none evil occasions, and to avoid all
suspicious things whereby evil occasions may grow.

O Lord assist me with thye spirit, that I may labor to mainteyne peace, to
increase love, and to further virtue.

Grant (O merciful father) that I may prosper in all virtue, in long
suffering, gentleness, goodness, faithfulness, mekenes, temperaunce, strength, and
patience, with all such like virtues as are commanded in thy holy law for me
to walk in.

O lord give me joy in thy holy spirit, that I may rejoice in thy holy
scriptures, that al my whole pleasure, felycitie, and consolation, may be in
thy holy word night and day, in readinge, thinking, and talkinge of the
same, to thy glory and my edifienge.

Assist thy servant against this world with the vain pomp, pleasure and
beauty thereof, that it may be unto me as vile dust, slime, fylthynes, and
ashes, that I may use it as though I used it not, and that it may serve me,
and I not it, that I may take my part thereof unto my necessity, with
thankesgeuing, that I do not use thy creatures voluptuousely, but that I may at
al times live righteously, soberly, and godly in this life.

Give me grace to walk with a good conscience both before thee and toward
all men, in bying and sellinge, and in all other my doings, to cast away
allyinge, craft, and disceite, that I be not a reader of thy holy word, and a
talker only, but that it may appear also in my life and conversation.

O Lord grant unto thy servant the strength of thy holy spirit, to
subdue this body of sin with the whele lusts thereof, that it may be made
obedient both in will, mind, and members, to do thy will, yt it may be weak,
vile, simple, and of no reputation in it self by the way of fasting, prayer,
and meditation of thy law, that I may be low hearted, humble minded, gentle
spryted and to all virtues obedient.

Give me grace O lord to bridle my mouth from al vain and light
communication, and give me an understanding heart with such discretyon, that
neither fylthynes nor folishe talkinge, nor iestinge which are not comely,
proceed out of my mouth, but rather giving of thanks.

O Lord my savior, increase my faith in thee, and in thy Christ, and make it
strong to believe thy promyses.

O Lord my redemer, increase in me a love to do thy will, and to thy ryghteous
people.

O Lord my iustifyer, increase in me a sure hope of my salvation without
doubt or wavering in adversity, and with out pride or presumption in
prosperytie: so that in adversity I may be pacient, and give thanks in
prosperity, and serve thee with reverence and godly fear all the days of my
life.

Increase in me Lord al other virtues agreeable to a godly life, for I come unto
thee my god as unto the well and everlasting fountain of health and salvation.

O heavenly father, grant unto me and al other, wheresoever they be dispersed
throughout the whole world, which profess thy holy word, so to live that we
may dye to sin, and lead a godly conversation walking innoce^tly before thee.

Preserve and defend thy servant from all false opinions, that I be not
deceived and carried away in error of the wicked, but that I may grow in
grace and knoweledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

O Lord give me a reverent and pure understanding of thy holy word, that I may
thereby avoid al rash judgment and perverse interpretations.

O Lord give me wisdom knoweledge and understanding to perceive those
false, lying, and flatteryng spirytes, which do deceive the hearts of
innecentes and begyle unstable souls.

O Lord make me to be content with this woman which thou have given me to be
my wife that we may godly live together according to thy holy ordinance.

Give her an heart of understanding, and set thy fear always before her eyes,
that she may be obedient in word, deed, and thought to all that is thy will.

O Lord give us the power of thy holy Spirit, to rule, govern, and bring up
these our children and family, in all god lie fear and knoweledge of thy holy
word, and that we may be unto them an example in all godlynes and virtue, to
the praise of thy holy name.

Save my soul (oh my God) whether it be through prosperity or adversity,
loss or gain, sickness or health, life or death.

Aid, strengthen, succor, and defend thy servant, in all aduersitye,
tribulation, and temptacio^, and suffer not him to be tempted above his
strength.

Increase my joy, that I may rejoice in persecution, and embrace it to my
co^solacion and comfort, and think my felfe happy and blessed, when I am
counted worthy to suffer rebuke for thy names sake.

Take from my heart the care of all worldly things, only set before my eyes
the joy of the cross of Christ, that I may take comfort therein, and
despise the shame, for the great reward that is laid up in heaven for all
those that with patience suffer in adversity, and continue in well doing unto
the end.

O Lord neither lay thou presumption unto thy servants charge, nor look not
upon my vileness, which am but dust, earth, and ashes: yet lord I have taken
upon me and am bold to come unto thee, through the merits of Christ's death
and blood shedyng, to lay my prayers before thee, requiringe merry, pardon, and
forgiveness of all my sins, and also the assistance of thy grace, to do thy
will all the days of my life, and to obtain all these my peticions, through
Jesus Christ thy dear son, and my only savior: To whom be all honor and
glory now and ever.

Amen. John Lydley.

A Godly Prayer for all Christen men.
O Almighty and ever living god, thou God of all power, before whose eyes all
things lie naked and bare, have regard unto me, most miserable sinner, and
shows me the light of thy mercies, let my prayers ascend up before thy
presence, and be accepted in thy sight, for Jesus Christ's sake. Give thy holy
spirit into my heart (Oh Lord) and lighten my understanding that I may dwell
in the fear of thy name all the days of my life, that I may know thee, the
only true god and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. For I come unto thee (Oh
Lord thou lover of our souls) not hoping in mine own righteousenes, but
trusting only upon the multitude of thy great mercies which thou have laid
forth before the eyes of all people, offering salvation to the whole world,
and haste promised that who so ever he be of the whole generation of man, that
will obey to thy grace, Repent, and turn unfeignedly from his sins, he shall
have free remission and forgeuenes through Jesus Christ our lord, which is our
only advocate and mediator, in whom our salvation lies, of whom thou have
said: This is my dear son, in whom I am well pleased, and well pacifyed.
For this thy sons sake (by whom I am bold to come unto thee, which appears
now inthy sight, making continual intercession for us) Have mercy upon me (O
thou mighty God) and forgive me all my sins, which I have vnrighteousely
committed against thee, in thought, word and deed. Oh let me feel thy
mercies toward me, for I do confess my sins unto thee (Oh lord) and hide
not mine vnrighteousenes, I do acknowledge mine offenses, and accuse my self
before thee of all my misdeedes. Help me, O God my savior for the glory of
thy name: O deliver and forgive me my sins for thy rich mercies sake.

Remember not the offenses of my youth (O Lord) but think upon thy great
mercies and covenant, made unto me in Christ Jesus.

O most merciful father consider mine infirmities, which are many and great,
and bear mine imperfection for thy son my Savior Jesus Christ's sake, which
had good erperience of our infirmity, that he might be merciful unto al them
that are tempted: consider how the enemy has gotten an open way into my
flesh, wherein I confess that there dwells nothing but sin wretchedness,
and misery. Therefore I come unto thee (O Lord my God) desiringe thee for
Christ's sake, to renew in me a right spirit, that I may receive strength
and hablenes to do thy will, and to stand against all the assaults of the
devil, that they may have no place in me, but that the old man which I bear
about in my body, may be crucified, and daily dye in me, that the lusts of
sin may utterly be destroyed, that I may evermore be renewed in the spyrite
of my mind: that the life of Christ may always appear in me.

Good lord deliver me from all kinds of evil, as fornycation, couetousenes,
malyciousnes, envy, murder, debate, deceyte, from whisperynge, backbitinge,
contempt of the and my neighbor, good lord deliver me, from evil ielosie,
from doing of wrong, pride, boasting, from adultery, vain glory, hypocrisy,
wantonness, ydolatry, witchecrafte, hatred variaunce, zeal, wrath, strife,
sedition, sects, envying, drunkenness, gluttony, and other such like.

Good lord for thy great mercies sake, deliver me and grant me grace to have
thee always before mine eyes, that I may also have a respect unto thy
judgments, that whatsoever I say, think or do, may be agreeable to thy holy
word, that I be not minded as the ungodly and wicked men are. Let me have no
pleasure in such things as please the^: make me low in mine own sight (O
lord) that pride and self love overtake me not. Let not the hand of the
ungodly cast me down, but bow my heart always unto thee, that I may serve
thee without fear all the days of my life in such holiness and
righteousenesse, as is acceptable before thee. Remove from me al vanities and
lies, take fro me the iustes of the body, let not the desires of uncleanness
take hold upon me, and give me not over unto an unshamefast or obstynate
mind, but hold me always under thy nurture and correction. Of thy fatherly
mercy leave me not to my self, but stand thou always by me: for I am to weak
of mine own power to do any thing that is good, but my righteousness and
strength lies only in thee. Therefore (O lord) I come unto thee, requirynge
mercy in thy sight, and the assistance of thy grace, yt I may be strengthened
with power in the inward man, and be armed with thy holy armor, which is the
brestplate of ryghteousenes, the shylde of Faith, the hope of salvation for an
helmet, and the sword of the spirit, which is thy holy word, that I may
stand parfecte in all that is thy will, and be found worthy through Christ, to
receive a crown of life which thou have promised to all them that love thee
in pureness of mind.

O Lord plant in me true obedience to thy holy law and let not the cares of
this world choke thy word in me. Keep me al so from all desceitefulnes of
richesse and unclean desires, that all virtues may be planted in me. Good
Lord give me grace to walk before thee all the days of this my Pilgrimage
with good conscience and pure mind, that when thou shall appear to reward
every man according to his deeds, I may rejoice and not be ashamed of the at
thy coming.

Increase my faith (O Lord my savior) in thee and in thy Christ. Increase my
love (O my Redemer) to thee, and to thy ryghteous people. Increase a sure hope
in me of my salvation, O my Iustifier. Increase strength in me to overcome
sin, and to stand against all evil temptacio^s that they have no place in
me. Increase in me true understanding and pure judgment in thy word, that I
be not deceived and carried away in the error of the wicked: But grant (O
lord) that I may grow in thy grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. Let thy kingdom come unto me, which is righteousness,
peace, and joy in thy holy ghost, long sufferyng, gentleness, goodness,
faithfulness, mekenes, temperaunce, strength, and patience, with all such like
virtues as ar prescribed unto me in thy holy word, that in prosperous things I
may give thee thanks, and in adversity be pacient: that I be not lifted up
with the one nor oppressed with the other. Oh let al worldly things be vile
unto me for thee. Let me not be merry with the joy that is without thee, and let
me desire nothing beside thee. Make me to lift up my heart oftentimes to thee,
and if I chance to fall or slip, make me to think on thee, and be sorry with
a steadfast purpose of amendmente. O Lord I gene over my self into thy holy
hand, desiryng thee for Christ's sake, that I may remain under thy mighty
protection and strong defense of thy power, and that thy holy aungel may always
pitch his tent round about me, and compass me always. Good lord give me
ioyfulnes of heart, and peace of conscience, continual gladness and consolation
in thy word and promises, that I may evermore be thanckefull unto thee, and
praise thy name for ever.

O Lord think upon all thy people, which are straied here and there from the
farthest part of the earth, which be entered into couenaunte with thee, and are
minded to walk after thy will, grant (Oh lord) that we may grow together in
love through the knoweledge of thy word to keep the unity of the spirit,
through the bond of peace, to the utter confounding of error and al false
opinions, and to keep us clean from hipocrysy and superstycyon, and to make us
strong in persecution. We beseech thee favorably to hear us good Lord, and
grant our requests. Give praise to god.

I. H.

A Prayer for the forgeuenes of our fynnes and auoydinge of the plague due and
at hand for the same.
O Lord most mighty and fearful God, to all them that hate thee and follow
their own ways, and seek not to do thy holy will, we thy poor creatures,
which labor and do desire to do thy will, do se by thy righteous Judgment of
thy word, thy fyerce wrath and terrible indignation ready to fall upon this
realm of England, for despising of thy Preachers and Messangers, and for the
vnthanckful receiving, yea treading underfoot of thy most holy word. Unworthy
were we of such a jewel, therefore worthily was it taken away from us, and
less worthy were we to have it restored to us again, but now least worthy of
al ar we to enjoy the benefit thereof. And now we se thy wrath is kyndled (O
Lord,) who shall be able to quench it? For our parts we do confess that we
be worthy of al ye plagues that thou haste devised against us: yet
nevertheless we beseech thee unworthily to be called thy children: look not
upon our deserts or worthynesse, but upon thy Christ and thy favorable
mercy, which thou had in the old time upon thy children of Israel if they
repented and turned unto thee. O Lord thou did preserve them, and keep
them from captivity of al other nations, and dyddest ever provide them a
faithful governor or ruler. And furthermore most merciful father, although
they were destroyed for their wickedness, and left but a small people: yet
nevertheless when they turned unfeignedly to thee, thou ever gave the^ the
victory over all their enemies, so that they might dwell as brethren together
peaceably in their own land which thou gaueste them. Thou art the same lord
and thy mercy endures for ever. And now (O lord) we that seek to do thy will
being but a small people, do beseech the of thy great mercy for Jesus Christ's
sake our only Peace maker, to turn away thy great wrath and terrible
indignation which we have deserved in this realm of England, and show thy
compassion upon us (as thou dyddest upon the children of Israel in the old
time) though not for our sakes which have so wyckedly deserved thy wrath, but
for thy most mighty and glorious names sake. For if thou should destroy us
and bring us unto desolation as we have deserved, than should thy most mighty
name and thy holy word be evil spoken of, through us in all the world.
Therefore we beseech thee most merciful father to chasten and correct us, not
as we have deserved, but according to thy favorable mercy: not in thy fury,
but with thy fatherly pitis: and deliver us not over into the hands of our
ennemies, neither take thy holy word from us O lord, though of all other we
do most deserve it, and have most irreverently and vnthanckefully abused the
same. And here we confess unto thee all our iniquities, the which are more in
number the^ the hears of our heads, and they press us so down, that our
hearts fail us and we dare scarsely presume unto thee: yet nevertheless
through Christ which is our righteousness and has pacified thy wrath, we are
bold to come unto thee (O lord) being sorry for our faults even from our very
hearts, desyring thee for his death and passion sake, to forgive us all our
sins that ever we have committed either in thought, word, or deed. O lord,
we give over our selves into thy holy hands, and with all our hearts do desire
to do what so ever thy good will is that we should do, besechinge thee, to
assist us with the grace of thy holy spirit, that we henseforth may live
according to that thy most godly and blessed will, and labor and study to
serve thee in newenes of life, taking up thy cross and following thy steps
(O lord Christ) willingly and cherefully all the days of our life. And
furthermore (O lord) we beseech thee to give us grace to be always tha^kefull
both in heart and in our conversation and living, for all the great benefits
that we have received at thy hand, so that we may enjoy the^ to thy glory, and
our comfort: even as at this present we render unto thee most humble
thanckes, first for thy goodness in the work of our creation: secondly for
that, when we were fallen into everlasting destruction through our consenting
to the subtilte of the ennemie, thou of thy great mercy through Jesus christ
did raise us up again: and thirdly that it has pleased thee to suffer thy
holy word, the food of our sowles, to have fre passage ones again amongst
us, and have given us an heart and a will to seek it, to believe it, and to
follow it in our living and conversation.

Moreover we render unto thee most hearty thanckes (O heavenly father) for
Elyzabeth our gracious Queen and Gouernoure, whom in much mercy thou
dyddest deliver with thy mighty arm from the hands of her enemies and from
the lions mouth, and we beseech thee so to work in her heart, that of a
thankefulnes toward thee for this her great deliverance, and thy syncculer
blessing, considering whose minister she is, she may sincerly seek and zelously
promote thy true honor and glory, build up thy house, confound thy sworn
adversaries, and carefully travel to bring thy people committed to her
charge, remaynyng yet almost in all parts of this realm either in miserable
blyndenes and dark ignorance, or wylfully and stubbernly kickynge against the
prick, to the true knowledge of the and thy blessed word. Make all that are in
authority under her vpryght and faithful in their calling, favorers and
furtherers of thy holy gospel, followers and practisers thereof, mainteyners
and defenders of the Preachers and mynisters of the same, and such as in
synglenesse of heart will seek, not them selves but the commodity of thy
people: and grant that we may all live as faythefull subjects, in all godly
and due obedience, first to the Queen as supreme head and governor, and then
to al other, according to their degree and calling.

Finally we beseech thee O lord, that we may altogether both high and low
walk in a life and conversation worthy for our profession, to thy glory the
good example of other, and the stopping of the mouths of thy ennemies and
ours for thy truths sake, that where as they sla^der us as evil doers they
may see our good works and praise the in thee day of visitation. Amen.

A prayer necessary to be said at all times.
O Bountiful Jesus, O sweet Savior, O Christ the Son of god, have pity
upon me, mercifully here me and despise not my prayers. Thou haste created me
of nothing, thou haste redeemed me from the bondage of sin, death, and Hell,
neither with Gold nor Silver, but with thy most precious body once offered
upon the cross, and thine own blood shed once for all, for my ransom.
Therefore cast me not away, whom thou by thy great wisdom have made, despise me
not whom thou have redeemed with such a precious treasure. Nor let my
wickedness destroy that which thy goodness has builded. Now whiles I live, O
Jesus have mercy on me: for if I dye out of thy favor, it will be to late
afterward to call for thy mercy. Whiles I have time to repent, look upon me
with thy merciful eyes, as thou dyddest vouchsafe to look upon Peter thine
Apostle, that I may bewail my sinful life, and obtain thy favor and die
therein. I acknowledge that if thou should deal with me according to thy
Justice, I have deserved everlasting death.

Therefore I appeal to thy high throne of mercy, trusting to obtain thy favor
not for my merits, but for thy merits (O Jesus) who have given thy self an
acceptable sacrifics to thy father to please his wrath, and to bring al sinners
truly repenting and amendinge their evil life, unto his favor again. Accept
me (O Lord) among the number of them that shall be saved, forgive me my
sins, give me grace to lead a godly and innocent life, grant me thy
heauenlys wisdom, inspire my heart with Faith, Hope and Charity, give me grace
to be humble in prosperity, pacient in adversity obedient to my rulers,
faithful unto them that trust me, dealing truclye with all men, to live
chastlye in wedlock, to abhor adulterye, fornication and all uncleanness, to
do good after my power unto al men, to hurt no man that thy name mays be
glorified in me duringe this present life, and that I afterward may attain
everlasting life, through thy mercy and the merits of thy grievous Passion.
Amen

A Prayer for true mortification and quietness of the heart in God.
Most blessed Lord Jesus, grant me thy grace that it may be always with me,
work in me and persevere with me unto the end, and that I may ever desire
and will that is most pleasant and most acceptable to thee: thy will be my
will, and my will always to follow thy will: be there always in me one will and
one desire with thee, so that I may have no power to will or not to will, but
even as thou will or wilt not, and grant me that I may dye to all things that
be in the world, and for thee to love and be glad to be dyspised, and to be as
a man unknown to this world. Grant me also, above all that can be desired,
that I may rest me in thee, and fully in thee may pacify my heart: for thou
lord art the very true peace of heart, and the perfect rest both of body and
soul, and without thee all things be grievous and unquiet. Wherefore let my
heart find peace and comfort in that peace yt is in thee on high, one blessed
and one endless goodness, and rest therein for evermore. So be it.

A prayer to be said before the hearing or reading of gods word.
ALmighty God and most merciful father, whose word is a lantern to our fete
and a light unto our steps, we most humblye beseech thee to illuminate our
minds, that we may understand the mysteries contained in thy holy law, and
into the self same thing that we godly understand, we may be vertuousely
transeformed, so that of no part we offend thy dyuine majesty, through our
Savior Jesus Christ.

An prayer for remission of sins.
WHen we look back and behold our sinful life paste (O Lord) what a du^geon
of errors, vice, and wickedness opens it self unto us? so that there is no
man but he must needs be ashamed of him self, when he calls to mind what he
has been: and tremble when he considers the wickedness and sinful course of
his life to come. For who shall undertake that the rest of our life shall be any
better then that is past? how can we then sufficiently magnify and praise thy
great mercy which haste differred thy punishment so long? beholdynge therefore
this our dangerous and miserable state, we come unto thee (O thou great and
mighty judge) in tre^blyng and fear, humbly besechig thee not to heap upon us
thy deserved ve^geaunce, but let thy tender kyndnesse and love thou bear to
Jesus christ thy dear son our gracious lord and redemer, cover our iniquities:
for whose sake (though we deserve al extremity) thou do pardon us.

If thou lord shall straightly mark our iniquities (O lord) who shall be hable to
abide it? Psalm. 130.


A prayer against our spiritual ennemies, the devil, the world, and the
flesh.
O Lord god, the devil goes about like a roaryng lion sekyng who^ he may
devour, the flesh lusts against the spirits, the world persuades unto
vanities, that we may forget thee our Lord God and so for ever be dampened.
Thus are we miserablye on every side beset and besieged of cruel and
unrestful ennemies, and like at every moment to perish if we be not defended
with thy godly power against their tyranny. We therefore poor and wretched
sinners, dispayring of our own strength (which in deed is none) most heartily
pray thee to endue us with strength from above that we may be hable through
thy help with strong faith to resist Satan, with fervent prayer to mortify
the lusts of the flesh, with continual meditation of thy holy law to avoid
the foolyshe vanities and transitorye pleasures of this wicked world: that
through thy grace being set at liberty from the power of these our mortal
ennemies, may live and serve thee in holiness and righteousness all the days
of our life. work this in us O holy and blessed spirit, together with the
Father and the son one true and everliving god, full of majesty and power,
which with thy heavenly inspirations quickeneste the minds of them that
before were dead in sin, make joyful the hearts of the faithful penitent,
bring into the way of truth al such as have erred and gone astray,
comfortest the sowles of them that hunger and thyrst after righteousness, and
plenteously enrychest those with diverse gifts which ask them in Jesus
Christ's name: purify our hearts we beseech thee, inflame them with the fire of
thy love, arm us against the crafty assaults of subtyl satan, against the
vain plcsures of the wicked world, and against the sinful lusts of fylthy
flesh, ye we being endued with grace from above by thy holy inspiration, may
walk forwards in newenesse of life, in true holiness and righteousness all the
days of our life. Fyl our hearts with new afctes and spiritual motions, and
renew us both in body and soul that we may dye unto old Adam; and live unto
righteousenes through a lively faith which works by Charity: which
synguler gift of faith grant unto us, that we truly believing in thee (O
eternal God the father the son and the holy ghost) and fully persuaded of the
truth of thy holy word, may be made thy sons and inheritours of the
everlasting joys: which as they are great and unspeakable, so are there
few that do enjoy the^. For strait is the way and narrow is the gate that
leads thereunto, and few there be that find it. Notwithstanding O god thou
have a little flock, to who^ it is thy pleasure to give that joyful kingdom,
whose names are written in the book of life. Make us therefore of that nombre
(for Jesus Christ's sake) and place us amongst those thy sheep which shall
stand on thy right hand to receive that blessed inherytance and dwell with
thee for evermore.

An other prayer.
Remember not O lord god our old iniquites, but let thy mercy spedely prevent
us, for we be very miserable: help us god our savior, and for the glory of thy
name deliver us, be merciful and forgive our sins. Let not the wicked people
say, where is their god? we be thy people and the sheep of thy passture, we
shall give thanks unto thee for ever: from age to age we shall set forth thy
lawde and praise: to thee be honor and glory world without end. Amen.

2. Peter. 3.

The day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in the which day the
heavens shall peryshe with terrible noise, and the Elements shall melt with
heat, and the earth with the worckes yt are therein shall burn up. Saying
therefore that all these things shall perish, what manner persons ought ye to be
in holy conversation and godliness, loking for and hastening unto the day of God.

The Letany and suffrages.
O GOD the father of heaven: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the father. etc.

O god the Son redemer of the world: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the son redemer. etc.

O God the holy ghost procedinge from the father, and the son: have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

O God the holy ghost. etc.

O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, three persons and one god: have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

O holy, blessed, and glorious. etc. Remember not Lord our offenses nor the
offenses of our forefathers, neither take thou vengeance of our sins:
Spare us good Lord, spare thy people whom thou have redeemed with thy most
precious bludde, and be not angry with us for ever.

Spare us good lord.

From all evil and mischief, from syn, from the crafts and assaults of the
devil, from thy wrath and from everlasting dampnation.

Good lord deliver us.

From all blindness of heart, from pride, vain glory and hypocrisy, from envy
hatred and malice, and al uncharitableness.

Good Lord deliver us.

From Fornication, and al other deadly sin, and from all the deceyptes of the
world, the flesh, and the devil.

Good Lord deliver us.

From lightnynge and tempeste, from plague pestilence and famine, from battle
and murder, and from sudden death.

Good Lord deliver us.

From al sedicion and privy conspiracy, from all false doctrine and heresy,
from hardness of heart, and contempt of thy word and commandment.

Good Lord deliver us.

By the mystery of thy holy incarnacion, by thy holy nativity and
circumsition, by thy baptism fasting, and temptacio^.

Good Lord deliver.

By thine agony and blouddy sweat, by thy Cross and Passion, by thy precious
death and burial, by thy glorious resurrection and ascension, and by the
coming of the holy ghost.

Good Lord deliver us.

In all time of our tribulation, in all time of our wealth, in the hour of
death, and in the day of judgment.

Good Lord deliver us.

We sinners do beseech thee to hear us (O Lord God) and that it may please
the to rule and govern thy holy church universally in the right way.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee to keep and strengthen in the true worshippinge of
thee, in ryghteousnes and bolines of life thy servant Elizabeth our most
gracyous Queen and governor.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please the to rule her heart in thy faith, fear, and love, and
that she may evermore have affiaunce in thee and ever seek thy honor and
glory.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee to be her defender and keeper giving her the victory
over all her enemies.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee to illuminate all Bishops Pastors and ministers of
the church with true knowledge and understanding of thy word, and that both
by their preaching and lyuinge, they may set it forth and show it
accordynglye.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee to endue the lords of the counsel, and all the
nobilitye, with grace, wisdom, and understanding.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee to bless and keep the Magistrates, geuyng them grace
to execute justice and to maintain truth.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee to bless and keep all thy people.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee to give to all nations, unity, peace, and concord.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee to give us an heart to love and dread thee, and
dilygentlye to live after thy commandments.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee to give al thy people increase of grace to hear
mekely thy word, and to receive it with pure affection and to bring forth the
fruits of the spirit.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc. That it may please thee to bring into the
way of truth all such as have erred and are deceived.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc. That it may please thee to strengthen such
as do stand, and to comfort and help the weak hearted, and to raise up the^
that fall, and finally to beat down Satan under our fete.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc. That it may please thee to succoure, help,
and comfort all that be in danger, necessity and tribulacion.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc. That it may please thee to preserve all that
travail by land or by water, all women labouryng of child, al sick persons
and young children and to show thy pytie upon all prisoners and captives.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc. That it may please thee to defend, and
provide for the fatherles children and wydowes, and all that be desolate and
oppressed

We beseech thee to hear us. etc. That it may please thee to have mercy upon
all men.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc. That it may please thee to forgive our
enemies, persecutours and slaunderers, and to turn their hearts.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc. That it may please thee to give and preserve
to our use the kindly fruits of the earth, so as in due time we may enjoy
them.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc. That it may please thee to give us true
repentance, to forgive us all our sins, negligences, and ignoraunces, and
to endue us with the grace of thy holy spirit, to amend our lives according
to thy holy word.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc. Son of God, we beseech thee to hear us.

Son of god we beseech. etc. O Lamb of God that take away the sins of
the world.

Grant us thy peace.

O Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the world.

Have mercy upon us.

O Christ hear us.

O Christ hear us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our father which art. etc.

And lead us not into temptation.

But deliver us from evil. Amen.

The versicle.
O Lord deal not with us after our sins.

Answer.
Neither reward us after our iniquities.

Let us pray.
O God merciful father, that despisest not the sighing of a contrite heart, nor
the desire of such as be sorrowful, mercifully assyste our prayers that we
make before thee in all our troubles and adversities when so ever they oppress
us, and graciousely hear us, that those evils which the craft and subtilty of
the devil or man works against us, be brought to naught, and by the
providence of thy goodness they may be disperied, that we thy servants being
hurt by no persecution, may evermore give thanks unto thee in thy holy church
thorough Jesus Christ our lord. Amen.

O Lord arise, help us, and deliver us for thy names sake.

O God we have heard with our ears, and our fathers have declared unto us the
noble works that thou did in their days, and in the old time before them.

O Lord arise, help us, and deliver us for thy honor.

Glory be to the father. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

From our ennemies defend us, O Christ.

Graciously look upon our afflictions.

Pitifullye behold the sorrows of our heart.

Mercifullye forgive the sins of thy people.

Favorably with mercy hear our prayers.

O son of David have mercy upon us.

Both now and ever vouchsafe to hear us, O Christ.

Graciously hear us, O Christ, graciously hear us, O Lord Christ.

Versicle.
O Lord let thy mercy be showed upon us.

Answer
As we do put our trust in thee.

Let us pray.
WE humblye beseech thee (O father) mercyfully to look upon our infirmities,
and for the glory of thy names sake, turn from us all those euyls, that we
most righteously have deserved. And grant that in all our troubles we may put
our whole trust and confidence in thy mercy and evermore serve thee in
holiness and pureness of living, to thy honor and glory through our only
mediator and advocate Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer for the Queens Majesty.
O Lord our heavenly Father, high and mighty, King of Kings, Lord of Lords,
the only Ruler of Princes, which do from thy throne behold all the dwellers
upon the earth: most heartily we beseech thee, with thy favor to behold our
most gracyous Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, and so replenishe her with
the grace of thy holy spyrite, that she may always inclyne to thy will, and
walk in thy way. Indue her plentifully with heavenly gifts: Grant her in
health and wealth long to live, strength her that she may vanquishe and
overcome all her enemies. And finally after this life, she may attain
everlasting joy and felicity. Through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer for pastors and mynisters of the Church.
Almighty and everlasting God, which only woorkest great marvailes, send
down upon our Pastors, and Mynisters and al congregacions committed to
their charge, the healthful spirit of thy grace, and that they may truly
please thee: Power upon them the continual due of thy blessing: Grant this
(O Lord) for the honor of our advocate and mediatoure Jesus Christ.

For rain if the time require.
O God, heavenly Father, which by thy Son Jesus Christ have promised to all
them that seek thy kingdom, and the righteousness thereof, all things necessary
to their bodily sustenaunce: Send us we beseech thee, in this our necessitye,
such moderate rain and shewres, that we may receive the fruits of the earth
to our comfort, and to thy honor, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

For fair weather.
O Lord God, which for the sin of man dyddeste once drown all the world
except. viii. persons, and afterward of thy great mercy did promise
never to destroy it so again: we humblye beseech thee that although we for
our iniquities: have worthily deserved this plague of rain and waters, yet
upon our true repentance thou will send us such weather, whereby we may
receive the fruictes of the earth in due season, and learn both by thy
punyshemente to amend our lives, and for thy clemency to give thee praise and
glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

In the time of dearth and famine.
O God heavenly father, whose gift it is that the rain dooethfal, the earth
is fruitful, beasts increase, and fyshes do multyplye: Behold, we beseech
thee, the afflyctions of thy people, and grant that the scarcity and derth
(which we do now most justly suffer for our iniquity) may through thy
goodness be mercifully turned into cheapenes and plentye, for the love of
Jesus Christ our lord, to whom with thee and the holy ghost, be praise for
ever. Amen.

In the time of war.
O Almighty GOD, king of al Kings and gouernoure of all things, whose power
no creature is able to resist, to whom it belongs justly to punysh sinners,
and to be merciful unto them that truly repent: Save and deliver us (we
humbly beseech thee) from the hands of our enemies, abate their pride, assuage
their malice, and confound their devises, that we being armed with thy
defense may be preserved evermore from all perils to glorify thee, which art
ye only giver of al victory through the merytes of thy only son: Jesus
Christ our lord. Amen

A prayer of Chrysostom.
Almighty God which have given us grace at this time with one accord to make
our common supplycations unto thee, and do promise that when two or three be
gathered together in thy name, thou will grant their requests: fulfill now O
lord the desires and peticions of thy servants as may be most expedient for
them grauntinge us in this world knoweledge of thy truth, and in the world
to come life everlasting. Amen.

FINIS.

