A LEARNED AND GODLY SERMON Preached on the XIX. day of December, Anno Dom.
MDCXXXI. at the Funeral of Mr. ROBERT BOLTON Batchelour in Divinity and
Minister of Broughton in Northamptonshire.

By Mr. NICOLAS ESTVVICK, Batchelour in Divinity, and sometimes fellow of
Christ's College in Cambridge, and now Minister of Warkton in Northamptonshire.

Revised and somewhat enlarged by the Author, and now at the importunity of
some friends published,

LONDON, Printed by GEORGE MILLER dwelling in Blackfriars, 1639.

(...) flock of sheep without a particular shepherd; and if thou had leave
to name his successor, thou might seek from one end of the land to another
in thy choice, and yet not find in all points a man matchable to him; he was a
bright and a shining lamp, if any of thy inhabitants do sit in darkness,
their ignorance is altogether inexcusable: he lifted up his voice in this
place many years together like a trumpet; if any of thy inhabitants are not
awakened out of the sleep of sin, they may now go on more securely in this
dead sleep; The loss of a good Minister.
but woe to them, it will be easier for Sodom and Gomorrah at the day of
judgment than for them. I pity your case (good friends) and bewail your
loss: but why do J name your loss? It is my loss, and a common loss, we are
all of us sharers, though not all alike in this judgment. LORD, that thou
should suffer such a wretched sinner and an unprofitable servant of thine as
I am yet to live, and deprive the visible Church of so worthy an instrument of
thy glory as M. Bolton! Holy Father, we may think, had it stood it with thy
holy pleasure, that it had been good for thy Church, if his life had been
spared with the loss of many of ours: he was a deep channel, in whose justly
deserved commendations the streams of eloquence which in former ages flowed
from those great and godly Orators, the two Gregory's both of Nazianzum and
Nyssa, from great Basil and golden-mouthed Chrysostom, from S. Ambrose and S.
Austin, might have emptied themselves, and yet not over-flowed the banks: and
what do I then come hither with my distracted thoughts and trembling heart,
which if ever I had any gift in encomiasticall and laudative Orations have many
years since willingly neglected it, and so lost it. As Gregory Nazianzen spoke
of his Basil, I have for my part as great reason to speak of our sometimes
dear and now blessed M. Bolton: J admired him while he lived, and honored him
in my heart; and to speak of his excellencies wherewith the LORD had plentifully
enriched him, is a burden too heavy for my shoulders, and a very hard task for
those who do nothing else but study Oratory: all that I can speak in the
praises of this godly man, falls short by many degrees of his worth, whose
memory is precious, and shall be kept green and flourishing as the rod of
Aaron laid up in the Tabernacle.

THE TEXT.
PHIL. 1. 23, 24. I desire to be dissolved --
THe Apostle S. Paul was in a strait, Paul's strait.
or divided betwixt two affections, carried to different objects, and they were
in a sort contrary; one way he was drawn with a desire to be with CHRIST,
far from the Philippians, even as far as Heaven is from earth; another way
he was drawn with a desire to continue with his beloved brethren warring on
earth, and to be for a time far remooved from CHRIST; the necessity of his
brethren did move him to desire the latter; his great love to CHRIST did incite
him to long for the former: betwixt these two affections the Apostle had a
conflict, and he was so perplexed, that he knew not whither to turn him, he
knew not what to choose. He was as iron betwixt two load-stones, drawn this way
first, and then that way. We read that David was on a time in a great strait, 2 Samuel 24. 14.
but apparent were the differences betwixt the present perplexity of this our
Apostle, and that of David; David's was in regard of evils proposed, this was
for the enjoying of good; his necessity was touching evil which could not be
avoided, but the Apostles was free and voluntary; his perplexity somewhat
concerned himself, the shunning of his own evil; but the Apostles was for the
good of others, which was joined with his own hurt. Behold here as in a
perspective a heart truly Apostolical, wherein he showed at once both great
love to CHRIST, desiring to be with him, and withal great love to his
brethren, desiring to abide with them for their profit.

I begin with the first of these, Sum.
Paul's desire in respect of himself; wherein are observable three particulars.

1. Parts.
The desire it self, and that was to depart or die.

2. A reason implied of this his desire, for then he should be with CHRIST.

3. His censure or judgment of that estate, to be with CHRIST, it is best of
all: Let us open the words first, and then raise Observations out of them for
our edification.

(...)) it is word for word, Exposition.
having a desire, and this is somewhat more than simply to desire, for it
notes a vehement, earnest and continued desire, a desire which is in action
and working till we have our desire accomplished, whereas to desire simply may
be a sudden motion or momentany passion.

(...)) Some translate the word passively, Tertullian renders it recipi, l. de
patientia, pa. 8. others to be dissolved or loosed, and it is done when things
mixed and compounded are resolved into their parts and principles, now because
the soul is (as it were) included in the body, and cannot enjoy CHRIST fully
till that composition by the body be resolved by death, therefore does S. Paul
earnestly desire this resolution.

2. Or it may signify to return, as the word is taken elsewhere, Luke 12. 36.
the LORD will return from the wedding, which sense is not dissonant from the
scope of this place; for the spirit being freed from the body, returns to GOD
that gave it, and what else does the Apostle now desire, but to return unto
CHRIST by whom he was sent to preach the Gospel?

3. It signifies to loose anchor, or as Chrysostom renders it, (...) to flit
or to change our place, and so it is a metaphor from mariners, importing a
flitting or sailing from the state of this present life by the ship of death to
another port, to sail (as it were) from one bank to another.

It is not much material which reading we follow, they all of them do agree
in the maine point and substance, and do afford an observation which might be
enlarged and set forth with variety of colors, and strengthened with long
discourses, but as they which have a long journey to go, and but a short time
allowed them, must make but a short stay in any one place, and as Painters many
times use only to draw out the heads and superior parts of men, leaving all
the other parts and lineaments to be proportionably supplied by the wise
beholders, even so must J at this time propound only some general heads of
several points without any large amplifications, and leave them and the rest
to your private devotions.

Death will unavoidably surprise us: Doct. 1.
Which is a resolution or dissolution of this exquisite frame of man, Death
cannot be avoided.
it is the dissociation of parts united together, it is the taking away the
structure and the fashion of this house of clay, 2 Cor. 2. 5.
We must needs die, and then we are as water spilt on the ground which cannot
be gathered up again, 2 Samuel 14. 14.
as the wise woman of Tekoah spoke to the King; Eccles. 8. 8.
No man has power over the spirit in the day of death, neither is there any
discharge in that war, all must fight with death, and death will conquer all;
our souls and bodies now met together in this near conjunction, though dear
friends must be separated each from other until the day of the general
resurrection, and keep them now as charily from dangers as we can, yet will
these earthen brittle, vessels be broken asunder, which all sorts and ranks of
men are bound to look for at all times, Psalm. 62. 8, 9.
Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie, to be
laid in the balance they are altogether lighter then vanity, a mavelous
debasing of all men! Let men be put in one end of the balance, and vanity in
the other, and the Psalmist does assure us that vanity will weigh down man,
and man is lighter than vanity it self. Job sets out his life by comparing his
days to a swift ship, and to an Eagle that hastes to the prey, Life swift.
yea and he further says, Job. 9. 26. v. 25
they are swifter than a post, then the birds in the air, the ships on the
sea, and the swift post on the land, all these do proclaim and preach a Sermon
to us of our mortality, and that this lamp many ways may be extinguished;
experience shows us that death puts no difference, the young do die as well as
the old, Job 3. 14, 19.
the strong as well as the weak, the Kings and Counselors of the earth as
well as beggars, the Physicians themselves as well as their patients, and death
is hastened by infinite diseases, whereunto all the living are subject, and
these are within us, and a thousand accidents to further death without us, and
which is the foundation of all our evils, by our own sins, whereby we do
provoke the LORD of our lives to anger, and do walk every day over a mine (as
it were) of gunpowder, subject every moment to be blown up by the LORDS
displeasure: Cyprian de mortal.
and S. Cyprian excellently shows the declining state of the world, how the
strength of the husbandman in the field, of the mariner on the sea, and the
soldier in the camp is weakened; Benefits of short life.
canos videmus in puer is: and it is well for us that our lives are shortened,
and that our days do not ordinarily attain to the tenth part of those that
lived before the flood, and that both in regard of the wicked, and the godly.
First touching the wicked, to repress their outrage and impudency in sinning;
this very thought that they may die ere long, and cannot live very long, in
reason should abate their violent and exorbitant courses, if they are
transcendently wicked now when death is at hand, what Nimrods would they be if
they had in the ordinary course of nature, eight or nine hundred years before
them to live in? If their damnation now shall be most dreadful, how much more
intolerable would it then be, Chrysostom one observes it as a work of mercy to
sinners to die spee die, Hom lib. 29. in Genesis
the number of their sins adding fuel (as it were) to the fire of hell, and
the LORD in justice measuring out to them a proportionable degree of vengeance
to their sins* hence will their accounts be so much the easier, Quo e^^^t vita
diuturnior, co fieret culpa numerosior. Amb. de Bono Mortis. c. 4 and long
illis plus damnatio profuisset ne incrementa facerent peccatorum idem ca 7.
ejusdem libri.
and their stripes so much the fewer. And this makes likewise very much for the
exceeding comfort and good of distressed Christians; infirmities, temptations,
poverty, reproaches, grief of passion for their own and of compassion for
their brethrens miseries are a great burden to them, how much heavier would it
be if this burden was to press them down many hundred years together? this
much allaies their sorrow, that all these evils are but as clouds which soon
ride away, or as a tempest though violent yet not permanent, Heb. 10. 34. and
37.
a sharp yet but a short winter, here is our Scripture comfort, Use 1.
the time to bear them is but short.

This consideration of our mortality should in reason move us to seek to Heaven
for help that we may effectually remember our condition: Mortality fits for
Heaven.
the holy servants of GOD our presidents herein have prayed to the LORD for
this purpose: thus did Moses, teach me to number my days, Psalm 90. 12.
thus did David, make me LORD to know mine end: Psalm. 39 4.
in their blessed steps let us tread, and their example let us follow; it is a
wonder that we should need to be remembered hereof, that we should be such
strangers in the world, but there is need of that proclamation still to sound
in our ears, all flesh is grass, Esaias 40.
and the beauty of it as the flower of the field: were we indeed as Adam was at
the beginning of the world who saw no spectacle of death before his eyes, we
might have some probable excuse if we thought not of our departure: but what can
we allege for our selves when we have had the experience of all ages? Go into
any part of the world, Zach. 1. 5.
and ask them in the Prophets words, your fathers where are they? and do they
live for ever? Even this place and this meeting do preach unto us our
mortality. Where are those Epicures in Esaias, which promise to themselves
continuance in their desperate ways, Esaias 56. 12.
To morrow shall be as this day and much more abundant, nay and which is more
abominable, do take occasion by the shortness of their lives to eat and
drink, because to morrow they must die: Esaias. 22. 13.
Come on therefore (say they) let us fill our selves with costly wine, Wisd. 2.
6.
and ointments, and let no flower of the spring pass by us, let us crown our
selves with rose-buds before they be withered, let none of us go without part
of our jollity, let us leave tokens of our joyfullnesse in every place, for
this is our portion. These sinners are likely to see the days when they shall
wish themselves toads, serpents or any loathsome creatures, rather then men and
women, and yet as desirous as they shall be of that exchange of their estate
they shall not have it, but shall remain woeful men and women for ever.

This Doctrine serves likewise for the reproof of those who neglecting
principally to depend on the immortal GOD, 2. A vanity to depend on mortal
men.
do sinfully rely on others which are mortal like themselves; thus the
Subject relieth on the Sovereign, the servant on his Lord and Master, the wife
relieth on her husband, and the children on their parents, and all this is done
contrary to our duty? Trust not in Princes nor in the sons of man, Psalm. 136. 3.
and why so? There is no help in them: their breath goes forth, and they
return to their earth. Truly they are like the running waters, our dove, i. e.
our faith can find no rest for the soles of her feet in any of the sons of men,
such hope is like the house of a spider, Job. 8. 13.
one sweep of GODS besome will easily make both the objects of their hope and
their hopes to be in the dust: it is as a broken reed to lean on; it will both
deceive and pierce them: Ezekiel. 10. 19.
the whole world runs on wheels, look Eastward, or in the West, North or
South, you shall see nothing but inconstancy in all the parts thereof. Oh how
safe and happy then are they which make the God of Jacob their help, Psalm. 146.
4.
and whose hope is in the Lord their God. whose hearts and eyes are fixed upon
him; how hard soever the world goes with them for the present, all shall be
well assure your selves with such in GODS good time; he will provide all shall
be well, he will help the husband, he will comfort the wife, he will guide
the servants, he will preserve the goods; yea rather than it should be
undone, (with reverence be it spoken) he will rock the cradle, they are the
words of the learned Martyr B. Hooper. Fox Acts, page 1480.


This doctrine does check all vain glorious and proud persons, 3. Vainglory
checked.
which Narcissus-like, do dote on themselves; their own beauty, or strength, or
any ornament of the body, which may like Jonas his gourd in one night be
withered. Who is more odious in our sight than a proud beggar? and nothing is
more hateful in GODS eyes than a proud man or woman, who are but meat for the
silly crawling worms to feed upon, and if thou know not thy self, Greg.
Nyss. in Mat. 5. Beati pauperes spiritu. Ser. de Beat.
go to the graves of those which have been most lovely and beautiful in their
days; in that picture and glass may thou view thy self, there may thou
behold the mysteries of our nature, as Gregory Nyssen speaks, and excellently
inlargeth this point. Have thou not (says he) seen a heap of dead men's bones?
have thou not seen their skuls without flesh, a grim spectacle to behold, the
very eyes being wasted and turned into dust? Have thou not seen their mouths
(as it were) grinning and showing their corrupted teeth and their other bones
lie scattered in the grave? If thou have seen these thou have in them seen thy
self: where are the tokens of flourishing age? where are those beautiful
cheeks? where is blood and colors in the lips? what is now become of those
sparkling and lovely eyes? what of the comely nose placed in the midst of the
cheeks? where are those locks of hair which were wont to adorn their heads,
etc. what is become of all those things which do increase thy pride? Tell me,
what dream is more vanishing, what shadow more flitting than is thy beauty, or
any other thing whereof thou gloriest?

Fourthly, those also are to be reproved which are earth-wormes, 4.
Covetousness checked.
and do labor inordinately and immoderately for transitory riches, which are
careful for very trifles, and careless for matters of greatest consequence,
which toil uncessantly for an estate to leave to posterity, and are compared
by Bartholomeus, to children following butter-flies, they must sometimes go
out of the way in their pursuit, they may miss, Job. 1. 20.
and if they catch, it is but a fly to besmeare their hands, Naked we came into
this world, and whatsoever we have gotten here, we must leave it all behind,
for naked shall we go out of the world. Knolls Turkish Hist. p. 73.
Saladine a Mohammedan the great Turk may teach Christians a good lesson; he
caused a Proclamation to be made by one of his Priests, a shirt fastened to a
spear in manner of an ensign, saying, this is all that Saladine Conqueror of
the East caries away with him of all his riches: indeed it is not all, they
carry with them a guilty accusing conscience, which will extort from parents
curses to their children, because that they to make them rich, became Usurers,
unmercifull Landlords, deceitful in their dealings, and worldly minded, we
can pity others in their miseries, and shall we have no compassion on our own
souls? shall our own souls now be vile to us, in comparison of which all the
kingdoms of the world are but trifles? for what shall it profit a man to win
the whole world and to loose his own soul? or what recompense shall a man
give for his soul? Mat. 16. 26.
if the soul perishes, then all the world is gone with us.

This Doctrine should teach al sinners a point of spiritual wisdom, 5. Deserre
not repentance.
not to defer their repentance and seeking to make their peace with God: the
children of this world are wise in their generation, that if they be tenants at
will and courtesy, and certain ere long to be thrust out of their houses, they
would look abroad to provide elsewhere, they would run all the country over to
get an assurance of an earthly house, and will not thou while thou may
provide for the eternal welfare of thy soul? if a man was hungry, and had
twenty or thirty dishes set before him, and he knew poison was in one of them,
the danger of that would make him be afraid of the rest; and thou have a desire
to live twenty or thirty years that in possibility are before thee; which thou
may happily live, but in one of them, thou know not which, death in
probability will come to thee, should not this prepare thee for death always?
men that are wise and have enemies, keep continual watch and garrisons in
frontier towns for fear of a sudden surprisall: death continually shootes his
arrows abroad; sometimes he mortally smites those above thee, sometimes those
below thee, and thou see some fall dead hard by thee: if thou give thy
soul to Satan in thy life, how can thou hope that GOD will entertain it at
thy death? O then why should thou for the pleasures of unrighteousness for
a very few days (little do thou know how few) destroy thy soul for ever? do
thou whip thy soul with the lashes of divine sentences to follow after GOD,
Aug. Conf l. 8. c. 7.
as Saint Austin did his, when it was backward and resisted this heavenly work
of thy conversion, and let not those nugae nugarum and vanitates vanitatum, of
those ancient sins which did shake his coat and whispered in his ears, c. 11.
do thou leave us now, and must we part for ever? let not these bosom sins I
say, detain thee in the prison of the devil, but shake them off as Saint Paul
did the Viper, Acts 18.
that they may do thee no hurt. Renew Repentance speedily.
Neither does this concern the unregenerate only, but those also which through
the policy of hell have disgraced their profession; instantly to arise from
their sin by unfeigned repentance, a duty praiseworthy in any, and to be
practiced by the greatest men on the earth. Many heroical virtues were in King
David, for none is he more to be honored then for his repentance: it is a
goodlier sight to see a King on his knees feeding upon the bread of sorrow, and
mingling his tears with his drink, then to utter divine Proverbs with wise
Solomon: and what our Savior spoke of watching, the same do I speak of
repentance, I say unto you all repent, if you are in the field, remember Abel,
if you are a feasting, remember Jobs children: when you go to bed, that you
might holily compose your selves to rest, that you may commit the keys of your
doors, much more your lives into the hands of GOD, remember the firstborn of
Egypt which were slain at midnight by the Angel of the LORD: let Adulterers
remember Zimri and Cozbi, 1 King. 16. 9.
and drunkards, King Ela slain by another Zimri; if you walk in the streets,
remember those on whom the tower of Silo fell, if your hearts begin to turn to
the love of the world, remember Lots wife: that which befell them may befall
us; it will be then our wisdom by GODS grace to prevent sin, and if we fall
into sin, our next wisdom will be to repent of the sin we have fallen into.

Another duty which naturally does arise from this Doctrine is, 6. Take the
opportunity of doing good.
to lose no time in doing and in receiving all the good we can; this is the day
(appointed to work) and how short this day is, Gal. 5. 10.
the LORD alone does know, Joh. 9.
but this we know, the night comes wherein none can work. Shall the Sun stand
still for thee, as it did for Joshua? or go back as it did five hours for
Hezekiah? do we think we can do good in another world, when we do no good to
speak of in this? be not deceived with this dangerous error, and hurtful
pretention of doing good hereafter, whatsoever thy hand finds to do, Eccl. 9.
10.
do it with all thy might, and the reason is good, for there is no device, nor
work, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither thou go. Vain hope of
future performances has undone many: sow thy seed whiles the seed time
lasts, if thou look to have a crop and harvest. We may learn this from the
birds of the air, Jer. 8. 7.
the Turtle, the Storke, the Crane and Swallow, know their appointed times; the
waifaring man he travels whiles it is light, then he knows he is under the
protection of the Laws, the seafaring man he observes the wind, the Smith he
strikes whiles his iron is hot; nay we may learn this wisdom from the devil
himself, Apoc 12. 12.
he rages and does all the mischief he can, because his time is but short.
Thus of doing good, and so likewise must we let no opportunity slip of
receiving good, lay hold of every season which may be an advantage to get
heaven, to strengthen and increase spiritual graces, be glad if thou can
hear the Word preached on a working day. Basil. 3. Ser. i^ Hexaem.
Saint Basil he preached on a working day, and tells his Auditors their thoughts
and desires, that he would be short that they might go about their labor. If
such thoughts possess our hearts, at this or any other time, let us repel
them, and remember what the holy Father there speaks, the time spent in GODS
service is not lost, for GOD (to recompense them) removes troublesome
business, gives promptitude of mind, or strength of body, sends customers to
buy their wares, and if he does none of these, yet (are they no loosers by
their pains, for) he gives them a rich treasure in heaven.

Lastly, this point may teach GODS children patience in all distresses, 7.
Short life a ground of patience.
and afford them sound comfort in all estates: they are nearer heaven now,
salvation now is nearer to them then when they began to believe; sin and Satan
do now disquiet them, Romans 13. 11.
but they shall not do so for ever. Many a one can be content to endure
hardship a few years, nay to be a galley slave under the Turk seven years,
if he had assurance of a great Lordship after that time was expired, and choose
rather to be a bondsman upon those terms, then to be a free man without them:
exercise longsuffering (good Christian) there may be but a day or month, or
year, but a little time betwixt thee and the joys of heaven. Who would not
admire the state of such a beggar, who every hour was in possibility of a
Kingdom? but behold a greater reward by GODS promise is due to all his
children, then this earth can afford; more glorious things shall be theirs,
then ever eye has seen, 1 Cor 2. 9.
or ear has heard, or the heart of man can conceive, which without all doubt
by comparison at least, are true of the joys of heaven. Why then should
thou O Christian soul be cast down, or why should thou be in vain
disquieted? surely if thou would seriously consider, that thy heaviness
shall be suddenly turned into unspeakeable joy, that all thy tears shall be
for ever wiped from thy eyes, 2 Cor. 4. 17.
and that these momentany afflictions do proportionably work unto thee, an
exceeding weight of glory, thou have no reason to be much dejected for them.

Thus much of the first Doctrine, the second follows; but that we may build
upon a good foundation, we must first declare the meaning of those words on
which we must ground our ensuing Observation. How Saints are with Christ.


I desire to depart and to be with CHRIST) To be with CHRIST. Why, was not
Saint Paul with CHRIST? was not his conversation now in heaven? Phil 3. 20.
and was not the stream of his affection carried to CHRIST? was not he with
him in the spirit as with the Colossians, Colos. 2. 5.
rejoicing and beholding his happiness? doubtless he was. But this being with
CHRIST was not that presence which he desired; it was a nearer presence, to be
where he was in the highest heavens, John 17. 24.
and to behold the glory which GOD the Father had given him; desire is the
daughter of indigence and want some way, and himself does plainly tell us,
whilst we are in the body, 2 Cor. 5. 6.
as now Saint Paul was, we are absent from the LORD; you may be pleased to
observe a difference betwixt these phrases of CHRIST his being with us, and our
being with CHRIST, it is one thing for CHRIST to be with us, this benefit is
enjoyed in this life, Mat. 28. 20.
he promised to be with the Apostles, and his Successors, and so by Analogy, he
is with all his mystical members to the worlds end; but it is another thing
for us to be with CHRIST; this honor is reserved for the world to come, and it
is a state of blessedness as he spoke to the thief on the Cross, this day
shall thou be with me in Paradise. Luke 23. 43.
Whence I do observe, that

The faithful soul when it departs out of this life is immediately after
death with CHRIST. Doctrine 2.
If the soul of Paul, Saints immediately ascend after death to Christ.
why not the soul of other faithful ones? Saint Paul I know, whilst he
lived, was a man endued with singular zeal for CHRIST and holiness of life, 2
Cor 11. 23.
and exercised with more then ordinary miseries and persecutions; himself
recites a Catalogue of many of them, but as it is not the degree of faith, but
faith that justifies, nor the measure of graces, but the having saving graces
in truth, that assures us of GODS gracious acceptance of us in this world, so
do they also by GODS free promise obtain reward in heaven, instantly upon the
dissolution; Cypr. de mortalit. ad finem fere.
as Saint Cyprian spoke to Demetrian us, though a blasphemous Ethnic, that if
he would at the end of his life pray to GOD for the pardon of his sins, believe
and confess him, he should be translated sub ipsa morte to immortality, why
not? the soul being purged clearly from the impurity and stain of sin by the
completion and state of grace, which gets full dominion in the very moment of
her departure out of the body, as Alexander Halensis, Durandus, and other
learned Schoolmen have resolved, and it is not defined in that Church whether
the deordination of the will, and whether vicious affections (as too much love
to wife and children) remain in the soul, Lib. 4. did. 21. Sect. 3.
says Estius, yet do we grant this to be true, that the more gracious any man
is in this world, the more is he now respected of GOD, and the more glorious
shall he be hereafter. The point it self is clearly proved by the New
Testament, Romans 8. 1.
There is no condemnation to such as are in CHRIST JESUS. None, Against
Purgatory.
and therefore not to purgatory pains. For the name damnation extends to
Purgatory, says Th. in 4. Senten. did. 45. q. 2. Sixtus Senensis l. 6.
Annotat. 47. No condemnation says the Apostle, yes, that there is damnation to
the fire of Purgatory, says the Jesuit Malon. Malen against B. Usher. p. 493
2 Cor. 5. 1.
Whether will you believe? again, We know that if the earthly house of this
our tabernacle shall be destroyed, we have a building not made with hands, but
eternal in the heavens. S. Chrysostom renders (...) if, by (...) when, to
note the time immediately after death, he says (...) not (...) we have not I
know not after how many years, we shall have: which may further appear by the
Apostles scope, which was to administer consolation to the afflicted, as
appears by the end of the former Chapter, that they should after death go to
an eternal house, statim post mortem acquirenda, forthwith to be possessed
after death, as Estius shows out of Photius, Lib. 4. did. 25.
Anselme and Thomas, which else could be but small comfort unto them, Sect. 2.
if they believed they should be detained in a fiery prison, far hotter and
more intolerable then any punishment in this world can be; and that the souls
of the faithful were in a state of happiness before the Ascension of CHRIST
into Heaven is clear, (though neither they nor the Angels were so happy for
degree, as after the incarnation of our Savior, is generally concluded, and by
clear demonstrations confirmed:) the point I say is clear, I build not my
faith on the book of Wisdom, though it binds Papists to the belief thereof,
that says, Wisdom 4. 1, 2, 3.
the souls of the righteous are in the hands of GOD, and there shall no
torment touch them: no torment, then not the torment of Purgatory; but behold a
crystal stream which is able to quench the flames of Purgatory; if a wicked
man will turn from all his sins, Ezekiel. 18. 22.
etc. he shall surely live, he shall not die: all his transgressions that he
has committed shall not be mentioned to him. How does he not remember, if he
does so severely punish that it passes the imagination of man to conceive the
greatness thereof? can there be a back reckoning for that which shall never be
remembered? and saying, that not a few but al his sins shall be forgotten, will
he yet punish them to satisfy for any sins at all? and is it not an easy
thing unto the LORD in the day of death to reward a man according to his ways?
Eccles. 11. 26.
Call you this a reward, for a good man to be thrust into a place of torment?
this present life is a time of working, striving, running, sowing, and godly
living, after death is the time of reaping, of receiving wages, garlands and
crowns; an unjust thing it is to detain the laborers wages, which reason I
suppose is as strong against Purgatory, Alphonso a Castro contra baer. baer. 5.
Bell. l. 1. de beat. c. 3.
as against those Armenians whom our Adversaries do worthily confute; and how
is it imaginable that if he good in the old Law supposed then dead, went first
to torment, that they did not tremble for fear of death? how could they (as
they did) depart in peace? and how is it imaginable that GOD who appointed
sacrifices for all sorts of sins and pollutions, should appoint neither
expiation nor sacrifice nor satisfaction to be made for the souls of the dead!
surely there appears not to us any token of any such thing, and therefore we
may fairly conclude, that all the souls of the righteous then were translated
into a state of happiness.

This Doctrine being thus briefly cleared, we may from hence draw many
conclusions.

Hence it follows that the soul dies not with the body, Use 1.
as the Sadduces that pestiferous sect amongst the Jews did damnably
maintain; The soul immortal.
for as they denied the resurrection and the being of Angels, Acts 23 8.
so did they say, there was no spirit, no spiritual substance at all,
Exercilat.
says Scaliger, which without all doubt, is the truth in the judgment of
Scultetus; Eva^g l. 1. c. 23
so gross were these Sadduces in their apprehensions: and as a wicked branch
of this sottish stock of Sadduces there sprung up certain Arabians which held
that the soul perished together with the body, Eusebius. Eccles.
as witnesses Eusebius. A fit doctrine for enlarging the kingdom of the
devil: Hist. l. 3. c. 36.
but that the soul is immortal my Text proves, how else could it part from
the body and be with CHRIST, unless it was a seperable substance, since the
body is not with CHRIST till after the general resurrection? whence is there
is natural confcience that accusing power for sin, that fear of wrath, but
from this principle that the soul is immortal? never make any question of
this, when thou die, thy soul which is thy better part dies not, but is
taken out of thy body, as a candle out of a lantern, and immediately placed
either in bliss or in torment.

Hence may we in the second place conclude against the Anabaptists and
Socinians, 2. The seule sleeps not as the body.
which though they went not so far as the Sadduces to deny the resurrection,
yet did these fantastiques dream that the soul sleeps till Doomes day,
Bullinger co^tra Anaba l. 4. c. 10
and is in a state of incensibility like some creatures in Winter, insecta*
till they be quickened and revived by the heat of the Sun, so they of souls,
till they be raised by the power of the LORD at the last day? but how then
could Saint Paul be with CHRIST? but to say no more against these silly
dreamers, I proceed.

In the third place, that conceit also falls to the ground, 3. Souls departed
immediately see God*
which prevailed with many of the ancient Fathers and with some later writers,
that the souls of the righteous see not GOD till the last day, but are kept in
certain receptacles in expectation thereof. I see no profit to the Auditory by
naming them; the learned if they please may read many of their names in Sixtus
Senensis. Sixtus Senensis bibl. San. lib. 6.
But how then (say I) could Saint Paul be with CHRIST? Annotat. 345.
this opinion is an unworthy conceit condemned by the Church, as robbing heaven
for the present of its blessed inhabitants.

Fourthly, hence also does it follow, that though CHRIST as touching his
divinity is every where present, 4. Christ absent in body.
for else he were not GOD, yet to us in this world he is absent as touching his
bodily presence. For, what is it to be with CHRIST, but to be present where
CHRIST is bodily present? and again, whiles we are in the body, 2 Cor. 5. 8.
we are absent from the LORD: the Apostle then was ignorant of that unhappy
perplexed point which some seem to defend, the ubiquity of CHRIST'S body, for
howsoever his humane nature (especially in the state of glory) is adorned with
admirable gifts, and advanced to the highest dignity, honor and domination,
yet do the natures of CHRIST personally united remain distinct both in
essence, properties, and operations. Yea, and the mselves confess that the
divine properties belong to the humane nature, not by any physical transfusion
from one subject into another, Hannius tracta. de persona Christi, p. 12.
but it is only personal and communicated to the humane nature by the grace of
personal union insomuch that the humane nature (as they say) is omnipresent not
in being but in having, Philip Nichol. l. 1. de omnipraesentia bominis Christi,
c. 6.
not in it self but in the person of the word, and thus do they in words at
least deny what they seem to contend for.

From whence likewise it follows that there is no Popish Purgatory; 5.
Against Purgatory.
the fault is clearly remitted, and so there can be no satisfactory torments
required. GOD should (me thinks) but mock us, if they say true, as if he should
say, I pardon thee thy offense, but I will punish thee for it, I acquit thee of
the debt thou owe me, but not of the payment: but why should not the souls
of the righteous dying in faith be carried instantly into heaven, as well as the
soul of a man newly baptized coming to that holy Sacrament in due manner, and
dying before he has committed a new sin, although he was full of sin before?
there is no question of this latter, and why should there be of the former? And
if they cannot go to Heaven because GODS justice must be satisfied, what will
become of all those that die a little before the judgment? and much more is the
difficulty increased in those which pass in a moment from mortality to
immortality at the very coming of JESUS CHRIST. But I marvel not if Papists
do contend for this Purgatory, as being indeed one of the best fires that ever
the Pope and his Clergy have had for the heating of their kitchins. For let
this be granted that there is such a fire, and that the torments there and in
the place of the damned differ but in duration, and there are no torments in
this world comparable to those in Purgatory; let their Preachers tell their
people such a supposition as this is, if a foul had been tormented in
Purgatory thirty years, Discipulus de tempore ser. 60. litera B.
and had by an Angel a choice either to stay in Purgatory one day long, or to
return into the body and do this penance a hundred years together, to tread
only on iron nails which will pierce the feet, to drink gall mingled with
vinegar, and to eat the coursest bread, to be cloarhed with Camels hair, to
lie on the ground, and instead of a bolster to have a hard store for a pillow,
the foul would rather do this penance a hundred years together, Apoc. 9. 5.
then to endure in Purgatory one day, faith their Preacher. By this and such
like doctrines, the consciences of their disciples are stung as with Scorpions;
and it is like a gift whither soever it turns, Pro. 17 8.
it prospers, then may they work them like soft wax by their charitable
promises to apply the means for their ease and relief out of the place of
torments. What a woeful speech was that of our Richard 1. Fox Acts page 249.
who committed his soul to Purgatory till Doomes day.

Sixthly, this Doctrine overthrows their Popish prayers for the dead, 6.
Against praying for the dead
directed unto GOD to ease them, and free them from the pains of Purgatory,
yea and that kind of kindness too which many that do profess the Orthodox
doctrine, do unwarrantably use in words, and further, as a more durable
monument of their mistake, Balthaesar Lydius Nota in disputat. Taber. page 202.
do write upon the grave stones of the dead, GOD be merciful to the soul of
this dead man. For are they with CHRIST? then do their prayers bring no profit
to the dead, but hurt to the living. For to speak the fairest of them, 1. Such
prayers can be no better than an idle word, Mat. 12 36.
for which we must give an account at that day. 2. They are an injury to the
dead, and do vertually imply, that such as pray for them are not persuaded they
are in happiness for whom they pray. 3. This practice although it might be
perhaps by some qualification justifiable in the intention of the speaker, yet
may it breed danger in the conceit of the hearer, who may turn thy voluntary
devotion to harden him in the dangerous error of that opinion; if then no
benefit redounds either to the dead, thy self, or the hearer, its best to
leave those forms of prayer which are made for the dead. But ignorant persons
being reproved are bold to reply in this foolish manner, what would you have us
say of the dead, would you have us to revile or curse them? Oh perverse minds!
as though necessity lay upon you, either to pray for them or to curse them?
Belike what displeases GOD pleases you passing well: let us speak of the
dead as GODS Word teaches us to speak of them; sure I am, it no where
enjoyneth us to pray for them, nor furnishes us with the example of any Saint
to that purpose, and yet were their affections to the dead as good as yours.
Cannot you use such forms of speech when you fall into mention of them, they
are with GOD, they are at rest, they are happy, their memory is blessed,
unless you pray for them.

But leaving now these Uses of confutation, I come to those of instruction,
which are indeed more profitable for our edification, and more suitable to this
present occasion, and the first is,

Fear not death (O thou righteous soul) overmuch; Use of Instruction.
its one benefit we reap from the death of our blessed Savior, to be freed
from the fear of our own death; death is called indeed by Bildad in Job, 1.
Death not to be feared.
the prince ofterrours, and by the Philosopher, Heb. 2. 15.
of all formidable things, the most terrible, Job. 18. 14.
so it is to the wicked, or at least there is good cause it should be so, for
to such as live without CHRIST, death is as a purseivant sent from hell to
fetch them thither: but they that live conscionably, may think of death
comfortably, and they may sing that triumphant song, 1 Cor. 15.
O death where is thy sting! they may take this all-devouring serpent without
any hurt at all into their bosoms: they that have their debts paid, dare go
out of doors, and are not afraid to meet the Sergeant; they dare look on
death, and welcome him as the King of heavens officer to give them possession
of an everlasting-inheritance; we fear our friends when they have a vizour on
their faces, but put it off and we rejoice in them. Excellent was the speech of
S. Ambrose to the Nobles of his city, which with threats and flatteries were
sent to him by the Count Stilico, to persuade him to pray unto GOD for the
continuance of his life, which when the holy Bishop heard he answered divinely,
Paulinus in vita Ambrosij ad B. August.
J have not so lived amongst you that I am ashamed to live longer, nor am J
afraid to die, because we have a good Lord. Doubtless had we (beloved
brethren) as much faith on earth as there is joy in heaven, we would not be
afraid of death: this is the narrow passage betwixt this life and our country:
on this side the bridge we have many troubles, many sins, many fears, many
temptations of the Devil, which should make us think the worse of our lives,
and very willing to leave them: but on the other side, we shall be freed from
all trouble, from all sin, from al molestation of the devil, and shall be
filled with all the joy our hearts can possibly desire. So that hitherto we may
apply Sampsons riddle, Out of the enter came forth meat, Judge. 14. 14.
and out of the strong came forth sweetness.

Secondly, this may serve to moderate our excessive mourning for our friends
which die, 2. Mourn not immoderatly for the dead.
we hope in the LORD. David exceeded in his sorrow for Absalon, and was there
not a cause? He did not so at the death of the infant. Let us rejoice, Saint
Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in locum. 2 Samuel 12. 23.
for the just both living and dead, because they are happy, let us not in an
unseemely manner bewail them by pulling off our hairs, baring our arms,
tearing our faces, or putting on mourning garments, so says the father; and I
say, happy are they which have exchanged a base earthly tabernacle for a
princely Palace, sorrows for joy, and earth for heaven; and me thinks our
blessed brother now deceased, if he had intercourse with us mortal creatures,
would say to his dear wife lying in her tears, children and friends, as our
Savior did to those pious women that followed him; Luke 23. 28.
Daughters of Jerusalem weep not for me but weep for your s^lves, you know my
fastings, my meditations, my watchings (and know you brethren that godly
Ministers do purposely watch and meditate for you, when you are or would be a
sleep.) You know my grief for my own calamities and for the calamities of
GODS Church, and by your own experience, you may know what sharp combats I
have had with that raging enemy the Devil, and what wounds I have received in
the conflict; now do I fear no perils on the land or sea, no perils in the
house or in the field, now am J victorious over Satan and have trampled him
under my feet, and now he has nothing at all in me, and now am J crowned with
glory, and would you (my dear friends) be so unkind to me to wish me alive
again, and to run the former hazards? Kings and Queens are willing to marry
their daughters to foreign Princes, and never look to set their eyes onthem
again, and should we mourn too much for his absence, and not rather rejoice
with him for his happier estate then this earth can afford? Genesis 45. 27.
When Jacob heard that his beloved Joseph was alive, and governor over all the
Land of Egypt, his fainting heart revived, no less ought the consideration of
the glory of departed servants of GOD, cheer up our drooping and sad hearts
for them, and excite us to desire the fruition of the same glory.

And this is my next point to be handled, I desire, says S. Paul, to be
dissolved and to be with CHRIST.

It Is the foresight of heavenly glory and being with CHRIST, Doctrine 3.
Foresight of being with Christ makes willing to d^e.
that makes a man desire to die: Some men indeed would die, because there is
nothing in this world for them to expect but misery and shame, and these do
little less sometimes then call for the rocks to fall upon them, that they
might end their wretched days as Job says, Job. 3. 21, 23.
they long for death, and dig for it more then for hid treasure, which rejoice
exceedingly, and are glad when they can find the grave, this motive swaied not
Saint Paul, but only this that he might be with CHRIST. I grant to desire
death simply, as death, is against the Law of GOD and the law of nature, death
is our enemy, and is not from GOD creationes by creation, Death simply not
desired.
though it be truly from him ultione to revenge the sins of man, Florus cited
by B Usher in hist.
says Florus de praedest: or as others say, it is from him ordinatione,
because in justice he ordained death corporal as one part of the punishment
which was due for the sin of man, Gotesol. p 132.
and hence our Savior CHRIST himself who knew no sin at all, viewing death as
it is in it self considered, declined it, 2 Cor. 5. 4.
let this cup pass, and so did Saint Paul too, we will not (says he) be
uncloathed, the parting of these good friends body and soul without some
further end, is a grievous separation; this harmless innocent nature
teaches; and as death is further a means to cut off all possibility to profit
others, and to help the poor Church of CHRIST with our labors ^^us piety and
grace may move them to pray with David, LORD let my soul live. Psalm. 119. 175.
These cautions are premised to prevent mistaking in the point; but now, which
is to my purpose, Consider death as it is a way and means to bring us to the
presence of CHRIST, so it may be holily desired, our Savior CHRIST, who said,
let this cup pass, Luke 12. 50.
said also as his death was our life, I have a Baptism to be baptized withal,
and how am I pained till it be accomplished? 2 Cor. 5. 4.
and not only I Paul, but we that are faithful that are in this tabernacle, do
groan earnestly, ver. 2. not for that we would be uncloathed, but clothed
upon, that mortality might be swallowed up of life; and after, we are willing
rather to be absent from the body and present with the LORD. Ver. 8.
Its the love that a child should be borne into the world, not the love of
pain that makes the mother desire the travel in childbirth; excellently
says Saint Basil, Basil de laudibus Iustitiae.
properanti ad coebestem paetriam, etc. to him that makes have to the country
which is above, the stay in the body is more grievous then any pain, or any
prison: and it is said that Peter and Andrew welcomed their crosses, as they
were wont to do their dearest friends, and embraced them in their arms, and
saluted them with kisses of peace. Ignatius encouraged wild beasts to devour
him that he might be bread for CHRIST; Martyrs went to their death with
cherfulness and songs, and ran to the stake as to a garland, 2 Samuel 10. 22.
and who would with Saul hide himself in the stuff, when he is called to be
crowned a King?

If Abraham saw his day by faith when he was but promised, and rejoiced, Ioh.
8. 56.
what cause of joy must it needs be to see the Savior of the world when he is
exhibited? If Saint John Baptist did leap at his presence when he was in the
womb of his blessed mother. What will his glorious presence effect in them who
shall behold him in all his Royalty? if the Wife men of the East went a long
journie, Luke 1. 44.
and rejoiced to see the holy Babe CHRIST in the house; what cause of joy will
it be to see him sit in his glory at the right hand of his Father, far above
all Principalities and powers? If many Kings and Princes longed for that day to
see their Savior mortal, Luke 10. 24.
what resemblance is fit to express the joy of those that behold him crowned
with glory and immortality? it is a passing glory to be admitted to the sight
of CHRIST his face, and to receive glory from the brightness of his Majesty,
and if we were to suffer torments every day, yea the very torments of hell for
a time, thereby to gain the sight of CHRIST, it were nothing in respect of the
reward.

This Doctrine shows us the extreme folly of all licentious livers and
impenitent sinners; Use 1.
when they look upon their wicked courses, Wicked ones cannot be with Christ.
what for sight can they have but of hell as their just reward they would be
with CHRIST (as they say) hereafter, and yet they will not have CHRIST to be
wi^h them now, and to rule over them* they will sow unto the flesh, and yet
would reap unto the spirit; they are stout and will have their sin though
they be damned for it: we will (say those rebels in Jeremy) walk after our
own devices, Jer. 18. 22.
and we will every one do the imaginations of his evil heart. Experience
shows us that you cannot crush oil out of skins, nor sweet wine out of sower
grapes, and if you be the seedesmen of darnell and cockle, you shall have no
harvest of wheat ^or good grain; you will not live conscionably, and yet you
would die peaceably; and though you speak CHRIST fair, yet you will loose
nothing for his sake; the chain will make your profession afraid, and reproach
will make it ashamed: you love him well you say; but you will be advised not to
displease such and such friends for his love; your foresight of Heaven has no
hands to do good works corporal and spiritual, nor eyes to shed tears for
your sins and the sins of others, nor stomach to abide a holy and a religious
fast, nor flesh to endure this mortification and zealous revenge, nor tongue to
speak the language of confession, and zealous, devout and faithful prayer; if
then in your extremities and when your fears approach, you send for us, as
Pharaoh did for Moses, and never till then, 2 King. 6. 26, 27.
and cry unto us help us and comfort us, as that starved woman did, to the
King of Israel: We answer as he did that distressed creature, if the LORD
does not help you, how should we? And now by this time I suppose you are
brought to that pass, that GODS servants, whom you have in your prosperity
despised may say to you concerning all your daubers whom you then respected,
where are they now that will prophecy peace peace unto you? your consciences
which before were asleep, being now awakened to hear the cry of your sins,
and these glasses formerly covered with dust as it were, being wiped clear to
represent unto you the disfigured and odious face of your sins; when these
evil days shall come upon you (as they will or that which is worse) you must
needs confess to the terror of your souls, Gen 42. 12.
that we GODS Messengers have told you of these things, and you would not hear
us, as Reuben said to his brethren. Your sins which you took to be your
friends (as GOD himself has threatened) are suddenly turned to be your foes,
and now do appear as a marshalled army coming in a terrible manner against
you, Psalm. 50. 21.
and when GOD speaks to your consciences, 2 King. 9 33.
as Iehu did to the Eunuchs, who is on my side? who? even they will cast you
down and dash, as it were, your blood against the walls, and make you to be
trampled upon; and then can you cast your eyes noway without horror, if
upwards unto heaven, they will tell you that you are justly excluded out of
that happy place, if you think upon hell, the mouth thereof (as you fear) is
open every moment to receive you when these evil days shall come, etc.

Second Use of instruction is, that we would study our selves, 2. Get assurance
of Christ.
and ransacke our souls, and be of good grounds, and to have certain evidence
that our change shall be for the better: man's wisdom teaches him in Summer to
provide for Winter, in youth for old age; if GOD be better then the world and
heaven better then earth, and the soul better then the body, shall we not
labor while we live to get full assurance of being with CHRIST, as S. Paul
had, when we are dead? but here is the maine doubt, how I should know and be
assured thereof.

First, if thou art assured hereof, then have thou faith, the maine and
fundamental grace, 1. Faith gives assurance of Christ.
not fundamentum quod, that is, CHRIST, but cui as a learned Schooleman does
distinguish, immediately laying us upon CHRIST, and as a Captain, I say not
making the graces as heavenly Soldiers, but as bringing them forth to fight
according to their several operations; thou have I say a lively faith both in
that direct act whereby it justifies, and also by a prudent observation of the
work of faith in thy soul; thou do by faith believe that thou art justified
by faith; thou have also the attendant companion upon faith, that Christian
hope whereby thou waitest on GOD till he accomplish all his gracious promises;
Heb. 3. 6.
if we come against the Devil as David did against the Philistine, 1 Samuel 17.
45.
not with sword, shield and spear, but in the name of the LORD of Hosts, we
are sure to conquer. If we have these graces and by the use of holy means do
hold them fast, how happy are we! Blessed is he that believes the Lords words
to be all of them true, and blessed is he that waits on him, till he
manifests the truth of his words, that believes by faith that GOD is his
Father, and expects by hope that he should show a fatherly affection to him;
who believes that salvation belongs to him, and waits by hope til he enters
into possession of it: if this then be the blessed frame of thy soul, that
thou resolvest and hopest to live, and thou resolvest and hopest to die in the
arms of thy sweet Savior, thou art in a happy case.

Secondly, if thou have this holy affection to die, and assurance of being with
CHRIST when thou art dead, 2. Assurance of being with Christ what it works.
then do thou labor for the true sense and feeling of thy reconciliation
with GOD, Mat 5. 25.
and do make thy peace with thy brother whom thou have wronged by word or
deed; if thou look to see the face of CHRIST the righteous Judge with
comfort thou will abandon foolish shame, and fond self-love, thou will make
restitution, and return goods in thy hands to the right owner; Ezekiel. 33. 15.
thou will not suffer sin to lie upon thy soul, Job. 31. 38.
nor let thy furrows in thy field to cry out against thee, nor by proportion,
the stone and timber of thy house to complain of thee, Zach 5. 4. for this
would bring a curse to consume them: thou will often make thy reckning even
with thy GOD, for this makes friendship durable, if CHRIST be gone, as he
seems to be at some time from his children, thou will seek for him sorrowing
as Mary his mother did, and thou shall in GODS good time find him in the Temple
(as she did) I mean in the use of his holy ordinances.

Thirdly, 3. Spiritual watch
always be vigilant and watchful; this spiritual watch is nothing but the
carefullnesse of the soul to keep spiritual graces in their vigor and
activity, and though GOD has appointed watchmen over us, yet has he not
appointed watchmen for us, their watching is not in our stead to give us leave
to sleep, but it is to keep us waking, what I say to you, I say to all, Mar.
13 37.
Watch. And very good reason, You know not (says our Savior) what hour your
LORD will come; Mat 24. 42.
and our drousie disposition will be soon rocked a sleep by Satan, who
besprinkles the temples of our head with his spiritual opium of wicked motions
and suggestions, if we do not lawfully strive against them; take heed least
thine own corrupt heart the greatest enemy thou have beguileth thee not, be
prudently vigilant to descry dangers before they come, to prevent all occasions
whereby thy happy estate might be lost; the dumb beasts, as Ox and Mule, that
are without understanding, will not come near the place where they have
escaped danger, and should thou adventure to the hazard of thy soul? in
knowledge be not like the horse and mule, in avoiding dangers be like them.
Consider the Devils policy, he is a thief; a beggar may safely pass by him,
his aim is to rob the wealthy passenger: rub thine eyes often, frequently
ransacke thy heart, keep GODS fear fresh in thy soul. Jacob could not sleep
when he heard of Esau his coming against him, and Sampson had little list to
sleep in Dalilaes lap when he heard the Philistines were coming on him; Gen 32.
delight in the society of the Saints, Judge 16. 19, 20
good company keeps us waking; all these are sovereign helps to keep us
spiritually watching.

Fourthly, often meditate on death, die as it were daily in the disposition of
thy soul, 4. Frequent meditation on death.
and preparation to death; forgetfullnesse of death makes life to be sinful,
and death to be terrible as a destroying Lion, Lamen. 1. 9.
whereas the sight of savage beasts is not terrible to those that converse with
them; Mat. 24. 48.
look on death as on the Sun in an opticke glass, though it be far off, yet
it seems near at hand, and so in truth it may be near us, being as a pit
covered with snow into which we may suddenly fall; that which many carry in
their rings, carry thou in thy heart, memento mori; be like to those that in
their life time had their scpulchers in their gardens, and places of pleasure,
and that they might be mindful hereof, some had dead men's skuls before their
eyes in their most delicious banquets; by so doing, we should prevent a great
deal of sin, and it would be as a bitter pill to purge out many noisome
humors, Deuteronomy. 32. 29.
and prove that we are truly wise, always ready for death: its an excellent
thing when death approaches, to have nothing else to do but to die.

Fifthly, 5. Continual prayer.
it is a comfortable sign, if thou do heartily pray to GOD for this very end
as the Saints of GOD have done: Psalm. 39. 21. and 90. 12.
prayer is our best guard when we are at home and when we are abroad; GOD will
not deny our suits made in CHRIST his name, Luk 2. 32.
because this was one benefit which CHRIST merited for us. Alas what else
should we do when we are every day for ought we know going to judgment? should
we not entreat the Judge to pardon us? should we not with sighs and sobs cry
continually unto him to be merciful unto us? Sozom lib. 1.
Hier. reports in the life of Paul a Disciple of Anthony the first Monk,
Histor. cap 13.
and that not simply for devotion, but to avoid persecution, that this
religious man was found dead kneeling upon his knees, holding up his hands,
lifting up his eyes, the soul was so devout that the very dead corpse seemed to
pray unto GOD, now this humble seeking to GOD by prayer that he would make us
always ready for death, argues a soul sensible of its own weakness and of
GODS goodness.

Sixthly, if thou art sincere and sound at the heart, and walk with GOD in
the uprightness of thy soul, 6. Sincerity.
and make this the crown and garland of thy life, which will never wither
and decay, that thou hate all known sins, not the outward only whereof men
may be witnesses, but all inward corruptions, as hardness of heart, Esaias 55. 7.
wanton revengefull thoughts and such like, whereof the world can take no
notice, if thou magnifiest GODS graces, and gracious persons, and can be
content out of thy love to CHRIST, to suffer any thing for CHRIST, this is
sincerity: I say not legal sincerity, that is a perfection too high for us to
attain unto, nor only natural and moral integrity, whereby an unregenerate
man is guided by the light which is in him without hypocrisy (this may the
very heathens have) but Evangelicall integrity, whereby the person being
accepted for CHRIST, the heart though failing in some particular actions, yet
manifests habitual grace by a constant course (in the general) of a holy
conversation.

Lastly, 7. Thanks for Redemption from death.
to name no more, if we are truly thankful unto GOD for making away for us to
go by death to heaven (by the death of his Son) whose portion by due desert
was hell; how Judith and Ester were magnified for procuring deliverance to
their countrymen from outward enemies, the Bible shows: how the Grecians
honored Flaminius the Roman for prevailing against Philip of Macedon, Plutar.
in vita Flami.
and proclaiming their liberty, Florus Hist.
is registered in heathen stories, with what applauses and acclamations of all
the Romans, men, Romans li. 2 7.
women, and children Constantine was received into that Queen of Cities,
Eusebius. lib. 1 de vita Constable. c. 33, 34.
Eusebius the Historian does relate, for vanquishing the Tyrant Maxentius,
calling him their deliverer, their conserver, their bountiful Patron, a common
good thing, etc. here was love and thankfulness we see most earnest; GOD
knows and our own consciences testify unto us this day how far we exceed
those Grecians and Romans in mercies bestowed upon us, not by a mortal man but
by our JESUS, not from temporal servitude, but from the power of the devil;
if then our cries and acclamations be to our JESUS constantly, (...), as theirs
were to their deliverers, and we can joyfully sound forth S. Paul (...), O
death where is thy stingthankes be to GOD who has given us victory through
JESUS CHRIST our LORD, this is a good sign of a blessed man; and if these are
in you, I do assure you that your estate is now good, and by perseverance in
them, shall be far better hereafter, and these will comfort you, What
comforts in death.
when all the comforts of the world will fail. What will all friends, riches,
and pleasures profit when you are on your deathbed? unless you have this
foresight of joy in CHRIST, you live (for ought you know) under GODS curse, the
curse both of the Law, and the curse of the Gospel, and you can have no solid
joy in any thing under the Sun, no more then a condemned man can have in his
wealth and fore-passed honor; but have and keep these fruits of the holy
Spirit, and when death shall come to thee, and take thee (as it were) by the
hand, thou have no cause to shrink for fear, but may say with Babylas
slain by Decius that persecutor, in the words of the Psalmist, Return unto
thy rest O my soul, for the LORD has been beneficial unto thee, now my
griefs farewell, and all my wrongs adieu, and now my soul be glad, for now
comes thy rest, thy sure rest, thy sweet and never fading rest; and that
which comforted Hezekiah on his supposed deathbed, Esaias 38. 3.
Remember LORD how I have walked before thee with an upright heart; that also
was a great comfort to this our deceased brother, that he could say to me in
his last sickness, when I visited him, Note.
that he had walked in sincerity, and performed his Ministerial duties
(setting humane unavoidable defects aside) with an upright heart, and so I
doubt not but GOD sent his Angel to wait at his beds head to carry his soul
when it parted from the body, into Abraham's bosom.

You have heard (beloved) what was Saint Paul's desire, that was to die; and a
reason implied of his desire, for then he should be with CHRIST: hearken with
the like Christian attention to Saint Paul's judgment or censure of that estate
of being with CHRIST; this is says he far the better, or (as some expound the
words) which is best of all: Quest.
which occasions a Question, Whether is it better to be with CHRIST in his
humane nature, How it is best to be with Christ.
then to be with GOD, whose beatificall vision is said to be the chief object
of happiness? To which I answer, that the Apostle does not compare these
together, Sol.
I mean the enjoying of GOD and CHRIST, as though his chief happiness did
consist rather in beholding the body of CHRIST then the face of GOD, but his
being with CHRIST, and that estate in glory is compared to his being in this
present world, and he mentions CHRIST because he in his humane nature had
purchased this great happiness for him, which consists principally in the
vision of divine excellency: our happiness is chiefly in GOD, Aquin. 1, 2. q.
3 art. 8. sine contradictione.
but by CHRIST his merit: do we not think that many poor exiles stripped out
of their inheritance, and banished out of their native soil; do desire to see
that day, and that blessed man that should bring them out of their captivity,
and settle them in their former habitations, and rejoice in him as the author
of their happiness? hence I note,

A life in heaven with CHRIST, Doctrine 4.
is far better then a life on earth with men. Christ's glorious presence the
best.
It is better for the wife to be with her husband then in other company, and is
it not much better for the Spouse of CHRIST to be with her LORD, whom she
worthily esteems as the chief of ten thousand? this present life of nature
is good, the life of grace is far better, but the life of glory is best of all;
it is good to be a babe in CHRIST, it is better to be a strong experienced
Christian, but to reign with CHRIST is best of all; it is good to sigh and sob
for sin, it is better to mortify and to prevail against it, but it is best of
all to be perfectly sanctified, and purged from it. 2 Samuel 14.
We know that Absolon recalled from exile, and not admitted to see his fathers
face in Court, was impatient of all delays, and so are GODS children after
they are called to GODS favor, long to see their Savior which is far better,
which may further appear by these differences betwixt these two estates.
Reason I.


Is it not far better to have the wayward old man in our bosom, Sin in the
best on earth.
the most spiteful enemy and false friend, I mean all the remainders of
corruption, the leprosy and poison of sin quite abolished then to have them
still in us? while we live they will be in us do what we can, we shall find
much ignorance of GOD and all his ways, much folly which keeps us from
taking any thing to heart which respects GOD or our selves, much
uncircumcision of heart which makes us that we cannot be holily poor in spirit
though conscious of innumerable motives which should induce us hereunto, much
dross of selfe-sufficiency which will not let us perceive what need we have of
GODS presence for the quickening, strengthening, comforting, directing and
prospering of us in all our ways, though the breath of our nostrils be not
more necessary for our natural being, then his grace is for our spiritual
welfare and comfort; these evils do renew their assaults on us every day, and
notwithstanding we renew daily our endeavoring against them, yet cannot we get
that full conquest over them. If we could assemble all the Saints together, and
ask them whether they were without sin, Aug. de natura and gratia c. 36.
what do we think would they answer? whither that which Pelagius says, or
that which John the Apostle says? How great soever their excellency was, if
they could be asked, they would cry out with one voice, 1 John 1. 8.
If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no truth in us,
and would they perhaps say so more humbly then truly? GOD places not the
commendation of humility in any part of falsity: and therefore if they spoke
this truly, they had sin, because they humbly confessed it, and the truth was
in them; and if they said they had sin when they had none at all, they did lie,
and so did sin in lying, and the truth was not in them, but when we are in
CHRIST all our sins are quite abolished, and not till then, and therefore to be
with CHRIST is far better.

Secondly, is it not far better to be in such a condition, where we shall be
freed from all troubles, 2. Death freeth from all crosses.
miseries, diseases and discontents, then to live in poverty, debts, diseases,
disgraces, discontents and infinite crosses? even those things often which we
love the best, and expected the greatest comforts from them may prove our
greatest crosses, or at least we live in fear and expectation of changes and
evils to come; now they that are with CHRIST are then and not till then, freed
from all those evils which should make our life not over-pleasing to us, and
they are not only freed from those evils, but set in high places out of the
gunne-shot and danger of them, and therefore to be with CHRIST is far better.

Thirdly, is it not far better to live in such state where we shall live
without fear of displeasing our good GOD, 3. Death freeth from all fear.
and of loosing his favor, which is better then life it self, then to live in
fear of displeasing him? from this fear in this life we can never be freed in
truth, nor without great danger in our conceit, and it is a great bitterness to
the soul to displease our best friend in the world; from these fears we are
fully freed when we shall be with CHRIST, and therefore to be with CHRIST is
far the better.

Fourthly, is it not far better to be there, where we shall be freed from the
molestations and temptations of the Devil, 4. Death freeth from all
temptations.
who as he is crafty, so is he cruel, then to be encumbred with them? 2 Timothy
4. 8.
S. Paul we know triumphed, when he had finished his course and fought that
good fight against them, and shall not we? these infernal spirits are every
where about us: when we are at our best devotions in the Church, one Devil or
other stands at our right hand as at Ioshuahs, Zach. 3. 1.
to entice us to sin, they have no place in heaven to trouble us when we are
with CHRIST, and therefore to be with CHRIST is far better.

Fifthly, and lastly, is it not far better to be in heaven with CHRIST where no
sin is committed, 5. Death freeth from ill company.
where are no false brethren to betray us, then to live in this world which is
a very pesthouse and Sodom full of filthiness, and where perhaps we have not
one entire good friend in this world? This is the condition of them that are
with CHRIST, Psalm. 120. 5.
they are freed from that woe of the Psalmist; VVoe is me that I am constrained
to dwell in Mesech, and from the company of all the wicked, and shall see with
unspeakable joy and comfort the blessed Angels, and the spirits of all the
faithful departed, the glorious company of Martyrs which shine now much
brighter then the flames wherewith they were burned, they shall see the blessed
Virgin Mary the mother of our LORD, they shall see the most sacred humanity of
our Savior, and his comely face, fairer then the sons of men; and above all
this, they shall immediately enjoy the glorious presence of GOD, and have a
clear sight of the divine face: and consequently to be with CHRIST is the best
of all.

First, Use 1.
if to be with CHRIST, is best of all, then (by the law of contraries) to be
with the devils in hell is worst of all; to be borne in sin is bad, to live a
slave of sin is worse, but to die in sin is worst of all: to live in a deep
dungeon and prison, to be tormented with the sight of ugly devils, and that
with everlasting fire without all ease, intermission and hope of remedy, what a
woeful thing is it? if some have lost their wits by means of some dreadful
sight, yea if the very suspicion of devils has caused many men to tremble, and
the hairs of their heads to stand upright, what shall then the terror and
fear of that dark lake be, which is full of many horrible fiends and dreadful
hellish monsters? the appearing of devils in horrible shape, is a far greater
evil then is imagined: some body says (he bears the name of Cyrill) that one
would choose rather to burn in a hot fire, Cyril de vita B. Hieronymi ad finem
Epist. B. Hieron.
then endure their fearful fight. Good LORD that any Christian should live in
the danger hereof, and yet be senseless? what to be a firebrand of hell and
not to be moved? this stupidity may make our hearts to quake, and our flesh to
tremble, and astonish our senses; O then pity your own souls, pity the souls
of wretched sinners, and be entreated (brethren) by the sweet mercies of GOD,
by all the sufferings of our Savior, by all the joys of heaven to seek the
LORD while he may be found: if the danger of sin was only to be bondmen and
bond-women, as Queen Ester said to Ahashverus, Ester 7 4.
I would have held my tongue, or I would have been less importunate with you,
but the punishment is a thousand times greater, and I am at this time GODS
Messenger, to bring heavy tidings unto sinners, and I will tell you what you
shall find true by experience hereafter, that you who are despisers and
contemners of GODS Ordinances, formal professors having a show, not any power
of godliness, malicious persons, etc. shall after a little time, yea a very
little time, cry out, Woe, woe, woe. Ah what an unfortunate wretch am I, that have
lost all hopes of heaven! time was when happiness was offered to me, but I
(fool that I was) rejected it, now alas shall I weep and wail for ever. A
little City as I have somewhere read, resisted Alexander, he lighted a torch
and vowed that if they submitted not themselves before the torch was burnt, he
would burn their City into ashes; our life is like the burning of a torch; now
must thou yield up thy self to be ruled by the LORD, or burn in hell, not as
that City for a short time, but for ever: the everlasting flames of hell cannot
burn out one stain of sin out of thy soul: What great benefits did thou
receive of the world to allure thee to loose heaven? and what if thou had
gained much riches and many pleasures, and enjoined them a hundred years? all
those are gone, and all are nothing in comparison of the least torment which
thou there must suffer; then will thou cry out, oh unhappy pleasures, oh
unfortunate riches, oh miserable time wherein I foolishly blinded my self!
Guliel Melmes Continuator Bedae, c 3.
Ethelburga wife of King Iva a Saxon King in this Land, Anno Dom. 709. by a
godly policy won her husbands heart from carnal delights: on a day they had
all outward solaces that heart could wish, the room richly furnished with
plate, they had sweet and pleasant music and delicate cheer; she caused the
same place to be strewed with dung, and to be as loathsome as they could make
it, she entreated and prevailed with the King to repair thither, and beholding
it, he mused in his mind of the change, she took the opportunity, and thus said
unto him, where are yesterdaies delights, good cheer, and rich furniture? are
not all such things as wind and vanity which passes away? and with these and
the like speeches she drew her husband to a mortified life. Oh that this or the
like consideration could reduce the lovers of pleasures to the love of the
ever-living GOD! If the damned in hell could have but another life in this
world, nay if those which have but seen them, or rather (as I believe in my
instance) the strong imagination of such a terrible sight; I would not wonder
if they proved the greatest Saints on earth. Venerable Bede tells (as he thinks)
a true story, of one Drithelme by name, Beda Hist or. Aug l. 5. c. 13.
(the man lived in Northumberland) who was raised from death to life, and
reported wondrous things which he had heard and seen both of joy and pain,
which wrought this great effect (as there is chronicled) that he utterly
detested this present life, and abandoned all worldly cares, chastised his old
impotent body with daily fasting, plunging himself in Winter season into the
cold water, singing of Psalms and devoutly praying, and when the beholders
said, Brother Drithelme, this is a mavelous thing that you can possibly
suffer such bitter and sharp cold; marvel not (says he) for I have seen
places colder then these. Let this move thee to seek the LORD while he may be
found, the benefit of this life you cannot long enjoy, and when it is once
past, it is ever past, you cannot recover it though you had in your power a
thousand worlds to give to redeem it.

And as for us fellow soldiers and dear Christians, let us hold fast that
goodness which we have, Courage against death.
let us play the men, let us be courageous, constant, and never weary of
well-doing; let neither devil nor man take our crowns away from us, never
look to enjoy a state which is best of all, without much opposition, Pharaoh
will pursue you with all his power to bring you back into servitude, but do you
like stout Champions repel the temptations of the devil, as Gregory Nyssen
instructs you. Gregor. Nyssen Sancto Bapti. Oration.
Avaunt thou cursed and unhappy creature, I am a dead man, a dead man loves not
bodily pleasures, a dead man is not caught with riches, a dead man slandereth
not, a dead man is no lier, etc now have I another kind of life, and another
rule of life then formerly I had. I have learned to contemn earthly things,
and to set my mind on heavenly things. Hier Epist. ad Eustachium.
That which Saint Hierom spoke of judgment, we may apply to the joys of
heaven, let them be painted on the walls of our houses, and in every corner
thereof, that they may be always before our eyes: as Captains do encourage
their Soldiers to fight for their country, lives, profession, etc. so do I
say to you brethren, it is the LORD of Hosts whose battles you fight, it is
your own salvation which is in hazard, your enemies would rob you of grace, and
deprive you of happiness; if you give up your weapons you are undone and
firebrands of hell, be valiant therefore and keep this treasure, this precious
treasure which CHRIST (says S. Bernard) did judge to be more precious then his
own blood; Bernard ser. 3. de Adventu Dom.
if I had kept the blood of CHRIST which dropped from him as he hanged on the
Cross in a glass, how careful should I be to keep it? and must I not be
careful of my soul which is a precious treasure kept in an earthen vessel?
if thou art poor in thine outward estate, and CHRIST be thy portion, thou art
rich enough, care not for outward poverty, be the LORDS servant now, and thou
shall be with CHRIST hereafter, which is best of all. If thou art afflicted in
thy body with any grievous disease, care not for that; if afflictions work
kindly to mortify thy sin now, thou shall be with CHRIST hereafter, which is
best of all; if thou art basely esteemed and persecuted by wicked men, care not
for that; if this be for righteousness and out of a desire to keep a good
conscience, thou shall be with CHRIST hereafter, which is best of all. If thou
have but weak endeavors and a little strength to goodness, if thou strivest to
be better, and art a conquering thy sin, be not daunted hereat, thou shall be
with CHRIST hereafter, which is best of all. And to reflect upon our deceased
brother, now have thou happy soul that which thou have so much longed for; thy
death is the death of all thy defects, and the beginning of everlasting
happiness; thy faithfulness thy integrity, thy zeal have procured to thee a
crown of glory, now have thou thy fill of happiness; O blessed art thou that
may see the LORD face to face, that thou may enjoy the happy sight of thy
sweet Savior; thou beholdest thousands of Angels, the Assembly of our first
Parents, the seats of the Apostles, the tribunals of the Prophets, the
scepters of the Patriarchs, the crowns of the Martyrs, Basil. de Bapt. fol.
147.
and the praises of all just men made perfect, as Saint Basil says.

VER. 24. Nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more needful for you.
Our Apostle has made it known unto us, Coherence.
why in respect of himself he desired to die, and of this I have already
spoken: now does he in this verse acquaint us with the reason, why he should
desire to live, because his life made more for the profit and advantage of the
Philippians, then his death could do. For making the way to the maine point
which I do only aim at, five things are to be cleared.

1. Exposition.
What is meant by Flesh? the mortal body in which the soul dwells by a
Synecdoche, flesh being a conspicuous part thereof.

2. What is it to live in the flesh? it is to live a natural life preserved by
natural means, as eating, drinking, sleeping, etc. we walk in the flesh
though we do not war after the flesh; 2 Cor. 10. 3.
yet take him not as if he meant to abide always in the flesh, and by a
privilege to be exempted from death which is appointed for all men, Phil. 1.
12.
but he means deliverance from those present bonds, and the continuance of his
life for a time to the furtherance of their faith and joy.

3. Mark here and in the former verse that our Apostle speaks as if his soul
was himself, and as if his body was no essential part of man, this is not
true in propriety of speech, and therefore is to be taken improperly by a
Synecdoche, Integri promembro, the whole is put for a part, and here for a
principal part of Paul, the same trope in the like phrases touching our
Savior CHRIST, John 3. 13. and John 6. 62.
is by a kind of Appropriation called by Divines the Communication of
properties; Acts 20 28.
and these arousefull terms happily invented to clear these and many obscure
Texts of Scripture touching our Savior. But to return to our Apostle: Saint
Paul consists of flesh and spirit, or soul and body, and yet Saint Paul
says, for him to abide in the flesh is more profitable for them. When he died
he was with CHRIST; how? not with his body, but with his soul: Saint Paul is
dead and has seen corruption. How? in body, not in soul. Saint Paul in
propriety of speech abides not in the flesh, but his spirit a principal part
of Paul that is it which during the term of his natural life abides in the
flesh or body.

4. More necessary] This is not spoken simply but comparatively, it was not
absolutely necessary for the Church that S. Paul should live, for GOD could
even then, as after his departure he did, provide other Instructours to build
his Church and House, but yet it was more necessary for their profit that he
should live then die.

5. For you] But why more necessary? was it not because his appointed time to
die was not yet come? this is true, but personal. He mentions that which
concerns the Philippians, that they might take notice how careful he was for
them, and how thankful they ought to be to GOD for him.

My life is more needful for you, for the furtherance of your faith and piety.

Q. Did Saint Paul desire to live only for the good of the Philippians?

Sol. He neither says it, nor thinks it. He says his life was more needful
for the Philippians, so it was, but he says not only for them.

Q. Why then does he only name them?

Answ. Because he only writes to them. Good Shepherds prefer the welfare of
their sheep to their own glory.


Behold a pattern of admirable love in a Shepherd to the sheep of CHRIST,
preferring their welfare to his own present glory. What Merchant (says Saint
Chrysostom) having his vessel fraught with rich commodities, Chrysostom. in
locun.
if he could safely arrive at a haven would doubt to do so, rather then be
still tossed in the sea? What Champion would-strive for the mastery when he
might wear the corruptible crown? What Commander when he might rest at home
in glory after a triumphant victory, would rather still continue the fight to
the hazard of his life and honor? and yet this is S. Paul's choice, wherein he
resembles a woman that has husband and children, her husband is in a far
country and she is with her children; she may go to him whom her soul does
chiefly love, and there she shall be abundantly provided for, but then she
must leave her children behind her, and what then will become of you my poor
children? it would be better indeed for me to be with my husband, but it would
be worse with you then now it is, for your sakes therefore it is that I neglect
mine own present honor to do you good. Leaving this discourse, the words do
naturally yield us this Doctrine, which I will handle being pertinent to our
present purpose.

The life of a faithful Minister does more good, Doctrine 5.
and is more profitable for GODS people then his death: A Ministers life more
profitable then his death.
This does S. Paul witness of himself, yet from this particular and worthy
example, the grounds and reasons of his assertion being common, and the same in
others that they were in him, the doctrine is generally true of every faithful
Pastor, that they do more good to the living Saints while they themselves do
live, then when they are dead. The Word of GOD in the mouths of the Ministers
is not weak, but mighty in operation, able to cast down strong holds and
whatsoever opposes it self to it: though Satan be the strong man that keeps
possession, yet the LORD is stronger and can cast him out. See the efficacy and
wonderful working of the Gospel, Romans 15. 19.
that Saint Paul could say for his part only, that from Jerusalem round about
unto Illyricum, Mat. 24 27.
he had fully preached the Gospel of CHRIST, and as the lightening comes out
of the East, and shines to the West, and as the Suns going forth is from the
ends of the heaven, Psalm. 19. 6.
and his circuit to the ends of it, and there is nothing hid from the heat
thereof: so in Saint Paul's time the Gospel was come into all the known parts
of the world, Coloss. 1. 6.
and brought forth fruit, as it did amongst the Colossians; thus did the
Gospel strangely spread it self by the preaching of GODS servants, even while
Saint Paul himself was alive, and after the Apostles by their Successors as
they were Pastors; as the soul in the body, so were Christians dispersed in
the world, even the Getulians, Moors, Spaniards, Galls, and the Britans, the
Sarmatians also, Germans and Scythians do believe in CHRIST, before whom the
gates of all Cities are thrown open, and none are shut against him, before
whom also the iron locks are broken, and the brazen gates are opened, i. e. the
hearts of very many that were holden fast locked by the devil, are now
unlocked by the faith of CHRIST, Tertul adversus Iudaeos.
says Tertullian. What instrument was ever too weak to effect GODS will, if
he took it in hand? though the Apostles presence was but weak, and their
speech rude, and their words distasteful and unwelcome to the world, yet did
they prevail, or if they had been to preach to Infants and children not
seasoned with inveterate idolatry, it had been no great mastery to have
brought them to the faith of CHRIST, as it was no great glory to the Spaniard,
to vanquish the Indians, when Benzo the Italian reported that he durst be one
of the 25. that would fight with ten thousand, nay with twenty thousand of that
naked people: but the case is altered now, for 1. The Apostles were but few for
number and of no great reckoning in the world: 2. For the same men to teach a
strange doctrine to believe on CHRIST crucified, and to be ready to lay down
their lives for him, if they looked to go to heaven. 3. To preach to the world
when many of them did seek after wisdom and secular Philosophy, 2 Cor. 10. 5.
as did the Grecians, many after state policy and war, as did the Romans, and
all of them trained up in a long continued will worship, and damnable idolatry
of a deep die, yet the Gospel by the preaching of it, as Aarons rod amongst
the serpents of the Magicians devoured them all, and brought them to
acknowledge allegiance to it; surely this should make us cry out, as the people
did upon the proof that Elias made, 2 King. 18. 39.
the LORD he is GOD, the LORD he is GOD. Now the LORD does this great work by
the Ministry of living men, and sometimes by weak men, that the excellency of
the power may be ascribed to GOD and not to man: and thus you see in general
the great profit which accompanies the work of the Preachers in the plantation
and foundation of Churches: let us consider some particular benefits which
redound to them which are actual members of a visible Church; and they are
either 1 in regard of the bad, or 2 in regard of those that are good, or 3 in
regard of all sorts both good and bad.

First, 1.
I say their life is more needful in regard of those that are actually as yet
in the state of unregeneration, and that in a double respect:

First, to be a powerful means of converting the Elect, 1. Ministers convert
souls.
and to bring them to all the degrees of salvation: other professions do aim
at the good of this life; the Physician at the health of the body, the Lawyer
is for the right of his Client, but the end of the Ministry alone, is chiefly
to save men's souls; Vocation, that is by the preaching of the Gospel; 2 Thessalonians. 2. 14.
Justification another degree of salvation, Romans 10. 14.
that is for CHRIST his sake by faith which is given by hearing the Minister;
Sanctification another degree of salvation in this life, is by preaching of the
Word, in regard of dying to sin* the Minister is as the salt of the earth, Mat.
5. 13.
in regard of living to righteousness, its the Word of grace by which we are
sanctified. What had become of Paulus Sergius, 2 Cor. 3. 8.
of Onesimus, of Lydia, and of many Churches if they had not been called to
GOD by the preaching of S. Paul, who restored those to life, says S.
Chrysostom, which had six hundred ulcers by sin? but what need I instance in
particulars; the consciences of millions converted, can witness that Ministers
have been their spiritual fathers, their preaching has been the key to open
the Kingdom of Heaven, and they are appointed by GOD for the gathering of the
Saints. Ephesians 4 11.


Secondly, 2. Ministers restrain men's corruptions.
their life is profitable, if not to convert, yet to civilize people, and to
restrain the corruption of nature; even reason and Philosophy overruled
Pythagorus, See Bradward, de causa Dei, l. 2. c. 3.
by nature the worst of men, as Philemon the Astrologer conjectured, to conquer
his natural propensions to vice, and to become (as his Scholars thought) the
best and the most worthy man that lived; much more effectual sure is the Word
preached to produce moral virtues, and to enable some to do moral works
rationally, out of the sway of right reason, though not obedientially with a
pure intention to obey and glorify GOD; preaching is a bank to hinder the
inundation of sin, and to keep men in outward conformity, this keeps
calmness upon the face of the Church and mankind, which otherwise might
degenerate into savage brutishness. Herod was better by hearing John, and
reformed many things that were amiss, and by their means they may have many
graces of the spirit, it is the influence of the same Sun which ripeneth both
the grape and the crab, it is the same spirit also which helps the wicked in
their moral, and the godly in their spiritual works, those I speak of may
have illumination and a taste of the heavenly gift, and may propagate GODS
truth to others, 2 Chro. 24. 21.
as Ioash the King did all the days of Iehojada the high Priest, 2 Chronicles. 26.
5.
and Vzziah in the days of Zachariah the Prophet: and who sees not that the
presence of a godly man does bridle the tongues of the wicked from wicked
speeches, though sore to their grief, as Job says, Job 29. 8, 9, 10
in my prosperity the young men saw me and hid themselves, the Princes
refrained talk, the Nobles held their peace, etc. and the same is reported of
Cato, that they would forbear to speak uncomely things on the stage while he
was present: and if swearers rap out unawares profane oaths in the presence
of a grave man, they check one another, know you not that such a one heard
you? the devil dares not show himself a devil in his colors in the presence
of such a reverend man as this our brother was.

Secondly, 2.
the life of a Minister is more needful then his death, in regard of those
that are effectually called.

First, 3. Ministers mortify relics of sin.
because there is after conversion much corruption and sin in GODS people to
be mortified, whereof they may justly complain as did Saint Paul, Romans 7. the
best Christians are like pieces of gold, they are too light and must have their
grains of allowance to make them current, Pro. 20. 9.
Who can say my heart is clean? he proposes the point in his armor by way of
demand, making his challenge to all the world with his triumphant negative,
knowing that no man durst step forth, none could justly say, I am entirely
innocent, I am as good as I ought to be, as good as the holy Law requires that
I should be. Private helps I know, as prayer, fasting, meditation, have their
force to abate the strength of sin, but yet the lively two edged sword, the
sword of the Spirit in the mouths of GODS Ministers, has the pre-eminence,
that is the fire to wast it, Jer. 23. 29.
and the hammer to bruise a hard heart.

Secondly, their Ministry is needful to discover sins after renovation: 4.
Min^ster discover secret sins
there are secret dark corners in our hearts which are deceitful, wherein
wickedness does lurk. Psalm. 19. 12.
Who can tell how often he offends? cleanse me from secret sins. If unknown
sins were in David, who was a man of an excellent spirit, of great
understanding, and a strict examiner of his own heart, can any man say in
truth he is free from them? Basil institutio aspiran ad vitam perfectam.
Saint Basil says, it becomes all men to acknowledge that they are not worthy
to speak before the divine Majesty, because they are sinners: we are guilty of
many faults which we know not, in that respect we may say with our Apostle, I
know nothing by my self, yet am I not justified thereby, that is, I sin
greatly, but I do not understand it. Hence the Prophet says, Who understands
his faults? thou will confess if thou art wise, that thou art a greater sinner
then other men: so Basil; private means such as are the looking into the law
of liberty, 1 Cor. 14. 25.
friendly reproves, and instruction, and such like, are much availeable, yet
that which does most lively discover it, is prophecy, that is it which
unbowels corruption, and best displaies the hidden nakedness of old Adam, Heb.
4. 12.
and which does exceedingly advance the honor of the Ministry by the praching
of the Gospel, Angels, yea chief Angels, as Principalities and Powers have
learned, what formerly without sin they did not know, Ephesians. 3. 10.
the manifold wisdom of GOD in the dispensation of the unsearchable riches of
CHRIST to the Gentiles.

Thirdly, many are the steppings aside out of GODS way, 5. Ministers revoke men
into the right way.
in regard of actual sins even in the most sanctified, in many things we sin
all. David did so, and Peter did so, Iam. 3. 2.
and what sheep of CHRIST does not so? checks of conscience, I know, and GODS
fatherly chastisements are good helps to reduce us into the right way; the one
is our bosom remembrancer, and the other is like to Ionathans arrow, which
has GODS message in the feathers, yet neither conscience nor crosses have
power comparable with CHRIST his voice in the preaching of the Word, to procure
our revocation into GODS ways.

Fourthly, Christians ought to be confirmed in their gracious estate, 6.
Ministers confirm grace begun
yet whose faith is so constant, that it admits no wavering? whose patience is
so fixed, that it admits no staggering? the clearest Suns of the Church have
been more or less eclipsed in their faith, their patience and their piety: of
all outward means to make us hold out, preaching is the principal, that is as
goods to prick men forward that are under the yoke of CHRIST, that is as salt
to sweeten them and to keep them savoury; it is with our hearts as with our
soil, which is not like the Land of Canaan, Mat. 5. 13.
the former rain after seeds time at the fall of the leaf, and the latter
rain at the spring, to ripen the fruit sufficed, insomuch that Saint Hierome
living in Canaan, rarely saw rain there in June and July, Hiero in Amos.
but our soil though now well watered, yet except it be well refreshed and
often comforted with drops of rain from heaven, will parch and wither.

Lastly, to name no more, 7. Ministers increase grace.
they are notable means to increase the vigor and livelihood of saving
graces; they are bellows to increase the flame, as a sweet rain to make the
LORDS inheritance to thrive in goodness, they are as milk and wine, and meat
to make the children of GOD to shoot up to their just stature, and as a strong
gale of wind to carry their vessels to the desired haven, Hiero. ad Demetrium.
as Hierom says, Pugilum fortitudo clamoribus incitatur, though Champions
fight valiantly, yet their courage is enflamed by the acclamations of the
bystanders, so is it with you; when we pray, exhort, beseech that that which
you do well, you do it continually, more sincerely and zealously, What good
soul by experience finds not graces excited, good motions kindled, holy
resolutions furthered and gracious operations intended by a profitable Minister?

The third Reason why the life of a godly Minister is more profitable, Reason 3.
is in regard of all both good and bad, Ministers cause blessings.
as touching the continuance of blessings. For he is as Elisha said of Elias, 1
Kings 2. 12.
and King Ioash of Elisha, the chariots and the horsemen of Israel; 2 Kings 13.
14
he fights while he lives, and bends his forces against all manner of sins,
Exodus 32. 25.
which make a people naked and expose them to the wrath of GOD, Number. 16. 47.
he stands in the breach betwixt the living and the dead, to avert the plague,
and to make an atonement for the people, as Aaron did: and doubtless the man
of GOD must be a good part of those righteous ones for whose sake the Sun is
darkened, and that the Moon gives her light, that the frame of heaven and
earth continues as we see this day, as Justin Martyr shows; Justin Martyr
Apog. 1. pro Christian^.
they are a good part of those impregnable bulwarks against all enemies, as
Theodoret shows in a memorable example when Constantine the great was dead.
Sapores the King of Persia did strongly besiege Nisibis; Theod Sanctor. Patrum
historia Iacobus.
there was a holy man of GOD, Iacobus by name in that City, the Citizens
beseech him that he would show himself upon the walls of the City, and pray
against the enemies, which he did, and the LORD sent a cloud of flies and gnats
amongst the besiegers, which dispersed them. Behold a whole City saved by the
means of one religious man, and hence also it is a sign of GODS wrath and
heavy displeasure, and a forerunner of farther judgments, to have excellent
instruments of GOD taken away, Esaias 3. 2.
and therefore the LORD purposing to visit the Jews for their iniquities, Esaias
57. 1.
threatens to take away from them the Judge and the Prophet; and the LORD uses
as himself speaks, Cum aliquis (vul^u and specie gravitatis reverendus)
decidit afficior, quia destituitur grex juvenum muro senili: de^ique periturae
urbis aut malorum imminentium vel futura labis hoc primum indicium est, etc. S.
Amb. de Cain and Abel, l. 2 c 3.
To take away the righteous, that their eyes may not behold the evil to come,
though this be little laid to heart as there is said, When we see a gardener
take away the wall and fence, pluck up the choicest plants, take away the
ornaments and beauty of it, and lay it open for the beasts to enter, we may
suppose he intends not to continue, but to deface his garden; so when we see
the evident footsteps of GODS wrath, and the fire of his jealousy (as it were)
breaking out by the smoke; beginning to appear by taking away profitable men
as plants of his garden, which his own right hand has planted, we must lay it
to our hearts, as a probable token preceding a heavy judgment; by which it
does appear, that the wicked do enjoy temporal blessings by the life and
prayers of a good Minister.

Use 1. Use 1.
Is of Confutation to the Church of Rome, which do maintain the invocations of
Saints departed, Against invocation of Saints
and say that their favor with GOD (which we deny not) is improved, and that
their affectionate notice of the peoples necessities, continues greater after
death then when they were alive; if so, the speedy dissolution of Saint Paul,
had been as expedient for the Churches which he had planted, as for himself,
for so (to use their own language) they might have had a new Patron in the
Court of Heaven, and it would be expedient for the benefit of the Church
militant, that the godliest Ministers should die the soonest and the fastest,
for so they may become more then Apostles, able to hear the prayers and
undertake the Patronage of many thousands with whom they had no commerce while
they lived; but it was never profitable for the Church to be deprived of the
godly Pastors bodily presence in this respect; Ioh. 14 13. and 16. 23.
this is to rob CHRIST of his prerogative, Romans 8. 34.
sitting at the right hand of his Father; in the Tabernacle of this world, as
was in the first Tabernacle, we may find many Priests to employ as Agents for
us with GOD, Heb. 9. 6, 7, etc.
but in the Sanctum Sanctorum, the second Tabernacle, there is but one Agent
who has Royal commission to deal betwixt GOD and men. Rollok on Col. fol. 17
1 lin. 9.
I dare be bold to say, that if the Angels and Saints would take the honor
that the Pope and his Clergy would give them, they should all go to hell and
leave the joys which they now have.

This point serves for the reproof of such persons, which feel no sorrow for
the loss of the chief stays of the Church, 2. Loss of Ministers not
regarded by many.
which are like a Dove without a heart, Hos. 7. 11.
and like the drunkards are stricken and yet feel nothing, Pro. 13. 35. and
Ier. 5. 3.
which loose an eye and are senseless in this loss, which have their
masterpieces and posts that hold up their house removed, and yet lay it not to
heart, which have the pawnes of their peace, and the pledges of their posterity
taken from them, and regard it not: these men's affections had need of the
spur, which have stony hearts, and bowels of brass, which are not pensive at
all for the loss of a dear brother, which perhaps as Saint Austen complains,
can weep when he read the story of Dido and of Troy, and such fabulous reports,
but he could not do so for the miseries of GODS Church, these men are as far
from sympathy toward the miseries of GODS people, as from an inward feeling of
the tender mercies of GOD to their own souls; the harder the heart is, the
worse it is, and the worst of all is hardest to mourn for so great a loss.

Thirdly, and much more does this Doctrine condemn their practice, 3. Hatred
of powerful Ministers blamed.
that if their Pastor be a faithful teacher, one that keeps nothing back
from them, Acts 20. 27.
but delivers unto them the whole counsel of GOD, as Paul did to the
Ephesians; if he denounces the judgment of the LORD against sinners, if he
lays the axe to the root of the tree, and launceth their festered sores to
the very bottom, they do even for their work sake, esteem them as Ahab did
Micaiah to be their enemy, and the more he loves them, the less he is beloved
of them, and do wish from their hearts that he might not live amongst them,
but do labor to make him weary of his life by vexing him, casting many times
the very name of a Priest, as a term of reproach upon his face; the abundance
of this Manna and bread from Heaven, makes them to loath it and the Messenger
that brings it. The reasons of both: 1. Because such men feel not their sin
nor their misery for sin. 2. Nor taste the comfort, sweetness and power of
grace. 3. Nor do consider that Presbyters are GODS hands to conveigh graces to
them; hence do these fellows scorn them in their hearts, and so have as it
were a brand set upon them to be (...) Atheists, irreligious persons and
despisers of CHRIST, Ignat. Epist. ad Trallian.
as that ancient and holy Father Ignatius phraseth them.

Fourthly, this consideration that the life of a good Pastor is more
profitable then his death, 4. The death of good Ministers to be lamented.
should put us in mind of a duty to mourn and grieve for the departure of an
eminent member in the Church: GOD is not like to the Persian Kings, Ester 4 2.
in whose presence no mourners were suffered to come, but godly mourners are
always welcome to GOD. See the practice of this duty but in one example, Acts
8. 2.
the devout men that buried Stephen made great lamentation over him, though
Stephen was a Martyr, and which was his honor, the first Martyr too, and if I
well remember, a Martyr says, if there be any way to heaven on horseback, it
is by Martyrdom; Bradford.
yet did devout men make great lamentation over Stephen. See the bowels of men
endued with GODS Spirit, they are full of affection, full of tenderness, so
that the streams thereof do overflow the banks; and good reason, they have
fewer friends remaining, and fewer helpers, fewer prayers are made unto GOD,
and fewer remain to whom they may do good, and from whom they may receive
good. And according to this present occasion let us practice a duty which we
owe in regard of our deceased brother, even to mourn: away with that Stoicall
opinion which allows not their wise man to sigh or change countenance at any
cross accident, this neither sorts with religion nor reason. No, we have cause
all of us to mourn, not you only of this Town, but your neighbors round
about you, nay this whole Country; and say as Elisha to Elija, my father, my
father, the Chariots and the horsemen of Israel; he by his fastings, often and
extraordinary prayers, often has stood in the gap, and mightily wrastled with
the LORD to keep away judgments; and like another Elijah has left his mantle,
or Dorcas her garments for the poor, some godly works, the fruits of a
sanctified heart and brain behind him, and many no doubt are strangled in the
womb by his death which shall never see light.

Touching the beginning of his studies, Master Boultons life.
they were not so commendable as could have been wished, he was tainted by his
Schoolmaster in his youth, and continued a Papist in heart at Oxford certain
years, and resolved with one Sometimes a Cantabrigian and student in Christ's
College.
Anderton his schoole-fellow, to have gone to the Seminaries beyond the sea:
but GOD happily crossed that design, and effectually calling him to the sight
of his sins, and the light of his truth, drew good out of that evil, and
taught him so much the more to detest Popery, and to discover hypocrisy and
dissimulation in GODS worship and in ordinary conversation above the ordinary
strain of Writers.

How industrious a student he was in the University, his many note books left
behind him will bear witness, and how well reputed he was for his learning,
as his other exercises, so his public disputations before King JAMES will
testify.

But Learning is nothing, Industry is nothing to be praised before GOD without
grace; grace has the pre-eminence and gives the luster to all the rest; the
LORD enriched his heart with a great measure of grace, hence is it that his
life was unstained and without reproof; though he was not freed from
infirmities, yet he was from crimes.

Hence it was that he was so laborious in his Ministry, a true student he was
all his days, as appears by his library though great, yet very few books in
it which were not read over and noted in the margent, and he attained that high
strain of grave eloquence, familiar to him, scarce imitable by any others; you
were twice a week ordinarily fed with Sermons and Catechismes, and with the
Exposition of Scripture on Holy days which would have been acceptable,
wholesome food I am sure, to the most learned auditory of the Land.

And though he was so great a Clerk, and so famous, yet was not he ambitious
nor sought great matters for himself, and he does beseech an honorable
Knight, Epistle Dedicatory to Sir Robert Carre.
to whom he dedicated his last book, and all others in him to do him that
favor, nay that right, nay that honor, not to conceive that he had a thought
that way.

His heart was set on the right object, and the bent of his study was for
matter of Sanctification, both of himself and of his hearers, Note.
for himself he could profess (and O that all Priests and Pastors could do
the like!) he did I say profess to his comfort on his death bed, that he never
taught any godly point, but he first wrought it on his own heart; toward
others he was a powerful instrument to batter the kingdom of the devil, he
was a downright Preacher and spared no sins, he made many an unconverted
sinner to quake and to tremble at his discourses, as Felix did at Paul's, and
cast them into a strong fit of legal humiliation; he was an instrument to pull
many captives out of Satan's snares, many of you can step forth and say he was
my spiritual father; he had a searching Ministry to discover the hidden
abominations of sin, to strengthen and increase the graces of those that did
stand, to quicken those that languished; many have cause to bless GOD for him,
Philemon 19.
and do owe even themselves unto him, as Philemon did to Paul.

From this spectacle before our eyes all of us may learn something for our
imitation: does any one profane GODS ordinances by a dissembled religion? let
him forsake it, and fly from it as from a serpent, (for, I speak to the glory
of GODS mercy, turning his face from Babylon to Jerusalem) so did our deceased
brother; does any one walk before GOD with an upright heart, let him hold out
to the end, run his race and finish his course both in health and sickness,
for so did our deceased brother.

A great man, great in worth is fallen in our Israel, and there will be a great
loss of him, his wife shall find the loss of a gracious husband; his children
shall find the loss of a gracious father; his sheep shall find the loss of a
gracious shepherd, we of the Ministry shall find the loss of a grave,
learned, and a gracious brother; the devout Christian that desires to have all
his sins unbowelled and discovered, shall find the loss of a gracious
soule-searching Minister, he that would have rules to avoid particular sins,
and to make progress in all virtues, shall find the loss of a copious and
experienced directour; he that is wounded in conscience shall find the loss of
a skillful Surgeon, who in that art was one of a thousand to restore
righteousness; the virtuous, rich, and humble poor Christians that feared
GOD, shall find the loss of a loving friend and a gracious supporter, those
that are in wants and truly religious, shall find (to my knowledge) the loss
of a liberal reliever and comforter, nay poor condemned Christians shall find
the loss of a charitable instructour: and what shall I say more? the whole
Land shall find the loss of a zealous pillar and of a powerful prevailer with
GOD for the continuance of our happiness: so that all had cause to pray not as
the dresser of the barren fig tree, but as for a fruitful tree, Luke 13. 8.
LORD let it stand one year, nay many years longer; but the greater our loss
is of him, the greater is the gain unto himself, and as he is crowned with
glory in heaven, so his remembrance to many of us, will be like that of Josias
to the Jews, It is sweet as honey in all mouths, Eccles. 49. 1.
and as music at a banquet of wine. Uses to be made of the death of Ministers.


This consideration may be of good use for GODS people; First that they would
set a high price on good Ministers, and afford them a singular measure of love
as to spiritual fathers, Ministers to be highly prized.
GOD honoring them so highly, as joining them with himself as co-workers in
the regeneration and salvation of his people; 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12, 13.
against whom Satan and his instruments are most enraged: 1 Cor 3. 9.
toward such let the affections of GODS people be most enflamed; though their
persons may be contemptible, yet in regard of their high calling as they are
CHRIST'S Ambassadors they are venerable, they are dear unto GOD; you cannot
contemn nor reverence them, but this reaches unto heaven, and in the last
resolution reflects on CHRIST himself, Luke 10. 16.
CHRIST is interessed both in the contempt and in the respect you show toward
them.

Secondly, it should teach them another duty, to pray heartily to GOD for them,
2. Ministers to be prayed for.
that GOD would give his Vrim and his Thummim to his holy ones; this was the
prayer of Moses for the Tribe of Levi: Deuteronomy. 33. 8.
think of them as Saint James said of Elias, Iam. 5. 17.
That they are men subject to like passions that you are, conceive us not to be
of. Laodicean temper, Revel 3. 17.
to stand in need of nothing; we are no better, nor so good as Saint Paul, and
yet good Saint Paul is frequent in his exhortations to the people to pray for
him; brethren we had need of your prayers, none more need then we: something it
is that Saint Paul in his prayer for the Churches, uses this form, Grace be
unto you and peace, but when he writes to Timothy and to Titus, separated for
the service of GOD, he prays for Grace, Mercy, and Peace, for them. They in
special manner it seems do stand in need of GODS mercy; pray for such then,
and for their continuance, that they may live, be guides to the blind, lights
to them that sit in darkness, Instructors of the ignorant, and by a godly
life examples to the flock over which the LORD has made them Overseers.

Get now all the good you can from profitable Ministers while you enjoy them,
3. All the good that may be to be reaped from Ministers.
hear them every LORDS day, as though it was the last day you should hear
them; whiles the years of plenty last, store up with good Joseph provision
which may preserve your lives if a dearth should come; like the shel-fish,
suck in that moisture while you are in the waters, which may preserve you on
the dry land. When Nilus over-flowed the banks, the Egyptians were so wise, to
dig pits to retain the water to serve their turn, when the water of the river
returned into its channel. Do thou so for thy soul in regard of the waters
of life, store now thy self with the bread of heaven, least thou find to thy
grief the greatness of a benefit in the loss thereof: unwise they are that
know not the true worth of blessings but by wanting them, which wisemen had
rather learn by keeping them. Eusebius. Eccl Hist. l. 5. c. 18.
O carry thy self toward them as Saint Irenaeus did toward that blessed
Martyr Polycarpus, many years after he did keep fresh in memory the
disputations of Polycarpus, his goings out, and commings in, his manner of
life, the shape of his body, his Sermons to the people, how he conversed with
Saint John the Apostle, and with others which saw the LORD, he could recite
what he reported as spoken by them, etc. such a deep impression in his soul
there was left many years after Polycarpe was a glorious Saint in heaven; and
I believe that this our brothers unaffected gravity, his wise carriage, and
many of his gracious speeches are written with the pen of an adamant in some
Christians which will be legible in them so long as they live.

Lastly, let us of the Clergy while we live, do all the good we can, 4. Do
good while the day last.
and put forth our selves with all laboriousnesse before the day of harvest; 1
Cor. 12. 7.
the gifts of the Spirit are given to profit withal, Gods gives these
ministerial talents to this end; and let us employ our talents to attain this
end, while we continue in this Tabernacle, let us not cease to put men in mind
of their duty, 2 Pet. 1. 12, 19
as Saint Peter professed he would do; let us pity the case of all disobedient
persons: let other fishers, if they think good, fish for riches, or for vain
applauses; but let our chief aim be to deliver a sinner from the pit of
destruction, and rather to speak five words in compassion to save a soul,
then five thousand for any sinister end whatsoever: the soul of the poorest
man is very precious, and the loss of it cannot be redeemed with a world, it
is sin that loses the soul. O how unhappy are all sinners, how miserable!
which would make GODS servants shed rivers of tears if they thought advisedly
thereof, and mourn over them as our Savior did over Jerusalem, Luke 19 41.
when he beheld their present security, and foresaw their future ruin, Mat. 23.
If thou had known these things that concern thy peace, how happy had
thou then been? let us then be faithful and laborious, and so much the rather
now ought we to be laborious, to make up this breach for the loss of our
brother, if GOD enables us; the LORD himself is the heavenly teacher of this
lesson by a just proportion in a like case. Moses my servant is dead, now
therefore arise Ioshuah -- be strong and of a good courage; Josh. 1. 2, 6.
this our brother GODS servant is dead, let us therefore who do by the
goodness of GOD remain yet alive in a better degree then formerly, be
faithful in our callings, let us be more industrious in reading, in
meditating, in conscionable preaching, and in a holy walking in the fear of
GOD, that so we may repair what we may our great loss by the death of him;
and truly we have great encouragements so to do: Josh. 1. 5.
for as GOD was with Moses, and promised to be with Ioshuah, so will the same
GOD, if we continue so doing, make the same word good unto us, he will be with
us, He will never leave us nor forsake us; and when this short uncertain, Heb.
13. 5.
vain and wretched life is ended, we are already assured, that every one of us
shall hear to our everlasting comfort, that blessed sentence, Well done thou
good and faithful servant, thou have been faithful over a few things, Mat.
26. 23.
I will make thee ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy LORD.
Which he for his mercy sake grant unto us all, Amen.

FINIS.

