The Castle of Christianity, detecting the long erring estate, asvvell of the
Roman Church, as of the Bishop of Rome: together with the defense of the
Catholic Faith: Set forth, by Lewys Euans.

Eccle. 21. Be not ashamed to confess thine error: for he that is wise will
remember himself. Hieron. ad Paulam. etc. Let men first read, least they
seem, not through judgment, but through the presumption of hatred, to blame
that, which they know not. Imprinted at London by Henry Denham.

Peter.2. c. Deum timete, Regem honorate. Cic: (...)
Est piger ad poenas princeps, ad premia velox.

Cuique dolet, quoties, cogitur esse ferox.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

Viuat deo, sibi, reip: longum, aeternumque valcat: regnet latissime, diu,
fortunatissime: regat se, nos, and regnum, long a in pace, splendidissima huius
imperij regnatrix, Elizabetha: Amen.



TO THE MOST gracious, and mighty Princess, Elyzabeth by the grace of God,
Queen of England, France, and Irelande; defender of the faith. etc.
Your Majesty's most humble, and obedient subject Lewys Euans, faithfully
wishes here on earth long reign, all honor, much heith, and continual
prosperity, and in heaven everlasting joy, and bliss eternal.

THE INCLINAtion of Mankind (most graciouse, and my sovereign good Lady) is
diverse, and strange: some are given to provide for their private gain and
desires: some for high room, estimation and honor: some for the safeguard of
their consciences: and some wholye to profit the commonwealth. Yea, and
besides these, an infinite sort of others there are, who be diversely carried (a
thing not unmeet to be thought vpony some living at ease, and in prodigality:
some with pain using their industry: some delighting in one thing, some in an
other: every one following, as his disposition is, the vain merchandise of
this brickle world. Hence it is, that the most famous Philosopher
Pythagoras, compared the life of man unto a mart, or fair, as in the which
some are busy, some idle, some buyers, some sellers, some lookers and gazers
on. But of the former sorts, as I can not enough commend those, who are all
careful for their souls, seeking rather with loss of life to win heaven,
then by rest here and joy, in the end to deserve sorrow, and hell: so must I
praise such, which employe their continual care, to the profit, enlargement,
and conseruatio^ of the commonwealth. For, unto these, there is (as Cicero
says) a prescribed place in heaven, wherein they shall live in bliss for
ever: unto the others, remains (says Christ) the salvation of their Souls,
and they are those (O most happy men!) that shall have our savior to be
their advocate and Patron, he it is, that before his father will acknowledge,
receive, and reward them. Yet all are not (O right sacred Queen) to be
accounted for religious, which talk of religion, and in whose mouths only
and lyppes the name of the Lord is, all are not true confessors which can and
do abide long imprisonment, all are not godly Martyrs which suffer death, yea
though they dye under color, and in pretense of defending the true faith. For,
many there are, whom the aduersarye hardens, as the Arrianes, the
Anabaptists, with others, many there be that dye in blindness, that are
seduced, and that defend in a manner mere heathines. Of these it is, that S.
Augustine says: Quae est ista dementia, vt cum male viuitis, lotronum facta
faciatis, and cum iure punimim, gloriam Martyrum requiratis? What madness is
this, when you lead an evil life, when you commit theft, and robberies, and
when you are iustlye punished, then to require the glory of Martyrs? It is not
(most benign Sovereign) all that say: we be Catholics, we be Christians,
we have Abraham to our father, whom the Lord our Savior will embrace, and
defend. For, there be some, I would there were not many, who under the name
of devotion do uphold superstition, and by the color of godliness and
piety, do pamper up blindness and Idolatry. The proof whereof (to the
inward sorrow of any christian heart) we may in these our days behold, and
see. For, to defend the pride of one man, to maintain the pomp of one
prelate, (Lord) what persons, and how many be moved, and set on? how many be
egged against Christ and his gospel? how many be styrred up against their
Prince, their friends, and their country? how many are bent against the laws
of God, of man, and of nature? neither yet is this, so much to be maruayled at.
For, vice and virtue may not agree, light must varye from darkness, good
dealings will differ from deceyt, holiness does hate ungodliness, true piety
shall ever detest blind Idolatry, to be brief, heaven is enemy unto hell.
Hence it is that all this hurlye burly and tumults do arise, hence it is that
within one Realm, within one City, yea, and within one house such
dissensions do grow, such strife does breed, such hatred does happen. And
yet, this is not, I say, strange, seeing that our Savior himself, has
before hand told, and showed unto us of the same. Think not (says Christ)
that I am come to send peace into the earth. I came not to send peace but the
sword. For I am come to set a man at variance against his father, and the
daughter against her mother, and the daughter in law against her mother in
law: and a man's foes shall be they of his own household. What playner words
can be then these? show they not, as in a glass, our time? and further, fully
to express our calling, You shall (says he) be hated of all men for my sake.
But how the professors of the Gospel are hated* what whispering there is
against them, what toys are wrought, what travail some take, what tryfling
news be devised, what gadding, what dreaming, what inuenting, what hoping,
what ymagining there is, as I am loath to utter, (for let God confound all
foolish devises) so am I right sorrowful to think. I my self have once
drunk (before your Majesty's great clemency I confess) of the puddell of
ignorancy, of the mudde of Idolatry, of the ponde of superstition, of the lake
of self will, blindness, disobedience, and obstinacy. This did I, this do
all they, which fondlye flee this your realm, which grudge (and yet know not
why) at your highness laws, which (alas) resist the truth, and have (as the
Apostle says) a fervent mind to God ward, but not according unto knowledge.
O here how may your subjects be glad? How may your highness rejoice, when unto
transgressors there is such clemency found in your grace, as inuiteth them
thus boldly to renounce their folly, and as offers, as unto the prodigal
child, most gladly, favor, forgiveness, and pardon? these things (most
gracious Lady) considered, let others esteem their vain credit as they
list: for mine own part I protest before God, and your highness, during life
to the best of my power, to prefer the divine Scriptures, before the Chaos of
man's doctrine, to embrace your most godly proceedings, and to perform in all
things toward God, your Majesty and my country, the part and duty of a
true subject. In token, and pledge whereof, I have adventured in most humble
wise, to dedicate these few leafes unto your highness most imperial
protection, beseeching of God, to save, keep, and defend your Majesty.

Your Majesty's most humble Orator Lewys Euans.

Romans. 1. I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for unto all such as
believe, it is the power of God unto salvation. Ephesians. 6. Put on the armor of
^od, that you may stand steadfast against the crafty assaults of the devil.
For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against rule, against power,
and against worldly rulers, of the darkness of this world, against spiritual
wickedness, for heavenly things. 1. Coloss. 2. Beware least any man come and
spoil you through philosophy, and deceitful vanity, through the traditions of
men, and ordinances after the world, and not after Christ. To his loving
Friends wheresoever, Lewys Euans wishes as un to himself.
WHen Jweygh, that friendship is nothing else, (loving friends) but an
especial agreement with good will, and love, between mankind, as well in
matters divine, as humane: I do then somewhat doubt, whether I were best to
publish this small book, or not. The thing that seems to let me, is the
familiarity, friendship, and amity, which has been and now yet is between
us. For I cannot but fear (so loath am I to lose old friends) least by this
mine alteration in judgment, you also (though you have no such cause) will
alter your love, and so withdraw your good wills. In deed you your selves do
well know, that I was never chargeable unto you, that I never sought friendship
for gain, and that at no time I fawned upon any for praise, estimation, or
profit. Only did I accept the faithful hearts of my friends, and I greatly
esteemed the gentle willing minds, and affability of mine acquaintance. And
this is it that makes me the more sorrowful, when I fear to lose their good
wills, whose friendship I delighted in, but of whose wealth and goods I
neither had, nor desired. On the other side, my duty toward God, mine
obedience due unto the Queens highness, and the unfeigned good will that I
bear toward my country, these do in deed now compel me to profess the
truth that I see, to renounce obstinacy, to knowledge the right way, and to
bid defiance unto Idolatry. I have therefore in this treatise, though not
eloquently, yet faithfully brought forth, reason, authority and Scripture, and
that to defend the Catholic faith, and to chase away the smoke of hell, the
mist of Antichrist, and the false long mayntayned merchandise of Satan. I
tread herein, I trust, the path of our perfect forefathers, I defend the
Church, I give a foil to pride, I commend prayers, penance, and fasting, I
cut down perverse hypocrisy, deceit, and blind iugling. I extol honorable
marriage and chastity, I the cause, that I labor indifferently: you shall
plainly perceive that I speak nothing against holiness, but that I endeavor
to do what I can, to further devotion and godliness. Why then should our
friendship cease? why should it not (these things considered) increase? yet
some I know there are, whose breasts be stopped with such pelting disdain and
ignorancie, that having a sound of the Catholic faith in their mouths, they
neither know what faith nor fidelity means. Some others there are, who
though they be worldly wise and learned, yet they so lean unto self will and
estimation, that they lean not in a manner, but altogether besides their
profession. These be not father Adams children, they are made, as they think,
of a finer moulde, they carry such a toye in their heads (and yet know not they
what) whereby they suppose themselves to pass all other men. Alas, is it not
known what they are? be they not terrigeni fratres? be they not of an
earthlye moulde? is not the trade over earthly that they lead? yea, and to
utter them further: touching manners, be they not intolerable? and concerning
religion, are not their errors in a manner palpable? they will have no man to
be like unto them, they think that in comparison of them, there is none
worthy to be looked upon, none meet to be hearkened unto: they adiudge their
own persons, their own dreams and fantasies to excel, surmount, and to pass
all. Who can away with such Pride? who can suffer such self will, such
disdain, such arrogancy? But to omit these: I shall crave of you (dear
friends) if for nothing else, yet for old familiarity, that you will read
over these few leaves, before you do infringe our amity, and that you will
read as friends, and then judge indifferently. And for my part this promise I
make, though we disagree in Religion, and that but for a time, until you
receive the grace that God offers you, the light which shines before you,
and the Gospel which is preached unto you, yet in friendship Orestes shall
find me Pylades, Damon shall try me to be Pythias, Theseus shall not miss
Perithous, Patroclus shall not want his Achilles, Nisus shall not lack
Eurialus, Lelius shall be assured of his friend Scipio, David shall try me to
be Ionathas. This seeing I speak from the heart, and faithfully, show your good
natures, perform the part of friends unfeignedly. And thus taking you al to be
my friends, whose friendshippes though I can not deserve, yet will J during
life desire, I bid you unfeignedly well all to fare. From London, the iiij. of
November.

FINIS.
A plain demonstration of the erring estate of the Roman Church.
LEWYS DVKE Aeneas Sylae. lib. 3. etc.
of Bauiere (Christian Reader) is for his constancy, and that not without good
cause, had ever sithence in memory. For being prisoner, and required to grant
some great matter, he utterly denying it: Albert then Marquis of Brandenburgh,
in whose hands he at that time was, threatened to deliver him over into the
hands of a Prince which was very cruel, and the Dukes most enemy. But the
valiant courage of so noble a man could therewith be nothing moved, in so much
that he thus answered: ask (says he) that thing Note.
at my hands now being thy prisoner, which thou should demand of me if I
were at liberty: else though my body be in thraldom, yet shall my mind
have still his freedom, it shall serve and obey me, and not thee. This is a
great and a right worthy example of much constancy, it was the saying of a
valiant heart, and the courage of a mind unconquered. Hereby we be admonished,
that we consent unto no unlawful thing, through fear, for living, for
liberty, or for life: but remembering the office of our bodies, what they are,
and whereunto they serve: that we keep our minds free from all dishonest
subjection, that we do things lawful with consent of conscience and
voluntarily, that we resist wrong, and falsehood with fortitude and constancy,
and that we yield unto the truth, not through force or friendship, but
willinglye. And what can An objection.
(will some say) this example make for your purpose, seeing that you now
write, otherwise than you have written? how may it defend you, which now say
otherwise than youhaue said? or how shall it excuse you, who now think
otherwise than you have thought? what constancy (will such say) is this? how
can your alteration so soon in mind, in judgment, be answered? you have
either (say they) adjudged amiss heretofore, or else you now do: so that
whether it be the one or the other, offended you have, you are to be blamed.
Alas, what arrogantie The answer.
were it, yea, what lewdenesse, either to affirm that we have at no time
trespassed, or not to acknowledge that we have offended, when the offense was
evident, evident, I say, unto others, although not (such is the blindness of
sinners) unto us? Is there any either of such impudency, or else of such
purity, that he will or may in such sort object? For be it by writing, by
some other deed, by words or thought, who is void Aug. lib. 20. de ciuitate
dei.
of offense? what mankind, what human nature (our Savior Christ only
excepted) is borne free from the bondage of sin? If we say that we have no
sin, and that we 1. John. 1.
have not done evil, the truth is not in us, and we deceive our selves.
Whereas, if we confess our sins, the Lord is just, he is faithful to
forgive them, he is ready to cleanse us from all iniquity. What then? shall
shame let us from knowledging our faults? shall foolish estimation hinder us
from confessing our sins? shall our friends, shall the world, shall the devil
persuade us from detecting our trespasses? GOD forbid. There is a shame, and
there is a disorder, which brings Ecclesi. 4.
sin: that is (as Augustine says) Aug.
when one is ashamed to renounce his wicked opinion, either least he should so
seem unconstant, or else appear, and that by his own confession, of a long
time to have erred. There is also a shame that brings Ecclesi. 4.
grace and advancement, as when one knowledgeth with repentance his
misdeedes, when he lamenteth and confesses that he has erred. For thereby
wins he Gods favor again, thereby he enters into estimation with all good
men and godly. Whether is it then a greater rebuke, a more Philip. 12.
shame, to confess our selves guilty with all men of sin, or else to
continue with the wicked, with the reprobate therein? Cuiusuis Cicero.
est hominis errare, nullius nisi insipientis, perseuerare in errore, it is the
property of all men (says Cicero) to err: but it is the property only of a
fool, to persevere in his error. Had not the prodigal child returned unto his
father, acknowledging and confessing his fault, full miserably in hunger and
filthiness, had he ended his life. O how often, and how earnestly do the
Scriptures erhort and persuade us to repentance! Let us look well upon our
own ways Jeremy. 3.
(says Jeremy) and remember our selves, and turn again unto the Lord. And
as for the loss of our estimation and friends, (which is the greatest block
that men stumble at) if we lose them for Christ his sake, and his Gospel, we
are promised the receite Marc. 10.
of an hundredth fold, we shall doubtless receive life everlasting. Concerning
constancy, is a man defending errors though stoutly, maintaining untruths
though earnestly, or suffering torments in the defense of falshode, though (as
they term it) patiently, to be accounted for one constant, or yet pacient?
Constancy is (says Aristotle) Eth. lib. 7.
in things which be good and laudable. Let none therefore adiudge them to be
constant, which either do lie in prison to maintain blyndenesse, or do
suffer death to defend wickedness. Else may you term the Arrians, the
Eutychians, the Marcionistes, Ebionites, and such like, to be men as constant,
pacient and virtuous as any other. For these of their own imprisonments do
seem to rejoice, of their punishments they are thought to be glad, of their
death they do triumph, and for the truth it is (say they) that they suffer.
What shall we therefore say of them, and not of them only, but of the like?
forsooth, Miranda est eorum duritia, neganda patientia, Lib. de patientia.
Their hardness (says Augustine) is to be maruailed at, but that they are
pacient is to be denied, that they are constant is not to be granted. If that
then, there is no constancy used or to be termed in blindness, in error, in
sin, but rather stiffnesse in opinion and obstinacy, which how dangerous a
disease it is, S. Augustine in Augustine.
plain wise does testify: For as constancy (says he) suffers not a man to
be depraved, so stubbornness suffers him not to be amended. If also it is no
inconstancy to embrace virtue, and to eschew vice, to leave the darkness,
and to lean unto the light, if it be no patience to suffer any punishment in
the defense of error, dreams and deceivable opinions, if to continue in
sin, to be covered still over with clouds, with mistes, and darkness in a
manner palpable, if to err, to be deceived, and to dote, is evil, if to be
sort for our misdeedes, and to call for grace, is a thing profitable for us,
commanded of God, and demanded by scriptures, if we and our forefathers, even
from our youth have sinned, and that until this day against the Lord, if (to
be brief) it was no reproach for S. Paul, of a Pharisey to become a follower
of Christ, of a learned lawyer at Jerusalem to become a learner of the
Gospel, of a doctor to become a disciple, of a persecutour to be persecuted:
why alas, why linger we to turn unto the Lord? why gadde we after gloses? why
follow we not the Gospel? Let us, of love unto all I say, let us at the
length now hear the voice of God, it is loving, merciful, and full of
comfort, by his holy Prophet he pronounces it: why will you die Ezechiel. 18
(says he) O ye house of Israel? I have no pleasure in the death of him that
dies, turn you therefore, and you shall live. Turn so shall there no sin
do you harm. Here notwithstanding our treason, we are offered free pardon,
for the times past God offreth forgiveness, our beginnings shall not be
thought upon, all our former faults are released, if now we amend, if our
ending be good. We stand a number in one case, to strive against our Prince is
not commendable, to contend against our Creator, against Christ is not
profitable. Fie on the world, fie on the devil, they, they would have us to
delight in this vain glory, of them comes all this obstinacy. Alas, what
avails us in Hieronym.
name to be accounted good, if in deed we be evil? away with our friends,
nay away with our foes, away with all such by whose means we delight in our
own ways. And shall we seek the praise of men (with a sorrowful heart I
speak it) to our own confusion, to hurt our brethren, to displease God?
Beware (says Christ) least Math. 6.
ye justify your selves before men to be praised of them. For else you lose
the reward at your father his hands. If in the defending of dreams, in
maintayning man's doctrine, and in shadowing the truth, we did so deal, as we
might seem in man's sight to deserve great praise, yet weying our own works
to be weak, seeing how fond it is that we defend, how hollow is the
ground, and how soon it may be shaken, what should we abuse learning any
longer? why seek we to defend with eloquence, with wit, with subtlety, the
suburbs of iniquity, the houses of harlots, the shoppes of trumperie, the
pallaice of vanity? it is no rebuke, no slander, to turn unto the Lord, it is
for our profit to get our fathers favor again, for in stead of Acornes, he
offers to feed us with most deintie dishes, in stead of cloutes and rags,
he has for us new clothes. I say again, let us not be ashamed, S. Paul
began evil, yet ended he well, of a persecutor, he became ye servant of God,
he professed, he embraced, he preached Christ, he died in the defense of the
faith. God grant that all we, renouncing foolish dreams and light legendes,
retracting fond assertions, and rightlye adiudging of men's doings, may so do.

Well, to the intent it may evidently appear, whether I am thus now moved
to write through fear, or by a free motion, whether I am persuaded thereunto
through the desire of gain, of friendship, of favor, or rather in hope of a
reward at Gods hands, to be received with others, for the knowledging and
setting forth (according unto my small talent) of the truth, I think it not
amiss here this much to protest: That were my judgment at hand, the place of
execution appointed, the manner of death determined, were I already condemned,
yea, were I warned to prepare my self, yet should fear make me grant no
further, than I would do of free mind, no torment should enforce me to write
against my faith, against the thing I undoubtedly believed. It is true that I
meaned before, as I wrote, I followed always my conscience, I hated flattery,
I loved to utter what I thought, and that freely, I followed as near as need
were my former example, I would not grant, nor did, to any thing being a
prisoner, whereunto I would not agree, or do not, and that willingly being at
liberty. Let no man therefore reprehende me in that I have written before in
one manner, and now in another, yea, though the one be contrary unto the
other. For therein (the matter being rightlye weyed) is no inconstancy, there
is no evil meaning in neither, a zeal there is in the one, although not
according to knowledge, and a zeal there is in the other, confirmed by
authorities, by conscience, by Scripture. Touching the offense in the one,
though I might remove the fault, and lay the same in others, yet to have
offended I knowledge, I confess, I grant. Neither yet ought any to object it
unto my reproach, the deed was not so heinous, as the repentance for the same
may be gracious. What says Cyprian herein? what says S. Paul? ignosci potest
Cyprian.
simpliciter erranti, sicut de seipso Paulus Apostolus 1. Tim. 1.
dicit: qui primus fui blasphemus, and persecutor, and iniuriosus, sed
misericordiam merui, quia ignorans seci: He that sins, not having an evil
meaning, may be the rather forgiven* ^s the Apostle S. Paul speaks of
himself: when before I was a blasphemer, a persecutour, and one that did wrong,
but I obtained mercy, because I did it through ignorance. No man therefore (that
I may use S. Augustines words) except he be rash, will find fault and
reprehend Aug. lib. retract*
me, because I rebuke and blame mine own faults. What? should I be so
arrogant, as to confess that I was never ignorant? or should I in well doing,
be ashamed to do that which Augustine and others have done. Let him (says he)
that Ibidem.
might not attain unto the chief and first point of wisdom, endeavor to
obtain though the second part of modesty, that having spoken some things to
be repented, he may be sorry, and knowledge that such things ought not to have
been said. S. Augustine was not ashamed so to do, and should I? if all the
Prophets, if all the Apostles, if all the Doctors have so done, were it not a
thing insolent, yea, a thing impudent for us so not to do? Let others esteem
their credit as they see cause, I will say what I think, by the means of
man I will never be smothered in ignorancie, I will freelye speak my
conscience, no terror, no threatenings, no death shall let me. Were I enclosed up
with Pantaleon, or shot into ye heart with Praxaspis son, yet dreams shall be
dreams, truth shall be truth, a spade shall be a spade, I can give it none
other name. I never labored for gain, I never looked for glory, what I did,
was done freely, it was and it is done of a good meaning, and voluntarily. For
mine own part, I bear evil will to none, I wish well to all, and that
faithfully, unfeignedly. Though I think otherwise than they do, if I think the
truth, and if good causes do move me thereunto, why should any blame me?
why should they rebuke him, which yields unto truth, and gives place to
reason, authorities, and holy scripture? But what was the cause and how came
to An objection*
pass (will some say) this sodeine conversion, objections I know, will be
devised, flowts will be framed, iestes, and toys (for idle walkers, idle
dreamers, there are enough) will be invented. The conversion, sir, is not so
sudden, An answer.
as of such, who say Mass in ye one day, and subscribe to the contrary, in the
other. And yet I speak it not to reprehend them, for S. Paul, I know, was
converted in a moment, Act. 9. c.
sodainelye going by the way to Damasco. Whether they be likewise converted in
deed, or no, between God, and them I leave it, I will be no judge. But what I
could hereof say, and what I know, for some causes I will omit. What made
me to alter my mind, and how it happened, you shall briefly hear. Hear me
then, I pray you, without parciallitie. Having always from my childhood
detested this way, which to do well, we must term the reformation, and
cleansing of Christianitye, from unprofitable cloddes, from weeds and briars,
wherewith the house of God was in a manner ouergrowne, having often hear in talk
(as to many can witness) resisted the same, having passed over the Seas, moved
with a vain zeal, to chunne it, and having at the length by translations, and
toys written against it, I returned privily (as occasion served me) into
England again of that mind to depart hence as soon, and as secretly as I
could. In the mean time I was aprehended, and so committed to prison. Being
then there, and looking for some extreme kind of dealing, which yet I so
little feared, as were the punishment never so hard, were it never so great, I
was contented, yea, very willing felt I my self to abide it. But in stead of
extremity, (it is best to confess the troth) I found much clemency, I found
in those, whom before I little regarded, great wisdom, good learning, much
gravity. Which thing, as I did at the first in a manner unwillingly (so rooted
was the disease) consider, so in time, how I know not, I began somewhat better
to like it. So that oftentimes weying the judgment of the learned men that
talked with me, to be short, waying all, and indifferentlye with my self, I
was diuerselye minded, a marvel it was, that one mind, in one body should
be so wavering, my thought was moved, my heart was in a manner amazed, it made
me to think upon the estate of Augustine, who forsaking the Manichees stood
Li. confess. 6.
at a stay, somewhat doubting which way to take. Here what should I do? I
desired meekelie that God would strength me in the true faith, that he would
vouchsafe of his great mercy to open the knowledge unto me of the right way.
And what followed? anon I was minded to examine better, and with good heed to
consider (which thing hitherunto I might not away with) the writings of such as
before, I mislyked, detested, abhorred. Me thought also that in reading of
man's works (the Scripture only excepted) men might by good reason, use the
gift that God gave them, their discretion, and their own judgment, specially,
in things dissonant from holy scripture. Yea, were he Augustine, Ambrose,
Hierome, or any other, were he of never so great antiquity, never so learned,
had he written never so great volumes, yet lawful I saw it was, that we might
say, as Papias the scholar of S. John Eccl. hist* lib. 3.
the Evangelist did say: Non multa dicentibus, sed vera tradentibus
auscultandum est: we must hearken, and obey those, which set forth the truth,
and not that say or write much. Whereunto S. Augustine himself did also in
these words, much further me: Neither Fortun. Ep.
should we so esteem the writings of men, although they be Catholic, and
good, as the Canonical scriptures, and as though it were not lawful for us,
(saving the reverence due unto such) to reprove some things in their writings,
and to refuse it, if we fortune to find that they have thought otherwise than
the truth does allow, and the same through the divine help, being better
understood by other, or by us. Again concerning the reading of books, or
talk to be had with the contrary side, for all is one: Ye could (says he)
at no time allow any Aug. exhort.
thing in us, your Bishops with whom we talked, would never peaceablye
reason with us, flying as it were to talk, with sinners. Who can away with
this pride? as though the Apostle Saint Paul talked not with sinners, yea, and
with men passing evil. Touching also the writing and decrees of any Bishop,
yea the Bishop of Rome is not here excepted, thus he says: We may argue, and
doubt Lib. 2. de vnico baptism.
of the writings of any bishop whosoever he be: but we may not so do of the
holy scripture. By any thing therefore hither-vnto done, (judge gentle reader
indifferently) may I for alteracion in mind, of rebuke and reproach, be
worthily thought guilty? I follow not mine own fantasy, I waver not with
the wind, the weight of reason, of authority does move me. So it follows
that when I was rid from that superstitious scrupulositie, wherein with
others I was before over fast bound, when I felt my self at liberty to read
with judgment, and to judge the things I read with the holy scriptures, the
very touchstone of truth, when I perceived it lawful to pervse over the doings
of either side: then felt I lo my mind much eased, and my conscience from
that lumpish burden, wherewith it was before much cumbred, now in a manner
released: Then (so can the right hand of the most highest change all) felt I
my study to Psalm. 77.
prosper, the black clouds to vanish away, and the light of the bright Sun
to shine and appear. I will not speak much of fond gloses, how unsavory
they began now to seem, how the one contraried the other, how few or none went
faithfullye to work. Of fables, of dreams, of spirits, and spiteful
devises, of iugling miracles, of feyned fires, of perverse prophecies, of
christianity, and godliness, most ungodly profaned, what should I say?
truly if we deal indifferently, having a regard unto the blyndnesse that
reigned, and unto the enormities wherewith the world was overwhelmed, we may
well say, non est veritas, non est misericordia, non est Osee.
scientia dei in terra, there is no truth, there is no mercy, there is none
that knows God upon earth. For was there any truth when toys, when stones,
when sticks, when earth, when ashes were adoured? where was mercy when
threatenings, when force, and when tyranny prevailed? who knew God, when Gods
word was obscured, and God himself scarcelye remembered, when blocks were
blessed, when mothes, and worms, when rust and canker was reverenced? Woe unto
him that says unto a Abac. 2.
piece of wood, arise: and unto a dumb stone, stand up: For what instruction
can such give? go we then unto the former time, let truth be said, what find
we there? superstition, Idolatry, murder, disobedience, pride, blindness,
deceit, envy, hate, whoredom, and a very heap of iniquity. This I speak,
not of heat, but out of histories. I report me also to the indifferent
consciences of good people, whether in the serving of God there was any abuse,
yea, whether any thing was almost in his right use. I report me to the whole
world, whether the church of Christ has been of a long time assaulted with
diverse and great offenses, or no: whether she has been, and that almost from
the beginning, besieged with avarice, hypocrisy, with lust, and intolerable
impiety, to ye loss, alas, of many a christen soul or no. Some there were
always, though in number few, and though their works were, through the
malicious policies of the adversaries, spoiled, burnt, and defaced, that spoke
and wrote against wickedness, against sin, against abuses, and against (if I
may use the term honestly) the beastlye life of the Clergy, all ought to
have so done, if any therefore now do it, should he be misliked? ought he to
be reprehendeded? is it reason that with Phocion he feel so much injury? The
Gospel was preached here in England, even when the foggie mist of ydolatrie
was thickest, which thing though it appear not so plain unto us, why should
we marvel? for were not the books by the adversaries spoiled? were not
translations forbidden? incurred not he the penalty of the greatest
excommunication, Constable. prou. Oxon.
who translated any book, chapter, or sentence of the holy scripture into
the english tongue? and yet for all their burnings, spoilings, forbiddings,
and excommunicating, we have testimonies enough, that the truth was here
preached, that there were preachers that spoke against the lewdness of the
Clergy, against the Pope, and other abuses, they treated de fide, de
sacramentis ecclesiae, Statut. Henrici. 4.
and de authoritate eiusdem, of the faith, of the sacraments of the Chuch, and
of the authority of the same. Yea, with such a zeal preached they then, that
though they were excommunicated, yet ceased they not, they travailed from one
Diocese unto another, until at length they were hindered and let (so were
the Apostles of Christ) by the extremity and rigor of man's laws. In Cyprian.
etc.
elder time also we must grant, there were learned fathers who bewailed much
the iniquity of their times, and from the heart lamented the estate of the
Priests, saying: that there was no good religion, no holiness, no faith, no
charity amongst them. This was a good while agone, it was above a thousand
years past, the time was then wicked, let us therefore well weigh what we
receive at their hands. But afterward what followed? forsooth iniquity
still getting the upper hand, sin ouerflowing the whole world, every one
followed his own way, (of the Prelacie I speak) fornication being defended,
vices maintained, no impiety in a manner rebuked, the Religion was nothing
regarded. Yea, Quidam sacerdotes Io. Peckham Cant. Archiep.
Baal potius quam domini saluatoris. etc. occidentes animas Christi sanguine
redemptas, euertentes ecclesiasticam disciplinam: there were of the priests (O
heaven! O earth!) the priests rather of Baal than of our savior. etc.
murdering the souls redeemed with the blood of Christ, abusing and
overthrowing the discipline of the Church. And Greg. Maur Aug.
what says Gregory of his time? humilium sumus doctores, superbiae duces, we
be the teachers of them that are humble, but we our selves are the ringleaders
of pride. Sacerdotes Ibidem.
nominamur, non sumus, we are called priests (says he) but we are not. Woe
Gregory was chosen. Anno domini* 591.
be therefore unto such priests, through whose perverse behavior, and vile
licencious life, the Gospel of Christ has been so hindered, the sense of holy
scripture so perverted. Culpa Gregor.
vestra hostium gladios exacuit, your heinous crime has sharpened the swords
of the adversaries, your lewdness has allured the horrible Turks to take
such enterprices, to invade Christendom, to conquer the land, to slay the
innocents, and to bring into most damnable subjection, our poor brethren,
sometimes the servants of Christ. What were your prayers? abominable. One of
your own Bishops so terms them. Quae execrationes potius dicerentur.
Archiep. Cant. Io. Peckham.
You name them the celebrations of Masses, but they ought rather (says he) to
be called cursings, a taking and abandoning of your selves to the devil. Do
they then amiss (al things, christian reader, considered) which labor to
purge Christendom from so deadlye an infection and poison? what? shall the
reprehenders of vices therefore be called vicious? shall such as seek with true
doctrine, with their own death to do good unto their country, be termed
spoilers of the faith, despisers of the church? shall good things be named
evil? is the world so evil? Peccatores procul dubio tacendo Gregor. Venantio.
etc.
pastor occidit, the shepehearde without doubt by holding his peace, murthereth
sinners. Would you then have the Preachers now, the bishops to hold their
peace, to see sin, to suffer it, to murder souls? the Sea they saw the
bishop of Rome his house, the very palace to pervert souls, and shall they
not once say against it? shall not we, shall not Bernarde bewraye De consid.
ad Eug.
the iniquity thereof? thy Court, thy palace (says he) receives in good
men, but (O lamentable thing!) it makes none: naughty persons (O horrible
house!) thrive there: and the good (O ungodly palace!) appayre and decay.
Does it not now by this appear, unto any heart not over parciall, how
profitable, how necessary it is, that we examine our ways, that we call for
grace, that we return unto ye Lord? I commit my credit into the hands of any
honest conscience, let him judge whether I am in fault because I fly from so
foul a profession, from so imperfect a teaching. But is this all? No, you
shall yet see the Gospel of Christ better defended, the City of God
stronglier fortified, you shall see Rome to be Rome, the usurped power easilye
put down, the smoke of Idolatry let out, and the ministers there of misrule,
of mischief, either by times to repent, or to sustain everlasting reproach. If
they henceforth prove good, their former ungodliness shall not hurt them, if
they wax sorry for their offenses, the truth will not shame them. I crave of
the^ that they will bear with me, though I blot out their paintinges, and
bewraye their bugges, their deceivable Lanternes, their Lemures, with all
their abuses: and that because the law of nature, of good men, and of God is
against them. Neither will I write so vehemently as the estate of the time
present would require. For the right hand of God is large, he may turn the
great Turk, and he may convert Cane of Cathay, he will (it is not to be
doubted) deliver our friends here out of blindness. So that it were better
to see some blames deeply buried, than either in any thing to discredit
those, whom God may yet call, or then to trouble christian ears with the
rehersall of some offenses, peradventure over heinous. I will therefore
reasonably, friendly, charitably, and with modesty proceed.

Let us then begin with the very bulwark Supremacy.
and strongest hold of the contrary side, which if we accordingly do batter
down, yield then they must, it is then for them to knowledge their
obstinacy, the rest they can in no wise defend. And what is their chiefest
fortress? the usurped title of a supreme head, their feyned Popedom, their
false primacie. Under this banner, a sinful man bears in hand, that he may
curse, bless, abandone the souls of men to the devil, under this title he
takes upon him to rule in hell, to reign in heaven, to command the whole
world, and to be king over all. Can man do any more to imitate Antichrist than
this? but (to omit such intolerable pride and blasphemy) shall we
indifferentlye examine whether the bishop of Rome (for this is the question)
has any authority by reason, by good authority, by scripture so to do? In
deed many he has well seen in the Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, that hold with
him: but how evil such are seen in that, which is the end of good studies,
that is in the knowledge of GOD, every good man must grant. Are they then
utterly ignorant? No. For they can make smoke where no fire is, in dark
places they can prove most light, in light they will prove darkness, in
deceit truth, in devilish men they can make good meaning, and in good men most
sin. They can prove the snow to be black, the fire to be cold, the black
cole to be white, the Wheat to be Rye, the Rye to be Rushes, such toys they
can do, declare they not themselves to be learned? If to defend harlottes,
who can do it fyner? if to maintain the slewes, who keeps a more stir? if
to favor fornication, they have no fellows. Good Orators (I warrant you) they
are. But in the defense of the Pope, what is their reasons? Marry (say they)
as in a City ought to be one chief Mayor or Magistrate, as in a ship ought
to be one Master, as over a household ought to be one husband, and as in a
Realm ought to be one ruler or Prince: so in the Church amongst Christians
ought to be (say they) one head Uicar, one Uicegerent or Regent under Christ.
Consider (gentle Reader) indifferently the strength of the example, wey it with
thine own conscience uprightly. Is it reason because a Prince, without the
assistance under God of others, as of his counsaylers and officers, can not
rule well and orderlye his realm, that therefore Christ, without the aid and
help of man, may not guide and rightly order his Church? shall Gods infinite
power be so pinched, and brought into that straightness, as to be compared
with the miserable estate and impotencie of man? shall the argument be good,
because man may not, therefore God can not? What should we speak of the
Solomon.
mutabilitie of man's heart, or else of the steadfastness of the Lords counsel?
Fie upon that man, and fie upon that spiritual man, which would challenge to
rule the whole earth, and that would abuse the name, authority and power of
GOD, to maintain such pride. Fie upon that tyrannical tryple crown, chair,
diadem, scepter, and the carrying of upon men's shoulders. Fie in deed (with
dolor of heart I speak) upon all such popish pomp and pompeous popery. If I
be earnest, bear with me, the cause requires it. What reason is it, as though
GOD were utterly absent, as though he could not be every where present, for a
sinful man to vsurp the maistrie, and such a supreme maistrie over all, over
Princes, Kings, and Emperors? but we shall see, even with our eyes this pride
soon to decay. For the 1. Pet. 4.
proud is resisted of GOD, and to the humble he grants his grace. He
puts Luc. 1.
down the mighty from their seats, and exalts them of low degree. Whosoever
Luc. 14.
exalts himself shall be brought low. The bishop of Rome exalts himself:
what then follows? therefore he must needs be brought low. And that he does
exalt himself, you shall see that most euidentlye proved. Christ would not
have neither his Apostles nor disciples to be called kings or Lords. For know
ye not (says he) that Marc. 10.
they which seem to bear rule among the Gentiles, do reign as Lords over
them, and they which be great among them, exercise authority over them: So
shall it not be among you. etc. If that then the bishop of Rome does contrary
unto this, contrary unto Christ, contrary unto the Apostles, does he not
exalt himself? he does not only challenge to be supreme in causes
Ecclesiastical, but also to have royalty over the Christen people. He will
be called Lord of Lords, King of Kings, yea, the Pope has (says his
defender) a kingly power over his subjects, even in temporal things. Where is
James and John the sons of Zebede? where is your mother? why come you not and
crave to sit the one on the right hand of the Pope, the other on the left, in
his glory? good God that the eyes of Christen people were once opened, that
they might equally discern, what it is for one and the self same man to be
called the servant (O hypocrisy!) of the servants of God, and contrary unto
that, to use a temporal power, a kinglye majesty over all, to have his
sword, his scepter, to have his guilt sturrops (fie) to put in his holy feet,
and in all defyance of humility, to have kings and Emperors to be his
footmen. What reason is this? Pride (says Ambrose) has caused angels to
become Ambrose*
devils. Pride (says all the world) has caused the Bishop of Rome to be
called Pope, and of a Pope to proceed further in all the degrees of
Antichrist. Let neither Cardinal, Council, nor Doctor say: who is like unto
the Pope? who is like unto the Apoc. 13.
beast? who is able to war with him? For as sure as God lives, Babylon that
great City must fall, the walls of Jerusalem will be raised up, falshoode
must fly, truth will overcome, darkness must down, the light begins to
shine, the devil maugre his head, must yield, God will have the field. Let us
therefore never abuse eloquence to defend pride, to maintain the Pope. For who
touches Pitch shall be filed Ecclesi. 13.
withal: and he that will communicate with the proud, shall cloth himself
with pride. Never felt our cuntriemen, never felt learned men greater reprofe,
than when by show of skill they have sought to defend shadows, to defend
dreams, and to defend the filthy abominable abuses of Rome. Oh it was not
without good cause, that the Christian Poet then thus spoke of Rome, of the
Prelacy, I say, under ye name of the City.

Si quid Roma dabit, nugas dabit, accipit aurum, Mantuan.
Verba dat, heu Romae nunc sola pecunia regnat. If we have any thing from
Rome, they be trifles. It receives our gold, and deceives us. Alas only money
now there reigns. And what is further said thereof? little praise I warraunt
you, and less it deserves.

Quo magis appropias, tanto magis omnia sordent. Ibidem.
The nearer you come to Rome the worse you will like it, the more you look on
it, the filthier it shall appear. What should I speak of their briberie,
ambicion, poisoning, fornication, and evil living? loathsome is the life if all
were disclosed of their chief pastor, the thing can not be denied, his deeds
be detestable. Shall we grant then by reason, shall we be so unreasonable,
that such a monster should be a master, and that over Gods anointed, over
Kings and Prou. 20. 1. Pet* 2. 1. Tim. 2. 1. Reg. 12.
Princes? how reverently does the scripture speak of Emperors and rulers? how
irreverently does the bishop of Rome abuse and abase them? and yet shall we
follow the Pope? Papam imitari debemus: such is the 24. q. 1. haec est fides.
etc and. 35. q. 9. veniam.
reason that they use. Gregory in reproving the pride of the Bishop of
Constantinople, uses this reason. There were (says he) of the Bishops of
Constantinople, some that were great heretics, therefore if the bishop there
should be called the universal Patriarch, the estate of Christ's Church
should decay. Here if this reason be good, we may frame the like, if it be
not, it is Gregory and not I that framed it. There were of the Bishops of
Rome, some which were great heretics and very lewd men, therefore if the
Bishop there should be the chief, then the estate of Christ his Church should
decay. This is the Popes own reason, let him see unto it. Ask of them what
Anastasius, Sisinnius, and John the twelfth of that name were. They were Popes
of Rome, the one was an heretic, the second was a wicked man, and the third
was a monster and a very Epicure. Liberius likewise was an horible heretic, an
Arrian, and yet B. of Rome. I report of them as I find it in the books
written by the Popes own friends. Thus for my part, touching reason, they
find me so reasonable, that I answer, and yet use their own reason.

But shall we now see what authority they have, for reason (we perceive)
they have none, and who the chiefest champions be that defend this primacie?
you may not think but that there are many of them, yet what they are, that is
to be considered. They be no Apostles, nor yet disciples of Christ, they be
the Popes of Rome themselves, their Cardinals, their Bishops, their Doctors,
their dearlings, their hirelings, they be those whose necks were under the
yoke, either thereunto allured through gifts, fair promises and flattery, or
forced through fear, or through overmuch simplicity blinded and seduced, who
so drew forth and vphelde the pompous chariot of iniquity. And that I see me
not to utter untruth, that the thing may appear, they were Stephanus, Julius,
Pelagius, Symmachus, with such like, all being bishops of the Sea of Rome. The
case in controversy is their own, they may not be their own judges, in
that their own law is against them. For I am sure (indifferent Reader) that
in a controversy between thee and an other, thou would not willingly be
tried by the defendant thine adversary. And could the Pope except he were his
own judge, maintain his primacie? No. And therefore being better advised,
they make this law, that the Bishop of Rome may judge all, but he may be
adjudged of none. And who made it? Innoce^tius, Antherius, Gelasius. And what
were they? Bishops of Rome. If therefore they provided for their own
preferment, could you blame them? Nay, you may in no wise blame them, though
they carry (these be Ex dictis Bonifaci^.
their own words) an innumerable sort of people with them by heaps into hell.
And why? because they do judge al, but Ibidem.
none may judge them. I use (Christen reader) no deceit, they be their own
words, wey the^ with indifferency, I ask no more, it shall do thee good so
to do. Doubtless it is both a pleasure, and also a great grief unto him that
has eyes and understanding, to see their laws, to behold their authorities:
a pleasure it is, for that he sees their fond iuglinges, being himself free
from their filthy bondage and trumperie: A great grief it is, to see men, and
those men which be our brethren, and are called Christians, to be so much given
to blindness, addicted to follye, and so further such subjects unto the
servitude of so intolerable a wickedness. Well consider we more of their
laws, and let us consider them indifferentlye. For at the first beginning of
their pontifical proud kingdom, they thought good to ordeine laws, that so
unto us at this time, their answer for lack of reason and scripture, might
yet be: Nos legem habemus. etc. We have a law* and by this law we defend our
doings and freedom, by this we rule, by this we reign. And what be their
laws? over vile, to abominable, I warrant you. They be these. The Pope be he
never so Ex decret.
evil, yet must you conjecture and guess him to be good. Though we know him
to be lewd, yet lo, we must guess that he is not so. O execrable blindness!
The Pope grau^teth Ibidem.
the authority of the sword, that is, of a Princely government. Is not this a
passing pride? The Pope is not only in Ibidem.
spiritual causes the chief, but also in temporal. O mighty ioly Monarch!
The Ibidem.
Pope has all laws (O hollow place, and not holy!) contained within his
breast. No man may hate him. Take heed of Ibidem.
that, you may not mislike him. He may dispense Ibidem.
in things contrary unto the Apostles. No marvel, for that is the right
property of Antichrist. All questions concerning Ibidem.
faith, he must determine. And must he be the very touchstone? shall holy
scripture be so excluded? His mind is to be Ibidem.
preferred before all the bishops. In deed that is the next way to reign. Of
manslaughter, Ibidem.
or adultery, he may in no wise be accused. No, though he be never such a
whoremonger, though he murder never so many. Yea, and that we should go into
hell in deed, there to bear him company, their law is, that we must follow
him, we must kill, if he kill, we must do as he does. Et sperent te
tartararegem? Must we serve him in hell? He may not look for Rhadamanthus
place, he is no such Executor of justice. Let him take heed, that he come not
under Tisiphones hands. With the rest of their laws, what should I trouble
thee? they are, if it may be, than these, a great deal worse. I will not much
scan upon their impiety, there is no person that can read (the thing
vprightlye considered) but will, and may regard them accordingly. Only thus
much I say, if pride, if covetousness, if desire alone, and only to reign,
has been the ground, and was the very cause, why such lewd laws were made,
if Satan was the subtle secretary therein, why trouble we our selves? why
torment we our consciences? why care we ought for them? we see his authority,
let his pardons alone, have not to do with his dispensations. Papa quandoque
nimium papaliter dispensat: The Pope (thus Barthol. Brixiensis.
says his own Lawyer) does sometimes too popishly dispense. What authorities
the bishop of Rome has, specially to maintain his estate you have heard: Now
what authorities be against him, let his friends be contented to hear. I will
be brief, I will not be partial. To begin I need not with the primitive
estate of Christ his Church, wherein we can find no such primacie, no
superiority amongst the Apostles, who then all having received the holy ghost
alike did preach the Gospel, and so faithfully did set forth the truth,
without pride, without chalence of the highest room, or once mention of any
supreme head to be had or exercised among them. Let the Popes own authorities
prevail, let his evidences be seen, are not the words thereof these?
Although Peter, James, and John were preferred by Clomens.
our Savior in a manner above the rest, yet claymed not they any glory, or
title of primacie: and shall then the Pope claim that, which Peter neither
would nor could not? In the time first of Cyprian we read, that certain lewd
Priests being worthily condemned by the Bishops of Aphrica, ran to Rome, that
by the Bishop there, they might have the matter farther discussed. Ciprian
finds great fault with the hearing of them, and writes thereof unto Lucius
then bishop of Rome, saying that unto every bishop a portion of Christ's flock
is committed, who shall render accordingly an account for the same, and that
therefore these men ought to be tried, as in deed they were in Aphrica, and
that by and under their own bishops: he writes likewise at large concerning
the same, and much reprehending it unto Cornelius. Now what authority, or what
ground of supremacy, a few disobedient and convict Priests could purchase
unto the Sea of Rome, judging uprightly, I see not. But if they be either s
ignorant, or s arrogant, as to frame upon these runnagates, their right, and
usurped title, let them then, and with good indifferency consider, how
Dioscorus their Pope of Rome being excommunicated, and yet touching no matter
of faith, did appeal (for so they themselves name him) unto the Pope, the
Patriarch of Constantinople. Here we find another Pope, and unto whom their
Pope of Rome has appealed. Touching the time of Constantine, it was he, and
not Siluester, it was the Emperor, and not the bishop of Rome, that made laws
in defense of the Christians, it was the Emperor that condemned the writings of
Arrius, it was he that called from banishment Porphyrius, and it was only he
that then made an edict against heretics. But if they will have it that
Constantine did ordeine ye bishop of Rome to be the chief, then let them go
forward in their history, wherein they shall find, how at that time this
voice was heard, hodie venenum ecclesiae est immissum, now does poison enter
into the Church. And that this voice was true, you shall well prove, if you
examine throughlye the whole doings of Siluesters successors. For (O Lord)
what cruelty was amongst them! what ambition! what symonie! what disobedience!
what heresy was amongst them! Come we then unto the Emperor Iustinianus his
time. For concerning Marcellus and Anacletus, if the decrees in their names set
forth, be theirs, (as in deed they seem not to be) they were bishops of Rome,
and therefore is their authority contrary unto the scripture, in aduauncing
themselves, nothing worthy of any reasonable man, or of any indifferent
Christian to be esteemen. And before we speak of Iustinianus, you must
understand that there were in his time, and under him, among others, five
especial Cities, that is Rome in Italy, Constantinople in Thrace, Alexandria
in Aegipt, Antioch in Siria, and Jerusalem in Iudaea* Of these five, there
were five chief fathers or Patriarchs, every one having a (...) and a
several authority in causes spiritual, such I mean, as Archbishops should
have, every one within his own and proper Province. Neither did any one
Patriarch either intermedle with the jurisdiction of the other, or claim a
Primacie the one above the other. They were several Cities, several
Provinces, several Patriarchs, several in authority, and equal in dignity.
And that this is most true, the words of Justinian himself shall testify,
who having next under Christ, a kind of supreme authority, made certain
Ecclesiastical laws to govern and rule them all. So that some laws being
made concerning the Clergy, for the due execution of the same, he sends his
especial commandment unto the said five Patriarchs in these words: Iubemus
igitur beatissimos Archiepiscopos, and patriarchas, Imperator, Petro glorios
prep.
hoc est, senioris Romae, and Constantinopoleos, and Alexandrinae, and
Theopoleos, and Hierosolymoru^. etc. we will therefore that the most holy
archbishops and Patriarchs, that is to say of old Rome, Constantinople,
Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem etc. He writes not to one alone, least that
one should challenge a superiority. Where was then therefore of Rome the
supremacy? certain bisshops he had under him, so had the rest, this was all
his authority. Justinian his style unto the bishop of Rome was this: Ioanni
Justin. Ioanni viro. etc.
viro beatissimo, ac sanc^tissimo Archiepiscopo, and Patriarchae veteris Romae:
To John the most blessed man, and most holy Archbishop and Patriarch of old
Rome. And here least any may gather any thing by these words, most blessed and
most holy, you shall hear in what order he writes unto the Bishop of
Constantinople, weygh both the styles, and you shall see Constantinople to have
the greater reverence, his words unto him be these: To the most holy
Epiphanius, and most blessed Archbishop of this holy royal City, and
universal Patriarch. Yea, Justinian in plain words says, that Constantinople
(Est sanctissimamaior ecclesia) Justin. An^ thenio sanctiss. etc.
is the most holy and worthier Church. Justinian, no man can well deny it, was
then under Christ in earth (if they will term it so) the supreme head, he
then, and none other made laws, and the same as well spiritual as temporal.
Unto the Clergy these were his words: we command: we will not suffer: we
ordeine: we streightlye prohibit: we appoint: we will: we bid: These be
words of greater authority than the bishop of Rome ought to use, they be
words by authority commanding him. And that the Pope ought not to use them,
Gregory in manifest words bears Gregorius Eulogio episcopo Alexandrino
witness: for writing unto the Bishop of Alexandria, thus says he: Which word
of bidding I would to be far from my hearing, for I know who I am, and who
you are. In calling, you are my brethren, in manners, my fathers: therefore I
badde not, but endeavored to show what things seemed profitable. Princes may
use these words bidding. etc. in them they be tolerable, and therefore the same
Gregory writing Idem Mauritio Augusto.
unto the Emperor, says: Quantum ad me attinet, serenissimis iussionibus
obedientiam praebeo, In that which appertains unto me, I yield, and render
due obedience unto your majesty's most roial biddings and commandments. I
would to God, in heart I wish it, that as the Pope did here unto the Emperor,
so al we would do unto our most gracious sovereign and most royal Princess
the Queens Majesty, and so unto her successors. You see that there is no
cause but we should do it, there is no reason, no authority to the
contrary. Let any indifferent man read the Chronicles, yea let him read
their own writings, and it shall be evident, that the Bishops of Rome had not
the title of any such Primacie, until at length through pride and ambicion,
contrary unto all custom and good order, they usurped that authority.
Symmachus and Laurentius, being both at one time chosen Bishops of Rome
(tantaest discordia fratrum) after much strife and controversy, were feign to
go unto Rauenna, there to abide the judgment, (as in deed they did) of
Theodoricus the king. Pelagius the second, how was he chosen? absque decreto
Principis, contra consuctudinem, Nauclerus.
without the decree of the Prince against all custom. Here they see that it
was contrary unto all former example, that the bishop of Rome should be
chosen against the decree and will of the Prince. Bonifacius the third did
will, that the election of the B. of Rome should consist and be determined by
the judgment of the Prince, of the Clergy, and of the Laity, and that for
good causes. But Phocas (they say, mark well when Anno domini. 604.
their kingdom began) commanded at the request of the B. of Rome, that all
Churches should be obedient unto ye Romain church. And yet was the authority
of ye bishop notwithstanding so small, yt he should be suffered to do nothing
without ye commandment of ye Emperor. For Bonifacius the fourth was glad to
ask leave of Phocas that he might transpose the temple Pantheon, to be the
Church of our Lady, and of all Saints. Bonifacius the fifth, could not
without the license of Heraclius the Emperor, not so much as be suffered to
take the tiles from Romulus temple, to cover S. Peter his Church. Neither was
this in the time when the Church was persecuted, it was six hundredth and
twenty years after Christ, it was when all Christendom (as they say) obeyed
the Bishop of Rome. But what obedience was given him, by his obedience unto the
Emperor, it may appear. For if it were not lawful for him without ye
Emperors leave, to meddle with the tiles or temporal goods of one Church, then
it was less lawful for him to have to do, as he now claymeth with ye whole
temporalities of all the Churches in Christendom. If he might not do so little
a thing without the consent of the Emperor, much less might he do greater
things, much less lawful it was for him to depose Christian Princes, and to
tread under his feet Kings and Emperors. Let here indifferency take place, if
we be wise, we will wey these things without partiality. Neither may I here
omit Paschalis which was chosen to the Bishopric of Rome in the year of our
Lord. 817. Who for that he was not elected by the authority of the Emperor,
was feign to send unto Lewys named for his clemency Pius, then being
Emperor, to declare in whom the fault was, and that it was long of the people
and the Clergy that he was so elected, adding further that he was chosen
against his will. With this satisfaction Lewys was pleased, and therevppon he
wrote unto the people and Clergy that they should keep the institutions and
decrees of their ancestors, and that they should not offend the imperial
Majesty again. This is so manifest that what should we need any more? and
yet seeing I am entered into the historye, I will allege what Gregory the
fourth did, in acknowledging his duty unto the Emperor. He being chose bishop
of Rome, by the consent of the people and the Clergy, would in no wise take
upon him that digninitie, until the said Lewys had confirmed his election.
Has then the Emperor nothing to do with the chosing of the Bishop of Rome?
who is so fond as to defend such absurdity? is not this plain? is not this
true? is not this in their own history? was not Benedictus the third,
confirmed Bishop by Lewys the second? was not Nicholas the first, confirmed by
the same Emperor? and that it should be so, was it not the order always, the
law, and the custom? Concerning their Counsels, in speaking of one, we shall
easily bewray the weakness of the others, and that if specially we touch any
of their chief. Their Council holden at Chalcedon in Asia, they do in
althings so reverence, receive, and so believe, as they do the four holy
Gospels of our Savior Christ. If then we can prove errors therein, of
necessity must they acknowledge their Counsel to be erroneous, and themselves
to be blasphemous. Let them now take heed, for if this go forward, their
craking of Counsels, their authority of fathers, shall henceforth not help
them a farthing. But how shall we prove it? Even by the Bishop of Rome himself,
I think his friends will be glad of such a judge. If he proceed against them,
let them blame none but him, whose blames they seek to defend. To be brief,
thus shall we prove it:

All such as have offered unto any man a profane name, a name of rashenesse,
of pride, and of blasphemy, were erroneous and wicked.

But the Counsel holden at Chalcedon has offered unto the Bishop of Rome a
profane name, a name of rashness, of pride, and of blasphemy.

Therefore the Counsel holden at Chalcedon was erroneous and wicked.

Here the Proposition at large is undoubtedly true, the less is proved out of
Gregory Bishop of Rome, in his Epistles unto Eulogius Bishop of Alexandria,
unto John Bishop of Constantinople, and unto Anastasius Bishop of Antioch. The
Conclusion can in no wise be denied. Note now then in what estate, in what
strength is their Evangelical Counsel, understand how soon they are
disproued, and how easy it is to detect their pride, their usurpation, their
blasphemies, and ambicion. I see a great deal more, which I might have said,
touching reason and authority, but to any reasonable man, to any not drowned
in the very pit of darkness, this much may suffice. Wherefore, forget not
that Gregory calls this name of a supreme head, of a generality, of an
universal Patriarch, of a supreme Bishop (for all is one) the name of pride,
of rashness, of blasphemy, an ungodly, a wicked and a profane name, and that
he further says: None of my predecessors, Greg. Eulogio and Anastasio.
no Bishop of Rome, has at any time agreed to use so ungodly a title. Let not
such also forget, who take upon them so rashly, and so unlearnedly to maintain
the bishop of Rome, what Gregory herein further says, his words be these,
for that they are manifest, I may not omit them. Who is therefore (says he)
in so corrupt, and Greg. Ioanni episcopo Constanti.
naughty a name, set, except he, before us to be followed, which despising the
legions of angels, appointed with him in equal fellowship, has leapte out
into the highest point of singularity, to the intent he might obey none, but
rule all? who also said: I will clyme up into heaven, Esaias. 14.
and make my seat above the stars of the sky, I will sit upon the glorious
mount toward the North, I will clyme up above the Clouds, and will be like
the most highest. Let those which are in blindness, if they have eyes, see, if
they have ears, let them hear, if they have reason, let them judge, if they
have learning, let them discuss, whether these words be so plain, as the
Pope in no wise, except he renounce his pardones and pride, can avoid them.
Well, shall we have a view of the scriptures? shall we see what in them ye bishop
of Rome has, to maintain his papacy? One thing (Christen Reader) before I
begin, I dare faithfully promise thee, that thou shall find throughout ye
whole testament, neither Papa, Papatus, Primas, nor Primatus, to be granted
unto any of the Apostles of Christ, then much less unto the Bishop of Rome.
Marry we must confess, and we will do it freely, that there was a foolish
contention amongst the Apostles, even in Christ his Luc. 2^.
time, before he suffered, which of them should Marc. 10. Math. 20.
be the greater. But our Savior did much reprehende them therefore as we
read at large thereof in the Scriptures, where he says that amongst the
Princes of the Gentiles such worldly power, such dominion is used: Non ita erit
inter vos, it shall not be so amongst you. And yet notwithstanding all this,
the Bishop of Rome will needs have Peter (God knows little for Peter's sake)
to have the preheminencie, the maioritie, the superiority over all the rest.
Christ allows it not, the Pope will, belike it shall be as he will. That I
speak no worse of him, a wilful part he plays thus in abusing holy
Scripture, in perverting the sense, by his insensible reasons, to serve his
turn and desire. But deal he as he list, yet dare I lay, that he shall be
brought down Esaias. 14.
to the depth of hell. And as for his arrogant and al ignorant arguments, they
shall be here laid out, their weakness shall be disclosed to their shame
that still will defend him, and to their praise that in time forsake him. I
crave of thee (good Reader) in his name, before whom we al must be judged, yt
thou will for thine own sake, see unto these arguments, consider their
absurdities, and wey them with indifferency. Their first fond argument is
this: Christ said, thou Math. 16. Behold how this place is abused.
art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church. Therefore the Bishop
of Rome is the supreme head. O Lord what a wise reason is this / where was
Logique, and that I speak not of the rest, where was common sense when this
was framed? upon what will he build his Church? shake off blindness,
confess the truth, super hanc petram, Ambrose.
id est, super hanc fidem, upon this rock, that is to say, upon this faith.
Upon him which rightly confesses that Christ is the son of the living God,
shall the Church be builded. And did none ever confess that but Peter? yes,
all the rest of the Apostles, Judas I scariotes excepted. Therefore upon them
all, upon any, whosoever that confesses Christ to be the son of ye living
God, is the Church builded. For what is the building of Christ his Church? is
it any thing else, than the increase of faithful people, confessing and
acknowledging the faith of Christ? what dream they than, upon Tues Petrus, and
super hanc petram? perceive they not how that place of scripture is most
plain? or is it unto them that the holy ghost, by the Prophet Esaias does thus
speak? you shall Esaias. 6.
hear, but you shall not understand, you shall see, and yet not perceive. Oh,
repent, Marc. 1.
and believe the Gospel. For this argument they themselves see, does neither
prove in Peter any superiority, nor yet that their Pope ought to have any
primacie. Proceed we then to their other arguments. Christ said unto Peter,
feed my lambs, Joan. 21. Note how this place is perverted.
feed my sheep, feed my sheep: therefore Peter is the head of the
Apostles. I ween this be to headie an argument, in the judgment of any
reasonable man, to be granted. Of Logique I will no more speak, for as all
men may see, they either utterly lack it, or else they want good matter
therein to utter it, or both. Shall it follow, because Christ bade Peter feed
his sheep, that therefore he is the head of the Apostles? what is it to feed
Christ his sheep? is it any thing else than to preach the Gospel, and so to
instruct men in the faith? said he not then as much unto the rest? hos numero.
12. emisit Jesus, Christ Math. 10.
sent forth every of the twelve to preach, ad oues perditas, to call home the
strayed sheep, to feed them. He gave no one jot of authority unto Peter,
which he gave not unto all the rest, he sent them all to preach the Gospel,
to feed his sheep. But why would the Bishop of Rome have Peter, so plainly
against the scriptures to be the principal or chief among the Apostles? latet
anguis in herba, there is a pad in the straw: it is not be ye assured, to
further Peter, it is nothing for Peter's sake: it is to the intent that he
himself (O proud man!) might challenge a superiority over all. This is the
cause that these blind arguments came forth, that the scriptures be so
wrested, abused, and belyed. Again, they thus reason. Christ says unto Math.
17. Wey how this place is wrested.
Peter, thou shall find in the fish his mouth a piece of coin of four
drammes, pay that for me and thee: therefore Peter has a primacie over all
the Apostles. A perfect argument I warraunt you, if it be throughlye weyed:
there was never such absurd toys, never such boyish brawling, I dare say,
devised. Does, I pray you, Christ, because he then paid tribute, challenge
unto himself, therefore any power, did not as many as were at Capernaum pay
the tribute of two drammes? did any one of them thereby claim an authority?
how shall Peter then hereby have any superiority? is it because Christ paid
for him two grotes? good God, a great many, yea all, (they must needs grant)
paid at Capernaum, for their servants the like tribute, and yet did they not
therefore attribute unto their men any chief dignity. The truth is mighty,
and the Them. ex orat. de fall. legate.
contrary is weak: the truth hereof is, Peter had never a penny, and
therefore Christ with that one coin, least he should be an offense unto them,
paid for him. This is the right sense, there is no more in it to seek. What
can be plainer than this? what can be more perverse, than to shadow with lies,
with lewdness so manifest a truth? But O the great strength of verity, which
against Cicer: pro M. Caelio.
the deuilish craft and subtilty of men, and against all the false guiles of
any whosoever, of her own force does defend her self! an other of their
arguments is this. Christ said unto Peter, Simon, Simon behold Luc. 22. Se
how this place is misvsed.
Satan has desired to sifte you, as it were Wheat: but I have prayed for
thee, that thy faith fail not: therefore Peter has a maioritie over all the
Apostles, and is their superior. Suppose here (Christen reader) what these men
would do, if others framed against them such foolish and self will arguments.
Never say that they are learned, except they have some better learning. But I
maruayle not so much at their blindness, I have been in it, I know thereof the
effects. If I wondered at any thing, it should be at this, that there are
amongst so many men, not so much as one eye. Neither speak I of corporal
eyes, but of those rather which Angels have, the eyes of understanding, the
eyes wherewith God is seen, wherewith his holy word is understood. Now
touching this place of Scripture, whereas Christ said unto Peter, that Satan
desired to sift them, as it were Wheat, the right meaning (mark well
indifferent Reader) thereof is, that our Savior Christ perceiving the time of
his passion to approach, and understanding the frailty, temptation and fear
that his Apostles should then be in, he said: all you shall be offended
through Marc. 14.
me this night, for it is written: I will smite the shepherde, and the sheep
shall be scattered* See here how plainly the Evangelist S. Mark sets forth
that place of S. Luke. The shepehearde is Christ, the sheep are the Apostles,
at his taking they scattered: relicto illo, omnes fugerunt, they left Ibidem.
him in the hands of his adversaries, and fled away. This is it that Satan
desired to sift the^. What follows? but I have prayed Luc. 22.
for thee (unto Peter he says) that thy faith fail not. And what gather we
of these words: forsooth, that Christ seeing, considering, yea, uttering the
estate to come of Peter, that is, how in that day he should deny him thrice,
and that before the Cock crewe, he thought it necessary also, as needful it
was, that Simon by name should receive some words of comfort, that he should
understand, though through fear he denied him, that yet his faith should not
so fail, but that in heart still he would acknowledge him to be the son of
the living God, and though that through frayltie he did fall, yet should he
through due repentance be raised up again, and so should not his faith fail.
There follows also in the same place: and when thou art converted, make more
Ibidem.
constant thy brethren. That is, after thou have denied me, after thou have
bitterly wept and repented, call then together thy brethren, call those that
are fled, confirm them, tell them that you all have done evil, will them now
with thee to repent and to be sorry. Such is the sense of that text, it
sounds (you see) in no wise to any superiority. And touching the authority
of binding and losing, as it was given unto Peter, so was it unto all the rest,
and that without any exception. For our Savior speaking unto them al (as S.
John witnesses) says thus: Joan.
whose sins soever ye remit, they are remitted unto them, and whose sins
so ever ye retain, they are retained. Saint Matthew records the same, his
words be plain, the sense is evident, the meaning is manifest, what would
you more? S. Paul himself (a thing to be marked) being accused before.
Festus, there and then appealed not unto Peter, but unto Caesar, showing
thereby unto us, that in causes, accusations and controversies, it is not unto
the Pope, but unto the Prince that we ought to appeal. Wherefore these things
with an upright judgment, with an honest conscience considered, how, by what
means, shall the Popes primacie be defended? the foundation thereof is pride,
the fruit is poison, it can not be praised. Reason is wholye against it, good
authorities do earnestly withstand it, and holy scripture does altogether
deny it. If good reason therefore may take place, if right authorities can
prevail, if sacred Scripture shall overcome, who is he now, where is any that
will maintain, defend, uphold, or assist either the Pope, or his feyned,
painted, hollow Popedom? I will therefore conclude, yea, the kings of the earth
(as says the Prophet Esaias) do one after another conclude and say: How
happens Esaias. 14.
it, that the oppressor leaves off? is the golden tribute come to an end? art
thou wounded also, as we? art thou become like unto us? thy pomp and thy
pride is gone down to hell. Mothes shall be laid under thee, and worms shall
be thy covering. The Cockatrice which came out of the Serpents root, we see
now rooted out, God grant that it never take root, so ragingly to rebel
against heaven again.

Here seeing then that the chiefest bulwark of unbelief is battered down,
seeing the gate of Babylon is broken, seeing that the very seat of Lucifer is
defaced, seeing his proud palace is overthrown, we may briefly speak of
the branches, which, said we nothing, the root being destroyed, would else of
themselves in very short time fail, die, wither, and decay. For if the Pope
be put down, how can dreaming Purgatory stand? how can his Bulls live? how
can his Pedlars, and his Pardons prevail? of these things, and of such others,
I mean as briefly, so in plain wise, and indifferently to speak. Yet first I
see it needful, that we answer unto certain objections now bellowing in
the throtes of the adversaries, that so their vain darts and foolish reasons
thoroughly weied, they acknowledging their disease, may with a more moderation
of mind with us consider, what things they be, whence they came, and whereunto
they tend, whereof we have to treat. Shall we An objection.
(say they) mislike the faith which our fathers professed when we were borne?
if the common people which know not the law, and are accursed, do follow
this new doc. Joan. 7.
trine, shall we be also seduced? does any of ye chief Rulers, of the Lords,
of the Lawyers, or of the learned believe it? Oh, sicut patres An answer.
Acts. 7.
vestri it a and vos? as your fathers the Pharisees have objected, will you also
object? if S. Paul had still followed the Pharisaicall law, which his father
embraced, and wherein he was borne, he had not been worthy to have the name of
an Apostle of Christ: if Peter, if Barnabas, if the rest had not forsaken the
rites and laws then used when they were borne, and which their forefathers
held and kept, they had never been accounted the Disciples and followers of
Jesus. Touching the common people, you know how the Pharisees foolishlye
objected by the same words, the self same thing against our savior. And as
you say: these Protestants be mad, they have no learning, so said they: turba
haec non nouit legem, execrabiles sunt, Joan. 7.
these foolish people know not the law, they are accursed. But let the
Pharisees, let their followers speak what them list, we must say: nunquam
sic loquutus est homo sicut hic homo, there is no preaching like unto the
Gospel, there was never man that set forth such doctrine, there is none that
may be compared unto this. S. Augustine before his conversion understanding
that the poor Christians did prevail and now somewhat better liking their
doctrine, says: Quid patimur? what suffer we? surgunt indocti, and rapiunt
coelum, and nos cum nostris scientijs dimergimur in profundum, the unlearned
do rise up, and they get heaven: but we with all our knowledgesse are drowned
in darkness. Let none therefore allege that we are unlearned, for were we
so, indocti rapiunt coelum, these unlearned, these foolish protestants do get
heaven. It is they which by persecution be increased, and by suffering of fire,
water, and sword are so multiplied, that they may well say: magna est veritas,
and praeualet, mighty is the truth, and she overcomes. And concerning the
chief rulers (right great praise be therefore unto God.) They were not of a
long time so desirous to hear the truth, nor so willinglye to embrace it as
now. If some be yet clogged, if their eyes be not opened, what marvel? When
the Prophet Jeremy perceived that the people would not repent, what said he?
for sit an pauperes sunt, peradventure Ieremi. 5.
they are foolish and simple, they understand not the Lords way: ibo igitur ad
optimates, I will go therefore unto their heads, and rulers, unto the chief,
and ecce magis hi simul confregerunt iugum, ruperunt vincula, but lo, these in
like manner have rather broken the yoke, and burst the bands in sunder, these
are worse than ye other. How say you now? what speak you of the chief and
Rulers? as for the learned, I will confess the truth, there are in the
ministry men very simple and of small understanding, I know of the^ a
number, I will not deny it, the thing may in time be remedied: but to speak
indifferentlye, if we examine the ministry with the former prelacy, they are
as learned now, yea, better learned than ever they were. For in times past,
what say you unto Priests, what say you unto Bishops that could not speak
any true Latin? Let none think that I slander them, they were such, and
therefore to excuse themselves, thus they say: If the Bishops or Preistes do
speak amiss, Did. 38. etc
through ignorance in Grammar, they may not be therefore despised of
scholars (no marry) because the faults are rather to be aduoyded in manners,
than in words: A proper matter, and an arche argument be ye assured. The
faults in a man's life are to be rather aduoyded, therefore such Bishops or
Priests as can not speak true Latin, are not to be dispraised. I pray thee
of fellowship, christen reader, find thou herewith any fault? if a poor
Minister had made any such, should he not have been flowted? is this their
learning? O learned fathers! Fie upon such an ignorant time, it was to dark,
it was intolerable. Non est deponendus aliquis propter imperitiam, X. q. 1.
placuit.
no spiritual man (say they) should be deprived for ignorancie. Why speak they
then of the learned, they themselves being not only ignorant, but also the
defenders of ignorancie? what talk they of learning? the effect of their whole
glosaicall study is this: Behold the deceitful pen of the Ierem. 8.
Scribes has set forth lies. What learning, what wisdom then can be amongst
the^? An other objection is this: we see (say An objection.
they) the iniquitye of the time, this doctrine cannot be good, there is such
ungodliness every where. In deed we confess that ye world The answer. Isidor.
is naught, yea, and that we are naught, we neither will nor may justify our
selves, sile^tio culpa crescit, we hide not our faults, we confess the^ unto
God, of him we crave mercy. And what is ye cause of this mischief? let us be
indifferent, let us tell troth. Satan forsooth of a long time having the world
under his claws, was quiet, without care, he was negligent. Then lo, though
most horrible vices reigned, yet had they either the title of virtues, or else
had the people no eyes to discern them, so that Satan was animi securi homo,
one that feared nothing, he needed not to be busy, a better trade than he had,
could he never have. For Superstition had put on the name of Religion,
haughtiness was termed holiness, tyranny was called a zeal unto justice,
whoredom was named chastity, and (as Gregory says) vitia virtutes se esse
mentiuntur, vile vices reported themselves to be virtues, such was the
wretchedness (O misery /) of the time. But in these days Satan being pinched,
men's eyes opened, darkness removed, vices defected, and the devil in a manner
naked, how on every side besturreth he himself? he blows abroad his poison,
he scatters every where his news, he calls unto him his mates, it
stands him upon, he makes all the troubles that may be. And what of all
this? is it a thing strange? or is not a thing always seen, that when the
Gospel is preached, then Satan is most moved. For the devil Chrysostom.
hearing that the son of god descended into this world, hearing the faith of
Christ preached, he made great haste against him to shut up men's hearts in sin
and infidelity, thinking that he could destroy as much, as Christ was able
to save. For example thereof, what should I speak of the persecution in the
primative Church? it shall suffice, if I set before you but a piece of the
wickedness, and of the lamentable estate of ye Roman Empire beginning anon
after Marcus. Commodus the Emperor (you Herodian. Anno domini. 194.
know) caused most cruelly, all his good fathers friends to be slain, he lived
in most detestable whoredom, and murder, he him self was in the end, after
other great dangers, poisoned, and strangled. Next him succeeded Pertinax a
very good man, yet was he slain and murdered of his own soldiers. What
should I speak only of murder: what wickedness reigned not? These cut
throat soldiers, after the death of Pertinax sold the Empire unto a covetous
Carle, one Iulianus. But what came thereof? the whole estate of ye Empire was
troubled, three at one time claymed the authority, Iulianus, Niger, and
Seuerus. Again of the death of Antoninus, and of Iulia his mother, what should
I say? go through the whole history, and you shall find almost nothing but
mere impiety. And yet at this time the Gospel was preached, we may not say
that the doctrine was not therefore good, because the time over flowed with
iniquity. Consider this, Christen Reader, wey it with thine own conscience,
and then An objection.
judge uprightly. They object also, that ye life of the Ministers is naught,
that they be vicious, lewd, and I know not what. Their lewdenesse I will not
defend, if they be evil, The answer.
God amend them. I know hereof, more tha^ for some causes I will yet write, I
know there be within ye Ministry, a number of the Popes friends in
Protestants skins, I know their trades, I know them. If in the Church now
there be some lewd men, I marvel not. So was amongst and of the twelve a
Judas, there was one naughty person amongst eight within the ark of Noah, in
the house of Abraham, in the house of I saac, of Jacob, of David, there were
offenders, and men altogether unfaithful, in the heaven it self many of the
Angels were faulty. What then though some, yea, even of the Preachers be
perverse? There are some which be lewd, I will grant it. Were they not so in
S. Paul's Philip. 2.
time? I have no man (says he) which with a like affection, will care for
your matters with me, for all do seek that is their own, and not that is
Jesus Christ. What say you to this? how say you unto that time? Touching the
Pope and his Prelacie, who can accuse them? for though they be never so lewd of
themselves, though they offend in most detestable filthiness, though the Pope
do not one good deed, yet Symmachus papa.
the virtues of his Predecessors may suffice him. These be their own words,
wey them (I ask) with indifferency. In this their own Doctor, their own
Pope is against them, I mean Gregory. Grace (says he) Gregory.
and not the place does save the soul. Surely had I here time to set forth
their lewd and fond Canons, had I leisure convenient to lay out before you
their foul fornication, their naughtiness and abomination, you would
doubtless abhor them, we should altogether defy them. But would you think
(unto their friends I speak) that they defended whoredom? would you believe
that these were their words? One having no wife, and that has a concubine
Council. To letan.
may not be put from the Communion, so that he be contented with one woman be
she wife or harlot. O how horrible among Christians is this decree! Such stuff
they have, such holiness they use, such men they be. Loath I am to defile any
further my pen, either in their most loathsome law, or in their vile and
lawless lust. Now to the branches whereof I spoke, and first of the chief,
which is Purgatory. This is a place Purgatory.
(as they appoint it) wherein only small offenses be remitted in the next
life. If you ask them where this place is, they can not agree, you appose
them, so that quod non inuenit vsquam, esse putat nusquam. They have sought
heaven, they have sought hell, itum est in viscera terrae, they have sought
even the very bowels of the earth, and yet can not feyned Purgatory be
found, there is none before the time of darkness, that ever heard of such an
Inn. But is there trow ye, any such place at al? If there be none, then has
it no place of being, for quod non est, nusquam Arist.
est: That which is not, is no where. The name of Purgatory in holy scripture
was never read, in sense also, there is therein nothing found, in any wise to
confirm the same: except you will have the wresting of places to be proofs,
and the abusing of Gods word to be made a ward, a covering, and a bolstering
of iniquity. Did the Apostles of Christ ever hear of any such place? heard
they once of the name of Purgatory? no, for it was long after (will the
defenders thereof say) before it was borne and christened. Our forefathers
(say they) more Allen in the defense of Purgatory.
than a thousand years since called it Purgatory. In deed they had need at
the length to name it, being of so long a time before namelesse, but who was
Godfather? ye Pope himself. Well, it was time to hatch it, for it was one of
the profitablest monsters that ever was whelped within the Popes house. But
(believe me) let them garnishe it never so much with gold, feyned dreams and
with other delusions, yet shall it down, the straw stuffing must be seen, the
painted lymmes must be looked upon, and the breathless babe must thoroughly
now be ripped up, and be tried. And what gave occasion to our forefathers (I
will use their own words) of the name of Purgatory? Marry (say they) the
third Chapter of the Prophet Malachie, and the first Epistle to the
Corinthians. These be their two especial places, upon the which, you shall
now see, how foolishly they build. The words in Malachie be these: Behold he
comes Malach. 3.
(says the Lord of hosts) and who may abide the day of his coming? who can
stand and endure his sight? for he is like melting and casting fire, and as
the wasshers herb. And he shall sit, casting, and trying out silver, and shall
purge the children of Leui, and cleanse them as gold, or silver. Here we find a
manner of purgation, and what is it? forsooth we will use plain dealing, the
matter needs no shift. In this place and in the whole chapter, these things
be only contained, the coming of S. John the Baptist, the deliverance of the
faithful, through Gods great mercy and grace, from their sins, the
judgment of Christ against the wicked, of their blasphemies against God, and
of Gods most benign care toward the godly. See then whether your private
Purgatory, may have hence any place, any pretense of being, any defense or
bolstring, or not. I needed not to tell you, oh I would it were not needful
to tell, that we are only saved by Christ his death, that we are cleansed by
his blood shed, and that we are redeemed by his passion, it is our Savior Jesus
Christ, which gave himself for Titus. 2.
us, to redeem us from all unrighteousness, and to purge us a peculiar people
unto him self, we feruentlye being given unto good works. Weigh then, what it
is to purge the children of Leui, and see whether it be any thing else, then
that they should be regenerated and renewed by the spirit of God, yea, and
that sin should not be imputed unto them for the love of Christ. Consider
this, it is a more wholesome doctrine, than to hunt we know not where, after a
hateful, fantastical and foolish pretenced Purgatory. Thus by the words of
the Prophet, seeing they may not prevail, seeing that the same is altogether
against them, let us likewise* see what ye Apostle says. He alleges that the
foundation is already laid, which is Jesus Christ, and then he proceeds in
these words: If any man build upon this 1. Cor. 3.
foundation, gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, or stubble, every man's
work shall appear. For the day of the Lord will declare it, and it shall
be showed in fire, and the fire shall try every man's work what it is. If
any man's work that he has builte upon, do abide, he shall receive a reward.
If any man's work burn, he shall suffer loss, but yet he himself shall be
safe nevertheless yet, as it were through fire. These be S. Paul's words* Now
as men not given to contention and fond strife, as men desirous of the right
understanding of holy scripture, as men all free from partiality and part
taking, let us weigh vprightlye the meaning of the text. Here the Apostle would
have us to be fervent in good works, and earnest to do well, he wishes us
to be occupied in that labor, which, when the judge of all shall come, may in
his sight be acceptable, may to us ward be commendable. And that we should well
beware, what works we build upon our foundation, he plainlye shows, that
at the last day all our doings shall be opened, and that then the same shall be
so tried, as the Goldsmith in fining his metals, tries out the dross and
base matter, from the pure, perfect, and fine. The day (says he) of our Lord
shall declare it, Ibidem.
because it shall appear in fire. The day of our Lord is the day of
judgment, the thing is so plain, as no man, though he be very perverse, may
deny it. But when shall it appear in fire? even then, at the general
judgment, so is the text. Where is therefore in ye mean time, their place of
Purgatory? Well, will you see in few words, what by the whole text is meant?
Here this only is spoken of those, which shall be saved, of such as build
upon Jesus Christ, upon which foundation, as all can not build gold,
precious stones and silver, as all can not be perfect, neither by martyrdom
be crowned, nor yet by good learning shine like the stars ofheauen: so
thereon building, be it but Wood or Hay, be it but very stubble, though ye
work it self be in the end burned, though he himself receive no such reward,
as the others, yet shall he be saved, and how? as it were through fire. Not
through Ibidem.
fire, but through the great fear, wherein he then shall stand, of the just
justice and judgment of God. O how comfortable is this doctrine? how far
passes it al their painted fires and feyned flames of Purgatory? You see now
that the Scripture admits no such place, you see the right meaning as well of
the Prophet, as also of the Apostle, You see that their two chief and only
places, do serve so to their purpose, that they stand plainly and altogether
against them. How shall then poor Purgatory stand? how shall the Pope
maintain his chief Farm? How shall therein his might, his gain be
befended? to what purpose should we cloak the matter any longer? his
evidences be all naught, his writings be counterfeyte, his lease is antedated,
his witnesses be proved partial, and perjured, his Lawyers have lost their
credit, his interest is not good, it is the Lord of hosts that sueth him, the
judgment ( se iudice) must pass against him. But we see (say the
Purgatorians) the name of Purgatory often set forth by ancient writers. And
what I pray you of that? what gathered they, what meaned they by that name?
forsooth, so far were they from confessing any such Purgatory fire, which
now men so foolishly seek to defend, that some said the tribulation of
Allen. etc.
this life, and world, must try men's faith and works: some said the grief of
mind in loosing that which they overmuch loved, was the burning fire of man's
affections: some would have the grievous vexation of departure out of this
life to be a Purgatory pains: some construed the text, of the fire of
conflagration, that shall purge the works of many in the latter day. Here who
is so blind, who is so senseless, but may understand, that the scope of
their Pargatorie was in this present life, and that it did nothing concern in
any one point, any pain in the world to come? what should I wade herein any
further? what should I use any more words? with one especial place of S.
Augustine I will end. For the souls (says he) of the Lib. de ciuit. dei. 13.
cap. 8.
godly being separated from the body, be in rest: but the souls of the
wicked, do suffer pains: until the bodies of the one may be revived unto
everlasting life, and of the other, unto eternal death which is called the
second. By this, he makes but two estates of the souls departed, the one now
in pains, who at the day of judgment shall be damned, and the other now in
rest, who then shall be saved. So is their Idea, and Idiot dreamings of
Purgatory, by authorities, by scripture disproued. The next thing whereof we
mean to treat, is the The supper of our Lord.
sacrament, the holy remembrance of the body and blood of our savior Christ,
which how it has been abused, of how long a time, and by whom, we mean here
by the assistance of God, whose cause especially it is, to express, set forth
and declare. Wherein if any Cyprian.
of our elders, either simply or ignorantlye have not held and observed, that
which our Lord and savior has taught us, the Lords pardon may extend unto
their simplicity: but we which are now warned by our Savior, and instructed,
may not look for forgiveness, If we wilfully will refuse the knowledge of the
truth, and the right understanding of Gods holy mysteries. Manifold were the
errors, wherewith men have been blinded, touching the holy supper of our Lord,
touching the Communion of his body and blood But because I have purposed to be
brief, I will rather labor to show the light, and right sense therein of holy
scripture, than to overthrow (which is very soon done) the foolish opinion of
some gross and carnal Cauphernaites. Neither yet may I altogether omit, as
occasion serves, to speak of the fond judgment of such, who cannot be
contented to enjoy the benefits of Christ his body and blood, except they
further (O wicked folly!) may tear him with their teeth, and more than
devour him with their mouths. Unto these does S. Augustine speak: To what
purpose August.
preparest thou thy teeth and thy belly? believe, and thou have eaten. Neither
yet let any here suppose, that I adiudge it not needful to eat those holy
signs, as things instituted by our Savior, for us to take and receive in his
remembrance. But that the adversaries may throughlye be satisfied, that the
indifferent and welwilling may rightly be instructed, shall we see in what
wise S. Paul received this institution at our Lords hands? That which I
delivered you, the same I received (says I. Cer. II.
he) of the Lord. For the Lord Jesus the same night in which he was betrayed,
took Bread, gave thanks, and brake it, saying: take, and eat, this is my
body, which shall be given for you, this do ye in the remembrance of me. After
the same manner he took the Cup when supper was done, and said: this Cup is
the new testament in my blood, this do as often as you shall drink it, in the
remembrance of me. For as often as you shall eat this Bread, and drink this
Cup, you shall show the Lords death until he come. Therefore whosoever shall
eat the Bread, and drink the Cup of our Lord unworthily, he shall be
guilty of the body and blood of our Lord. Wherefore let a man examine
himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup. Thus
far speaks S. Paul, and that very plainly. Now come we then to the
search of the text. And first, let those who will acknowledge there no bread,
way but indifferently the words as they stand. Christ took Bread, he gave
thanks, and brake it. What brake he? Bread. Who will deny it? He said that
it was his body. That is true: but how? not fleshly but spiritually. It is
(says Christ) the spirit that quickens, Joan. 6.
the flesh profits nothing, the words that I spoke unto you, are spirit
and life. Lo, how evidently he answers the cogitations of such, as thought
that they should have eaten him carnally. Hence it is that S. Augustine thus
says: The first heresy Aug. in exposition. Psalm. 8.
sprang amongst the Disciples of Christ, as it were through the hardness of
his words. For when he said, except one will eat my flesh, and drink my
blood, he can not have life everlasting. They here not understanding, said one
unto another, this is a hard saying, who can eat him? and whiles they thus
said, they separated themselves from him, and he remained with two disciples,
whom, when the other were gone, he instructed. It is the spirit (says he)
which gives life, the flesh profits nothing. The words that I spoke unto
you, are spirit and life. You have understood spiritually, so they are
spirit and life: You have understood carnallye, so yet are they spirit and
life. But unto thee they are not spirit and life, which understand them not
spiritually. Understand ye spiritually the words that I spoke unto you. You
shall not eat this body which you see, neither shall you drink the blood,
which those that crucify me shall shed. I have commended unto you a kind of
sacrament, which being spiritually understood, does quicken you, but the
flesh profits nothing. But as they understood, so they answered. For they
understood flesh, as that which is sold and broken in the shambles. But
Christ perceiving this, said: This offends you, because I said: I give you
my flesh to eat, and my blood to drink. If therefore you shall see the son
of man ascend thither where he before was, what is this? Here lo has he
plainly declared that, which before had moved them, here he opened, whence they
were offended, here in deed and plainly if they had understood it. But they
thought that he would give his body unto them. He said, that he would ascend
into heaven, and that all whole. When you shall see the son of man to ascend
where he was before, truly then shall you specially see that he gives not his
body in such manner as you think: or then you shall understand, that his
grace is not consumed with mouths. Until the ending of the world, the Lord is
above, but yet here is notwithstanding with us the grace of the Lord, for the
body wherein he rose, can be but in one place, yet his grace, his Godhead, his
divinity is spread every where. O how plain, how full, how manifest be
these words! the natural body of Christ that was borne of the virgin Marie,
is, and must be in one place, and that in heaven, until the ending of the
world: therefore his natural body can not be here also in earth, it can not
be in the material Church, on the altar, in ye Priests hands. Concerning their
consecration and transubstantiation, I ask of them what they do consecrate,
whether it be bread, or ye Lords body? if it be bread, then is The body of
Christ is not consecrated, nor yet the bread. Ask them then, what is
consecrated?
it not ye body of Christ, if it be his body, can they make it holyer at one
time, than at an other? is his body at any time unholy? Hereunto they may
never well answer, their in instanti may stand nothing to their purpose. I am
loath here to heap the innumerable heresies wherein they are, which would
defend this carnal eating. Their inconstancy, their disagreementes, their
errors be maruailous. For example, and that I seem not to belie them, I will
betray one of their absurdities. It is in question amongst them (so carnal
they be, such Cauphernaites they are) whether the body of Christ may be
received with his deity and soul or not? H: says that neither the soul nor
deity is there received: others, as B: do say, that in receiving the body,
they receive also the deity and soul. O Lord what intolerable, what
horrible controversies what heinous absurdities be these? It were hartilye to
be wished of every honest heart, that these would give over, thus carnallye to
grind upon Christ his soul, upon his body and deity. And if they cannot be
quiet, without altercation in the true faith, then it is rather to be
suffered, that they wrangle (as a number of them do and have done) about sum,
es, fui: hic, haec, hoc: qui quae quod etc. For by the one, they set forth much
and outrageous impiety: by the other they bewray but their iangling nature and
great folly. For is it not mere childishness, for them to deal, as one of
them does in this matter? With it (says he) agrees hoc, Sand:
this: with it, quod, the which: it comes after the verb est, is: and goes
before the verb datur, is given. Good God what a do is this, how is a Doctor
here troubled in finding out, in one little sentence, the nowne substantive?
Oh, it is easy to make great volumes, they may soon make such books, they
may stuff them without study, with Ge^ders, Cases, Articles, Pronounes,
Verbes, Participles, with construing, with parsing, with iffes, with andes,
with asking and aunswering, with trifling and lingering, with light questions,
common talk, and controlling. Well, Christ (say they) said, this is my body:
why shall not we then believe him? forsooth, that you would believe him, we
verilye do wish: and that you would take heed of that herefie, which August.
happened, as it were through the hardenesse of his words, amongst his own
disciples, we earnestlye admonish, persuade and exhort you. It is undoubtedly
true, that the holy Communion does consist of two things, of the visible
kind of Elements, of bread and wine, and of the invisible grace. Of which
two things, the spiritual body of Christ consisting, is received of the
worthy receyuer, to his comfort and salvation. Neither yet may you here
think, that his spiritual body consists of bread, but that by the
receiving of bread, we be made to understand of the receipt of his spiritual
flesh, and by the receiving of wine, we are certified to receive (and all for
our instruction) his spiritual blood: or if you will have it brieflier, to
receive his body and blood spiritually. And that this is the Catholic faith,
S. Hierome shall bear me witness: Two ways is the flesh of Christ In Epist.
ad Ephesios.
and his blood understood: either that spiritual and divine, whereof he
says: my flesh is meat in deed, and my blood is drink in deed, and except
you will eat my flesh, and drink my blood, you shall not have life
everlasting: or else that flesh which was crucified, and that blood which was
shed with the spear of the soldier. What words can be playner than these? who
is so simple, but may now see, of what flesh and of what blood Christ meant,
when he said, My flesh is meat in deed? here further to answer such, who
think it to be his carnal body, because he said, this is my body, I think
there is no reasonable body, that will suppose it needful. Yet to avoid all
that the adversaries may allege, whereas he calls it once his body, he many
times names it bread, so do the Apostles, so do the Doctors. His body it is,
in respect of his spiritual flesh and blood, which then the faithful do
receive: but bread and wine it is, in respect of the Elements, which we eat,
taste off, and digest. Also whereas the Doctors do sometimes not speak of the
bread and wine, but of the very body of Christ, quod in ipsae Augustine.
veritate spiritualiter manducatur and bibitur, which in deed is spirituallye
eaten and drunk: that do they yt rather to move men to lift up their hearts,
and to stir them from the thinking on those signs, to think upon the thing
signified, to remember that it is not in the bread fixed, which must feed us,
but that by faith we be fed from above, from heaven, whence we receive of the
Lord, the Cup of the new Testament, whence we receive verilye Christ his
body, by whom we live, and are made flesh of his flesh. So have you here
sufficiently showed unto you, the right meaning of the Lords supper, you have
in few words the effect of the same, and the testimony therein, as well of
Scripture, as of the Doctors. Do ye therefore the parts of Christians,
acknowledge ye truth that you see, embrace true and plain doctrine, detest
falsehood, abhor foolish wrangling and wicked wresting of Scriptures.

Hither unto have we spoken of the abuses of the Church of Rome, of the usurped
supremacy, of their painted vain Purgatory, and of their carnal
understanding of Christ his words spoken at his last supper: But now we will
brieflye treat, of the translation of holy Scripture into the vulgar tongue,
of singing of Psalms, and of such like things, as they shall occur, which now
are by Satan reproved, by his ministers repugned, and by his chief defenders
resisted. And herein that I may be indifferent, I will use such authorities as
(let Satan do his worst) must needs be allowed.

Much a do many now make, because they Of the translation of holy scripture
into the vulgar tongue.
see the holy Scriptures to be in the English tongue, and that to the comfort
and salvation of many a thousand. But what (trow ye) is the cause that they
find themselves therein so much grieved? Oh, therein lies the very whole
matter, therein hangs all the marring and making of their market. For if the
people once perceive what superstition is, will they (think you) be
superstitious? if they perceive what Hypocrisy is, will they be Hipocrites? if
they see how heinous Idolatry is, will they then succor Idolators? if they
behold what blindness is, will they delight in darkness? if they do
understand the ignorant abuses of times past, will they persevere still in
ignorancie? if they were deceived, blinded, and most shamefully abused, will
they then any longer follow dreams, or delight in the covetous devises of
men? when holy scripture is heard, read and understood, then are errors
afraid, lewd men amazed and the devil himself astonished. This moved our
forfathers to take great pains, that ye scripture might be translated out of
one tongue into another, that so the more might understand them, that so the
more might have and read the^. And touching any fault in our English
translations, if in some, some thing be amiss, who will marvel? was not the
truest and ancient translation in the Latin, corrupted and violated? Does not
S. Hierome himself so say? but I Hieron.
will answer such, as pretend faults in our translation, read in the Church:
and except he defend himself well, he is like to feel (and yet I shall deal
with him friendly) of his own blows. And first I demand of him, whether in
a translation he would observe the true sense, or else seek for ye Noune
substantive, for Genders and Cases, as he has done? in the judgment of all
learned, Hieron. in praefat. in lib. Judith.
and good men, the meaning of the author is to be followed, and the hunting
after words, is not to be liked. But what blames he in our translation?
forsooth, we have not rightlye translated (says he) this verb (...). It
should (says he) be englished in the sixth of John, to work, as (...), Joan. 6.
work the meat. Oh sir, and why not labor for the meat? what I pray you
is, (...)? is it not victum quaerere, to labor for ones living? you see herein
your ignorance, your wylfulnes, the one, or both, you see our true dealing,
understanding and plainness. To the rest. Qui manducat me, and ipse viuet
propter me. How englisheth he this? Marry, he that eats me, he also shall
live for me. And what English give we unto it? he that eats me, shall live
by the means of me. I pray thee (Christen Reader) consider this, and see who
goes nearest unto the text, yea, who has the right meaning, he or we. Do not
we live by the means of Christ? what? live we for him? and is not he living?
fie, why err ye so much by the means of the Preposition (...)? why speak ye
here so much of the Accusative case? has it not the self same signification
sometimes in the Genitive? Again. Qui manducat hunc panem, he that eats
(say we) of this bread. He that eats (says he) this Bread. What
difference, I pray you, is here? what fault is in our translation? yea, it is
true (says he himself) to say: he that eats of this Bread. Is it true?
why jar you then? why seek you a fault where none is? Also Cum accepisset
Jesus panem, and gratias egisset, fregit, and dedit discipulis, and ait: Jesus
(says he) having taken Bread, and given thanks, or blessed, brake, and gave to
the Disciples, and said. See (so to speak it) how unsavory, how without sense
he translateth. Jesus (say we) took Bread, and when he had given thanks, he
brake it, and gave it to the Disciples, and said. How say thou (indifferent
Reader) who has here the plain sense of Christ his words plainly uttered, he,
or we? but he finds fault with this word it: and why? because it is Christ
his meaning, and so it overthrows all his writing. Let him, for he has had
to do with his Pronounes and Rules, as late as I, (though yet I teach) let
him, I say, ask this question, whom, or what, and he shall find that it
answers unto this question. But he is accursed, which moves such childishe
iangling, specially treating of the mysteries of God. Further. Hoc facite, make
(says he) this thing. This (say we) do ye. Do thou (gentle Reader)
understand the Latin? if thou do, without any doubt thou must needs
detest his quarelling. But will he compel me to do as he does, to fall a
construing? facite, do ye, hoc, this. What blame find you in this? what?
shall no shame move you? shall reason condemn you? shall no honesty work in
you? well what follows? in meam commemorationem, for (says he) the
remembrance of me. In (say we) the remembrance of me. O Lord, how plain
this is! be not these the English phrases? for a man's sake: in a man's
remembrance: and not, in a man's sake, for a man's remembrance. Who then gives
the truest English, we or you? Let us go forward. Communicatio sanguinis
Christi, communicatio corporis. Why maymeth he the sentence? why? because the
Cup and the Bread may not like him. The sentence is this: Calix benedictionis,
cui benedicimus: nonne c^mmunicatio sanguinis Christi est? and panis, quem
frangimus, nonne participatio corporis domini est? The Cup of blessing, which
we bless: is it not the partaking of the blood of Christ, and the Bread
which we break, is it not the partaking of the body of Christ? What fault
would he find here? Marry, that we English it partaking: and have not they
themselves translated (...), to be participatio? is it not so in the old
translation? what then can they make of participatio, but partaking? what
remains? we being many, are one Bread. Of (says he) the one Bread: And
what says their own translation? v^us panis, one Bread. Good God! is it not
a shame for one that would teach, to be blamed in the thing, which he himself
blames? I know ye children would here say, turpe est doctori. etc. Be these ye
notes that you would have remembered? I assure you, the remembrance of them is
to you no praise, to others no profit, to your friends no pleasure. Alas, what
profit is it, either unto the hearer Hieron.
or reader, for us to sweat in laboring, and for others to labor in
reprehending? Omit, oh omit foolish wrangling, forsake self will and liking,
endeavor to do good unto your Country, to please God, give over unprofitable
questions, have regard unto honesty, consider the truth, take Christ his part,
be profitable unto your selves, set forth the Lords name, and labor for the
meat which perishes not. So shall you do, if your writings tend to edefie,
and not to ignominy: to convert, not to pervert: to persuade unto holiness,
not to dissuade from godliness: to reprehende blindness, not to reproach
righteousness: to augment devotion, not to impugn Religion: to redress
things being amiss, not to carpe that, that true is: to do well, and not to
mainetaine evil. This much concerning their notes to be remembered. Now may
not we note and rejoice to see our translation so perfect, as the adversaries
with all their weapons, may not peerce into, as they may not in any word (if
they deal iustlye) reprove? The Hieron in Pentateuchu^ Moysi.
Latin copies (says S. Hierome) are better than the Greek, and the Greek
better than the Hebrew. So if we say, that the English copy is better than
all three, why should we be reprehended? if we term it as perfect as any of
these three, should we not therein be allowed? verum haec contra inuidos. Ibidem.
This I speak against those which do envy unto us the Gospel of Christ, and
which are inwardlye grieved, that men so greedily desire ye knowledge of Gods
word. If they translated the Scriptures, which thing they will not do, then
would they have their doings received: but that we should do it, that can
they in no wise abide: as though virtue and vice were not in Ibidem.
the things, but altered with the author. Have they not read the advice of
Chilo, whose counsel is, that they egg no man unto contention, and that they
utter not always their pleasure, least they happen to hear, that may
displease them. They say that we have very many translations. Not so many (say
we) as they have: maxim cum Ibidem.
apud Latinos, tot sint exemplaria, quot codices, specially seeing the Latins
have so many copies, as they have books. Well, that the Scriptures be
translated, it is necessary it is profitable, it is comfortable. Whosoever
shall call upon the name of the Romans 10.
Lord, (says S. Paul) he shall be safe. And how can they rightlye call
upon his name, if they understand not what they speak, nor upon whom they
call? is the meaning of the heart enough? No. He that gave thee a heart, gave
thee also a mouth, use both. The belief of the heart justifies, but to
knowledge with the mouth, makes a man safe. And how shall he acknowledge with
the mouth, who in steed of one word utters another? who pronounces such
prayers, as in deed are none, such words as have no significations, and such
sentences as be altogether senseless? I see the gross ignorance of times
past, it might be seen, it might be felt, the world bears me witness, it
was palpable. And herein I appele unto ye conscience of any indifferent
Christian, whether the simple people had any understanding in that which was
read in the Churches heretofore? yea, whether the Priest himself, whether one
of them amongst twenty, could english you a sentence of that which they did
pronounce? Alas for pity, alas, our forefathers which might have seen, were
deprived of their sightes, they were led by blind guides into Orcus, into ye
darkness of hell, they were kept from true knowledge, and nouseled in
blindness. Fie for shame, painted Satannicall pardons were procured them, Gods
mercy and remission were rejected, popish papers were bought and soulde,
devises to release out of Purgatory were practiced, no means was left
unsought to withdraw men from God. Of muddy unwholesome water then men drank,
and yet gold and silver, great sums of monye paid they for the same. Unto
such, does the Prophet Esaias speak: Wherefore do ye lay out your Esaias. 55.
monye for the thing which feeds not, and spend your labor about the thing
that satisfies not? come to the waters all ye that be thirsty. Come buy wine
and milk without any money or monye worth. Why then spend we our money about
Popish pardons? why about Pelte, Parchment, and paultrie? let us repent
unfeignedly, and then will our heavenly father forgive us, freelye will he
pardon us. Who is more to be blamed, the people, or the pastors, who ween that
Gods gift will be obtained with monye? to proffer monye. Act. 8.
is the perverse part of Simon Magus, and to receive the same, is not the
profession of Peter. But Lord the people were ignorant, and the Priests were
covetous, and arrogant. Well, to proceed, how comes faith? by hearing. What
absolutelye? Nay. By hearing the word of God, and understanding the same. And
how shall the unlearned understand the word of God, seeing it is locked from
them, and uttered in Latin? why shall they not have it in their own tongue,
that so they may hear and understand, that they may receyuc faith? why shall
they not pray in their own speech? will God hear sooner (trow ye) the Latin,
than he will do the Irish, Welsh, or English? There is neither speeches nor
languages, Psalm. 18.
but that the voices of them be heard. The Irish is as well heard of him as
the Latin, the Welshe as the Greek, the English as the Hebrew. Why then
would they bar us from praying in the English tongue, in the Welsh, in ye
Irish? why blame they translations? why hinder they the increase of knowledge,
of grace, of godliness? why? because the Ministers of darkness, will ever by
all means endeavor to shadow the truth, to set up falshoode, to cast a mist
before men, so to further their merchandise. This made vile Mahomete to
establish a law, by the which he incurred the pains of death, that would
reason or argue about his procedings. This caused the Roman Prelacie to
command under the pain of excommunication, that no lay man, were he never
so learned, should reason, speak or talk about the faith of Christ. This
moved them to appoint the services to be had and used in strange tongues, and
so straungely, that the people in steed of sincere doctrine, had but doltishe
signs, subtle silences, lewd mummings, fond meanings, amazed gestures, and
mere trumperie. And hereof, I pray you what followed? the falling down unto
stocks and stones, the creping and kneeling unto them, the kissing and
adouring of them. Neither can here their feigned difference between (...) and
(...) excuse them, for the Valla.
signification of both, the meaning and understanding is all one. Every parish
had his peculiar God. Against the holy Saints, I will not speak, the
Saints were abused. Were it in taking of a journey, in peril and danger, I
put it unto your own consciences, who were called upon? was not God in a manner
forgotten? and all this happened through ignorance, through the want as well of
Gods word truly preached, as of the Scriptures to be read in every man's
language, and received. Let all therefore pray and speak in the speech that is
understood. For else when thou blessest with 1. Corin. 14.
the spirit, how shall he that occupies the rome of the unlearned say, Amen,
at thy thanksgiving? he understands not what thou say, he is not
edified. They further reprove us for singing of Psalms, and to speak the thing
plainly, they reprehende us for praising of God. O Turkish blindness! O
Jewish heathennesse! O hellish perverseness! Did not Debora and Barak, after
the victory, sing the same day, and praise the Lord? Hear Kings, Lords, I
will sing and give praise Judge. 5.
unto the Lord God of Israel. Who ever blamed them for this? I will sing
(says S. Paul) with the spirit, and I will sing with the mind also. Why
then will they 1. Corin. 14.
reprehende our singing* Be ye (says he) fulfilled with the spirit,
speaking amongst Ephesians. 5. Coloss. 3.
your selves in Psalms, Hymns and spiritual songs, singing and making
melody unto the Lord in your hearts. You hear what the Apostle of Christ
wills us to do. My songs (says the Prophet Psalm. 9.
David) will I make of thy name, O thou most highest. Whosoever therefore
rebukes us for singing of Psalms, the same does withstand the Scriptures and
holy ghost. But if they themselves do allow their own singings, why then
disalowe they ours? It is an unjust thing (says S. Augustine) Ad parentiam
commit. Arrian. Council. Toletan.
that one should judge another, and not to be willing to be judged himself.
Yea, they themselves thus write: Concerning the singing of Hymns, we have the
example of our Savior, and of the Apostles. Be not therefore any longer
obstinate, the Psalms of David we sing, never go about to carpe our singing.
Many other things there be, which in us they do blame. I will touch over as
many of them as I remember, and be brief. I will not be partial, my pen
shall defend no untroth, it shall cloak no wickedness. Let Eurybiadas shake
his staff, let as many as think it their pleasure, reprehende me, so they
be willing to hear me. The truth I know must purchase hatred: That made
Geminius to be hated of Cleopatra, Praxaspis of the King Cambyses, Pantaleon of
Lysimachus, Phocion of the people of Athens, Aristippus of Dionysius. Why were
the Apostles of Christ persecuted? why were they hated? because they preached
the truth. Why were a number put to death in the regions of Aphrica? in Antioch
and Alexandria? because they professed the truth. Truly, it is hard to find
one without enemies, who is unto vice and untruth a professed enemy. If all
then be not my friends, if all deal not friendly, I force not. The faithful,
I trust, will weygh with indifferency my work, they will first read and then
judge. Much contention (says the adversaries) An objection.
is amongst our selves, much varietic in opinion, and great diversity in
Religion. Some will wear (say they) a cornerd cap, some will not. What unity
is amongst these men? This may soon be answered. The answer.
For what is a greater unity than altogether (as we do) to hate blindness,
to forsake superstition, to renounce Antichrist, and to embrace true
Christianity? we all with one mind, do mean to labor for John. 6.
the meat which perishes not, our intent is to set forth the doctrine of
Christ, the same which the Apostles preached, which he himself pronounced:
where can be a greater or a godlier unity than this? there is amongst us but
one faith, one baptism, and one Ephesians. 4.
God. What unity then, is to be compared unto this: What if one if two or
three, do not so well like the wearing of a Cap, shall therefore for a Cap,
the Gospel of Christ be thus carped? Will they not understand that Theodorus
and S. Hierome were not in all things of one mind? Know they not that S.
Augustine and S. Hierome did once contend? yea, and that Hierome accused
Augustine with these terms, ostentare doctrinam, lacessere, pueriliter
certare, with such others? was this no discord? may it please them to pervse
their own doings, and they shall hardly find any one point, wherein they do
not disagree. Some of them says, that Christ did eat himself, some
otherwise: some write one thing, some another: some alleges this, some that,
some say they cannot tell what. Is not this a pretty unity? and will they
needs condemn us for a Cap? let them consider how amongst the very Apostles
there was some dissension, yea, and such as amongst two of them one was in an
error. Quia and Petrus qui Aug. lib. de baptism. peruul.
circuncidebat, cessit Paulo veritatem predicanti, for Peter who defended
Circumcision, yielded unto Paul preaching the truth. Came not certain from
Jury, and taught the brethren, saying: Except you be circumcised Act. 15.
after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved. Great dissension, controversy,
and disputing was amongst them, and yet was the Gospel of Christ not
withstanding perfect and good. What? was there not between Paul and Barnabas
such Ibidem.
sharp dissension, that they parted a sunder, one from another? you see that
amongst the chosen, amongst the very twelve, trifling dissension sometime did
happen. How then may they require a greater perfection in us, than in the
primative Church, than in the Apostles of Christ? they say further that An
objection.
our Ministers (which I somewhat have touched before) be lewd, and that they
come into the Church for living, and not for love or zeal unto Religion. Let
them The answer.
speak this particularlye of some and we confess it. If they say it
universally of all, we deny it. But is their own profession so pure, their
monasteries so perfect, that there are none perverse therein? be not these
their own words? Some came to the holy Sand.
order of Priesthood, not for devotion, but for wealth. And some went into
Monasteries, rather for ease, than for intent to serve God. What further were
they? negligent in their office, dissolute in Ibidem.
their behavior, ignorant in good learning, ambitious, rich, and covetous.
How, with what forheades, with what faces can they blame us, when these blames
be in themselves? For our parts we will do as Philip the father of Alexander
was wont to do. We thank them for their reprehension, we shall endeavor
thereby to redress that is amiss. Yet what so ever they allege against us,
let them never speak of ignorancie. For none were so ignorant as they. What
was a greater ignorancie, than to use such Arguments as these? God is Ex
decret.
my witness, whom I serve. etc. therefore the first See or seat is in the
Roman Church. This is no ignorancie. I speak it in earnest, I dare boldly
avouch, that the veriest child in England would not use such reasoning.
Again. Putrified flesh is Ex decret. etc.
cut with iron: therefore, Peter was chief of all the Apostles. Here is no
putrified argument. Also. Constantine sat in a little Hard.
low Chair in the midst, at the first council of Nice* therefore he was
not the supreme head. And why? what is the reason? Think you that the supreme
Ibidem.
head of the Church, should have come in last, and have sitten beneath his
subjects? Here is good stuff, if it were praised. Does his coming in last
bar him from a superiority? Comes not the Lord chief Justice into
Westminster Hall after a hundredth of his inferiors? Comes not the Prince into
the Parliament, after a number of his subjects? he sat (say you) beneath his
subjects. With a regard unto your estimation I speak it, you say untroth: he
sat in the midst, which is the highest room, and place of most dignity. As
for the low Chair, it was for his ease, it was his wont. That did rather
increase and confirm, than abase and diminish his authority. Let them
therefore never brag their learning, never boast of their knowledge. Their skill
is ignorancie, their understanding is mere folly, they see no further than
another man, for any thing that they can do, they may be matched. Let them
beware, least it be of them that Gnatho says: Est genus hominum In Eunuch.
qui esse primos se omnium rerum volunt, nec sunt tamen, there is a kind of
men, which think themselves the very chief, and yet they be not so. There be,
I know, who think their own hoodes, to pass all the heads in Christendom,
some are so precise, that they will come at no Common prayer, some are so
simple, that you shall scarcely at any time find them without S. John's head in
their pockets, some are such blind Prophets, that they go about the town,
poasing and prating in their corners, upon the Apocalipse. I am sorry (when I
think upon all) to see them in such foolish blindness. And yet these be the
men, that think they have no fellows, these be they that carry the whole
world (it is a world to think upon them) in their heads, these are they
which have and challenge the name of learning, but (alas) they are but meanlye
learned, their knowledge is small, their judgment is nothing. Neither may I
here omit to speak somewhat of Augustine which came into England, and whose
life, learning and godliness they do so much extol. Of him thus writes
Gregory unto Aldibertus then King of England, Reuerendissimus Aldiberto regi
Anglorum.
frater noster Augustinus, in Monasterio regulariter doctus, sacrae scripturae
scientia repletus. Our most reverend brother Augustine the Bishop, being
regularlye taught in the Monastery, a man right skillful in holy scriptues. If
this may be credited, he was a man very learned, if this can not be denied, he
is to be credited. We will deal vprightlye, let us consider his learning* Had
he such knowledge in holy Scriptures? had he ever read the first Epist of S.
Paul unto Timothe? It appears no. And yet he was regulariter doctus: then
regulariter, was not rightly. And that it may be manifest, how he was ignorant
in the scriptures, you must note that he was a Bishop, and yet knew he not what
of right appertained unto the office and duty of a Bishop: he knew not (O
ignorancie!) how to use his Clergy. That this was so, you shall see it by his
own words unto Gregory. Quaero (pater beatissime) de Episcopis, Aug.
interrog. ad Gregor.
qualiter cum suis Clericis conuersentur, I desire to learn (O most blessed
father) how Bishops should use themselves toward their Clergy. What is a
greater ignorancie, then for a Bishop to be ignorant in his calling and
profession? no Bishop was skillful in holy scriptures, that was ignorant of
his duty: but Augustine was ignorant of his duty: therefore he was not
skillful in holy Scriptures. What part of this argument could Gregory now
answer? what part can any Gregorian disprove? Again he says: opto doceri,
an Clerici continere non valentes, possint contrahere, I desire to be taught
whether that the Clergy which cannot live chaste, may marry. This might he have
learned in the Scriptures, if he had before read them. For better it is (says
S. Paul) to marry, than to 1. Cor. 7.
burn. But hereof I shall speak more anon, of Augustine I will this much say,
that either he had not read the Scriptures, or else he had not read and
understood them: so that whether it be the one or the other, he was ignorant,
such was their ignorancie. I could rehearse up here a number of such like
questions, that he has, which, because they be over foolish, I will let pass.
O what a heap could I here bring out of their Canon laws! O what mountains
of absurdities could I allege out of their Legends, out of their own
inventions and imaginations! But let them pass, I trust to have more time
hereafter. What do they further condemn in us? Marry we contemn (say An
objection.
they) fasting, prayers, penance and alms deeds, we have no regard (so
rashly do they judge of us) unto any good works. If The answer.
this were true, it were pity of our lives. If it be false, it is pity of
theirs. Let them remember what Cicero says: if they have taken any pleasure by
speaking evil of others, in Salust.
they may yet lose it by hearing their own evils. As for us, we be in this of
Antisthenes Laert. li. 6.
mind. Let them rail, slander, backbite and reproach, seeing we be not
guilty, we wey not. First touching fasting, I Fasting.
will prove that we observe it better than ever they have or do. The name of
fasting is not to be considered, the manner and order is diligently to be
weyed. In Armenia which is a region in Asia, the people fast so straightly,
that therein they pass the Pope and all his Prelacse. And yet is all their
fasting not worth one farthing. The Turks also, they fast, and that most
straightly, one month in every year, and a week. But is it think you, true
fasting? does it to their souls ward any thing prevail? No. I dare boldly
affirm it. The manner of fasting in times paste was perverse, it was not right.
For what avails me to fast from flesh, if I eat excess of fish, or to
fast from fish, if I abound with dainty and delicate food? If I only fast
upon ye Friday, having no regard thereunto on the Thursday, is it to be thought
that I do well? if I fast in the Lent, and feast at all times else, what
helps it? if I abstain from all kind of meats, if I wear on sackcloth, if I
wallow in ashes, if I would be seen therein unto the world, I am but an
Hipocrite. When you fast (says Esaias. 58.
the holy Prophet Esaias) your lust remains still. Ye fast to strife and
debate. Ye fast not, that your voice might be heard above. Think ye that this
fast pleases me? In the reast of this Chapter, does the lord set forth what
kind of fasting we should use. Together with our fasting, we must release the
prisoner, break the oath of wicked bargains, succor the oppressed, and
relieve the poor. This fasting is so acceptable unto God, that then if thou
call, the Lord Ibidem.
shall answer thee: if thou criest, he shall say: here I am. It were to be
wished that we would fast, as Daniel did: and that we would unfeignedly say:
We have sinned, Daniel. ^.
we have offended, we have been disobedient and gone back: yea, we have
departed from all thy precepts and judgments. But the Armenians, the Turks,
the Pope, with all his adherents will none of this. The days wherein they
fast, must be known unto the world, from what they fast must be proclaimed,
what holiness they be of, must be every where published, their time of
sadness must be promulgated. What says our Savior hereunto? when Math. 6.
ye fast (says he) be not sad, as the Hipocrites are. They will disfigure
their faces, brag of their abstinence, and boast of their fastinges. Of these
it is that Christ says: Verily I say unto you, they have their Ibidem.
reward. But what kind of fasting set we forth? we show how the flesh does
rebel against the spirit: we admonish therefore all men to consider their
own estates, and as some men be weak of nature, some sick, some strong, so we
wish accordingly to keep under and subdue the lewd appetites and sinful
desires of the flesh. We will them in their fasting, to shun the rite and
trade of Hipocrites. We exhort them to join unto their fasting, prayer, and
alms deeds. And whereas the Popes adherent says: nihil reputatur ieiunasse,
qui vnum diem non ieiunat; he Ex ^ecret.
is in deed accounted not to fast at all, which fasteth not one whole day. We
say: nihil reputatur iciunasse, qui omnes vitae dies non ieiunat, he is in
deed accounted not to fast, which fasteth not all the days of his life. They
require abstinence for one day, we during the whole life. Of this fast S.
Hierome thus speaks: sint tibi ieiunia Hieron.
pura and moderata. And what is that? quotidie esurire, and quotidie prandere,
daily to hunger, and daily to dine. This is not on Thursday to feast, and upon
the Fridaye to fast. We say that we ought not to eat, except hunger thereunto
move us, and that we ought to rise from our meat, yet being hungry. Neither
do we for civil policies, adiudge it not necessary that we abstain on
certain days, and from certain things. But to take it for a Religion, is a
mere error, and a very superstition. Now judge (gentle Reader) whose fast is
purer, whose fast is perfiter, ours or theirs. For prayers, Prayers.
I can see nothing wherein I may commend them. They prayed they knew not unto
whom, and in their prayers was contained they could not tell what. Alas, if I
pray in a 1. Cor. 14.
tongue that I understand not, though my spirit prays, is not yet my mind
without fruit? How falls it then out, that they will maintain a prayer for
the unlearned in Latin, for a people that understands it not? do they not by
this one thing, bewray their trumperie and deceit? devises they had to keep
men in blindness, means they had to hold men in darkness. They mumbled up
a number of words, which by their pronunciation, had neither sense nor
signification. They divided abroad their prayers, some to a stock, some to a
stone, some unto this, some unto that, ye least some was left unto God. If with
their lips they prayed Morning and Evening, though ye prayer was altogether
imperfect, yet they thought it enough. What shall I speak of the Sarasens?
they pray five times in every day, and yet is their prayer wicked and perverse.
So that we see, it is not enough to pray, but we must specially consider unto
whom, and how we should pray. What avails (says Augustine.
S. Augustine) the noise of thy lips, if thy heart be dumb. If thou
understand not thy prayer, if thou prayest not aright, what avails it? to
pray unto the Saints (the remembrance of whom I esteem) what helps it.
They hear not, they understand not our prayers, to what purpose then should
we pray unto them? The Ex constitut.
Saints (says the Popes friends) do not understand our prayers, except god
show it them. O great absurdity / God must go gather together our prayers,
made unto otuers, he must carry and show them unto the saints, so to be
entreated at their hands. O vain, O mischievous, O monstrous teaching / never
say that you pray unto the Saints, that they should offer your prayers unto
God, they must first come unto him by your own confession. I need not to say
that they prayed to be seen, for ye whole world did see them. It were folly
to show further of their foul errors and abuses in prayer. Therefore I will
show how we should pray, and then we may examine therewith our prayers. That
they should be in a tongue which we understand, by saint Paul I have before
proved. Well. When you pray (says Christ) you shall not be Math. 6.
as the Hipocrites are. For they love to stand and pray in the Synagoges, and
in the corners of the streets. And why? because they would be seen of men.
Verilye I say unto you they have their reward. How should we then pray?
Marry, when thou prayest, enter into thy chamber and shut thy door to the,
and pray to thy father which is in secret, and thy father which is in
secret, shall reward thee openly. Lo here is showed unto who^ we should pray,
it is not unto the Apostles, Prophets or Martyrs, it is unto our father, it is
he that will reward us. If we follow therefore the words of Christ, if we
direct unto him our prayers, who can reprehende us? if others pray unto any
other, why may not we blame them? when you pray (says our Savior) babble not
much, as Ibidem.
the Heathen do, for they think that they shall be heard for their much
babbling. Be ye not like unto them. How like unto them were those, who prayed
they knew not what, though they prayed never so long? How unlike unto them be
we (I speak it to defend the truth) which pray in a speech which we know,
and that unto Christ* Alas for pity, an infinite number were in times past,
who had a greater regard unto their Beads than unto their Breasts, unto the
number of prayers, than unto any end or purpose, unto the kneeling and
knocking, than unto the knowledging of their sins, and unto the use and
custom, than unto true confession and prayer. I will not trouble thee herein
(indifferent Reader) any longer, God has endued thee with reason, use his
gift, judge uprightly. Concerning Penance.
penance or repentance, which they apply rather to the body, than to the
mind, how ignorantlye they therein deal, it is manifest. Their barefoote
abuses were great, their gadding unto pilgrimages was horrible, their hearing
and bewraying of secrets, their presumption in pardoning of offenses, was
intolerable. So far were they from true repentance, that they had pointed it
in words only, outward means, and in days. For did not a thousand think,
if they had gadded to this or that Pilgrimage, that then they were perfect? if
they fasted certain days, thought they not their sins to be forgiven? if
they had confessed their faults unto the Priest, thought they not themselves
wholly discharged? yea, and which is most abominable, bought they not
repentance with money? was it not sold them? had they it not for twenty
pence, for ten pence, for two pence? some received twenty days pardon, some
thirty, some forty. O filthye merchandise! Well. What was further taught by
ignorant and unlearned men, touching penance, I need not to say. Only this I
dare avouch, that therein the Pope himself was deceived, and that he deceived
others, or deceitfully abused them. The confession (says Leo) which is first
offered Leo.
unto god, and then unto the Priest, is sufficient unto a repenter. What? the
only confession, the bare words, and no compunction? O how childish, how
foolish, how false is this doctrine! is it enough with our lips to confess
our sins? is it sufficient to tell them unto the Priest? is not repentance,
to be sorry for our sins Ambros. in sermon. quaedrages.
past, and afterward to commit none to be sorry for? Here is no telling unto
the Priest, no secret whispering, no auricular confession. Poenitentia vera,
est dolor, and amaritudo animae, pro malis, quae quisque commisit, vel Ibidem.
consensit. True repentance is the grief of the heart, and bitterness of the
soul, for such euilles, as one has either committed or consented unto. This
is (says Ambrose) the true repentance, we see what it is truly to repent, and
that we may the better see it, we shall herein consider what S. Augustine
says. He speaks of three Aug. ad Felicianu^.
kinds of repentance, the one in them, which before being heathens, have a
mind to be baptized. The second is after baptism, the whole life of one led
in prayers, charity, humility and such like virtuous and laudable deeds: the
third is, the repenting for those sins, which through ma^s frailty we have
howsoever committed, as the breaking of any of all the commandments. We see
here our whole life set forth, and how we should at all times repent. But let
us come unto the holy Scriptures, unto whom confessed the Prophet David his
sins? I will Psalm. 32.
knowledge (says he) mine offense, and accuse my self unto the Lord. If we
be Psalm. 34.
contrite in heart, then is the Lord nigh unto us, if we be humble in spirit, he
will help us. Repent (says our Savior) for the Math. 3. 4.
kingdom of God is at hand. And can we not repent, except we show it unto
the Priest? was not auricular confession condemned, was it not abolished, and
that for good causes, more than twelve hundred years past? did not Nectarius
the Bishop, reprehend and put it down? what? Unto who^ I pray you showed Daniel
his grief? I turned Daniel. 9.
me (says he) unto God the Lord, I prayed before the Lord my God. What
should any move us therefore with mediators, can we have any more than one?
do the Scriptures allow any more? There is (says S. Paul) one God, and one
meditour 1* Tim. 2.
between God and man, which is the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a
ransom for all men. S. Paul says, there is but one mediator: the Pope
says, there are more: whom we should credit, I refer that (Christian
reader) unto thine own conscience. All hereunto that they can object, is this:
there are of the Doctors (say they) that defend auricular confession. What is
this else, I pray you, than to say, there are men, there are of their own
company that defend it? with a good meaning I speak it, I would to God that
we weyed the writings of men as they be, and that we would prefer none
before the Prophets and Apostles of Christ. I would to God that men would
consider what men were, and what they have written. Else religion shall be
hindered, great absurdities shall grow. S. Hierome I know was a good man, yet
if they will stand in all things unto his judgment, then will I manifestly
prove, that ye Pope that now is, is not of the Hieron.
church of Christ. No man (says Hierome) that is spotted with any
uncleanness, is of the Church of Christ. But the Pope is spotted with some
uncleanness: therefore he is not of the Church of Christ. Here is a heavy
thing, they must either deny Hierome, or deface the Pope. You see what it is,
to stand so much upon the Doctors. What needs many words? the repentance
that is allowed by Scripture, the penance that is approved by the Apostles, the
same that is set forth by the Propetes, and by Christ, the same allow we, the
same we embrace and follow. This if they (as they do) will reprehende, then
carpe they not us, but the Scriptures of God: Go we then Alms.
further to see their alms. Wherein what they gave, is to be considered, and
also how they gave it, is to be noted. Neither may we omit, how they came by
the money which they gave. They came by their riches not rightly, they got it
by the means of Purgatory. If then the foundation be naught, nullius boni
operis est supereaeficium, no good Gregor. Antiochen. episcopo.
work can be builded thereon. Yea, it is not to be accounted (says Gregory)
alms deeds, if we give unto the poor, Idem Syagrio epis.
of that which is unlawfully gotten. You see it then plain, that if they
defend not Purgatory, their alms was no alms, their deeds did nothing
avail them. Why will some say, have they not builded houses of religion,
Colleges and Hospitalles? and what of that? I will not answer with mine own
words, but with the authority of Gregory. Gregory disprouing the alms
given of goods unlawfully gotten, says thus: vnde etiam certum est, quia and
si monasteria Ibidem.
vel xenodochia, vel aliquid aliud, ex pecunia quae pro sacris ordinibus datur,
construatur, non proficit mercedi, whence it may euidentlye appear, that
though Monasteries, hospitalles, or any such like thing be builded with money
given for holy orders: such yet does nothing avail. But peradventure Augustine.
one will think and say: there are many Christians which are rich niggardes,
and covetous: I shall not sin, if I take from them, and give unto the poor,
such thought (says Augustine) comes through the suggestion of the devil.
For be it that he would give all unto the poor which he had taken, yet does
he rather increase his sin, than diminish it. If then the Priests took
monye for Dirges, Trentals, Prayers, Pardons and Masses, which even by their
own law is unlawful, and by Gods law is wicked, how may they say, that they
gave alms, or had (if we judge indifferently) any devotion? but if they list,
we will leave the Doctors, and they shall have their fained alms condemned by
Scriptures. Unto Abel Genesis 4.
they know God looked, his offering he received: But unto Cain and his
offering, he had no regard. He looks not upon the alms, sacrifices, and
burnt offeringes of the wicked, the Lord abhors them. He that Eccle 34.
gives an offering of unrighteous good, his offering is refused. But who
doubts whether the goods of the Priest were unrighteous, seeing they got
them by polling the poor, by abusing Gods word, by dreams, by subtle
devises, by selling absolutions, by deceitful whisperinges, by hypocrisy, by
heresy? then what follows, they themselves may see. What should I allege
more examples? the Lord abhors the sacrifice Proverb. 15.
of the ungodly, but the prayer of the righteous is acceptable unto him. Read
the whole Scriptures, and you shall not find one sentence to defend such as
think they give alms of goods unlawfully gotten. Let this suffice of their
counterfaite alms. We for our parts do set forth and teach, that we ought
to sell of our own Luc. 12.
goods, and give unto the poor, that we ought of our own substance to
impart unto the needy. How often do our Preachers speak hereof unto the
people? how often do they ring these words of S. Paul into their cares? while
we have time, let us do AdGal. 6.
good unto all men, and specially unto them which are of the household of
faith. We further exhort men, that they forgive those who have offended them.
For that is a spiritual kind of alms. We persuade all to get their livings
truly, we admonish the poor, that he labor to his power, we counsel the
rich, that he aid and succor the needy, we teach all, that they give their
alms not to be seen of men, but in secret. Such is our doctrine: how can
they dispraise it? let good Christians judge, who follows therein the
Scriptures, we or they: Who set forth true prayers, who commend due fasting,
who allow perfect repentance, who best thinks of alms deeds, we or they.
This considered, let the world judge. They say also that we deny one of An
objection.
the articles of our Creed, upon which slander they build sharp and rigorous
words against us, and all to bring Gods word in contempt, and to procure unto
the professors thereof the hatred of the people. Let as many The answer.
as can read, pervse but with indifferency the books which we have set
abroad, and if they find not in the Creed, the twelve articles fully and
truly translated, then let them blame us and condemn our doings. Likewise, if
they there find them, then let them discredit our adversaries, reprove their
malice, and reprehend their falshoode. What if we prove that it is they, who
have abused the Creed, and that it is the very Pope which has denied that
Article? Ask Peckham Cantuar.
of them, who in our faith, of twelve articles, have made fourtene? Who says
that there be seven articles which concern the mystery of the Trinity, and
seven which belong unto Christ his humanity? who take upon them to correct the
Apostles, they or we? who says that the Bishops be not bound Lindewode.
to answer unto the articles of their faith, without deliberation? is not
this a most heinous ignorancie? this is so gross, that it can never excuse
them (to use their own words) a tanto, nec a toto. Pervse the Creed made by
Gregory, of that name, the first Pope of Rome, and you shall find that it is
he, who has left out one of the articles of our Creed, the discension into
hell. Why then blame they us without cause? why accuse they not him that is
guilty? you see their equity, their justice, their indifferency. We do
further (say they) contemn An objection.
good works, maintain bare words, defend naked faith, and so teach a doctrine
that is licencious, lewd and naught. What they The answer.
should say, we know, but what they dare say, all the world may see. Were
they not over foolish, they would herein hold their peace. For I pray you,
what faith is it, that we teach? preach we not the very same which S. Paul
does in this wise define? Faith (says he) is a sure confidence of Heb. 11.
things, which are hoped for, and a certainty of things which are not seen.
How say they then, is this to be blamed? as for our works, what be they, but
witnesses that we are righteous? was it not so in Ibidem.
Abel? And touching justification, the estate of the question between the Pope
and us, Justification.
is this: he says, that man is made just, not only by faith, but also through
the observation of the law. We say that we are justified by faith alone, by no
merits of ours, by no works. We say that a just man makes the works good,
and not that the good works do make a man just. And as by faith alone without
works we be justified, so by grace alone without our deserts we be saved. And
what says S. Paul hereunto Romans 3.
we suppose (says he) that a man is justified by faith without the deeds of
the law. Lo, what can be plainer than this? Let them which have eyes see, the
words be evident, let such as have hearts understand. If you (unto the Pope,
not I, but Paul says) be justified by deeds, then Romans 4.
have you wherein to rejoice, but not with God. Goes not this text very
plainlye to work? but have I no power (will one say) to do any good deed?
of thy self not at all, neither one. Will thou know what is in thy power? it
is in thy power, not to do some deed that is evil, and yet is it not in thee
to do that which is good. How so (will one say) do not I that which is good,
if I do not the thing which is evil? No. And therefore mark it. For were it
so, then did the Heathens, and Ethnickes good deeds, which thing, who is he
that will grant? shall we say, that the heathens were just men? or that they
were virtuous? God forbid. And why? because they wanted this faith which makes
the work good, Augustine.
which justifies a man. For the whole life of the unfaithful (says
Augustine) is sin. And therefore though we may say that one having faith,
has, does, or if he have time, would do good works, yet can not we say,
that all which seem in our eyes to do well, have faith. For many Hipocrites
there be, a man's faith we know not, his heart is secret, his deeds we see. No
man Ad Iren.
(says Ambrose) shall be justified by his works Some man (says the Pope)
shall be justified by his works. The first proposition is true: therefore this
last, being the contradictorie is false. Here they will object against us the
words of S. James. But I would to God that they understood them. S. James
moved with many, who bragged in their fruitelesse faith, is enforced in the
praise of works, to say thus: as the body Iam. 2
without life is dead, so is faith without works. What is this else to say,
than if one have true faith, it is impossible but he (having time) should have
good works? What does he else here, but exhort them to show their faith by
their works, to show that they have true faith? I will be brief, and so
bring them herin to knowledge the truth. Whatsoever purifieth the heart, by
that a Act. 15.
man is justified: but faith purifieth ye heart: therefore by faith a man is
justified. How comes a man to be justified? Marry, as S. Augustine says)
non per suas vires, nequeper De spirit* and litera.
literam ipsius legis, quod fieri non potest, sed per fidem, not through his
own strength, not through the letter of the law, which can not be but by
faith. What further testimonies the^ need we? why should any arroga^tly
arrogate unto himself any supererogatio^? We know (says S. Paul) that a man
is Gala. 2.
not justified by the deeds of the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ. And
therefore we have believed on Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the
says of Christ, and not by the deeds of the law, for by the deeds of the law,
no flesh can be justified. These authorities be so full against the
adversaries, the places be so plain, that will they, nill they, they must
yield, and therefore in these words they subscribe: These witnesses Alfons.
Virues. Hispanus.
do not only move, but also so far further, that we must confess, that we
have the remission of our sins, and justification through faith by Christ.
Yea, and that before faith, there was in us no good works, whereby we should
deserve that faith, which is the free gift of God. Now we here see that in this
they confess ye truth, and that they knowledge the Scriptures, if the^ they
afterward deny it, be that to their own danger, not to our deluding, be it to
their own peril, not to our poisoning: if they to show their follye, or to
utter their arrogancy do pass this scope, seeking by wresting the
scriptures, by shifts, and subtilties to shadow the truth, let that redounde
to their false dealing, not to diminishe out faith, to their iugling not to our
undoing. Let this be unto thee (Christen Reader) a watch word, wander not with
them into the wilderness, *stay with the Scriptures at the standarde of
truth, let Paul persuade thee, let not the Pope allure thee, let an Apostle of
Christ* instruct thee, let not an Apostata deceive thee. This much of
justification. The next thing and the last which we now will defend, is
marriage, Marriage.
wherein (says S. Augustine) if purity De bono vid.
be kept, damnation is not to be feared. Deus masculum and foeminam,
propagandi generis causa, nuptiali castitate coniunxit, GOD Idem contra aduers.
legum and prophet.
(says he) coupled man and woman together, for the increase of mankind, in
chaste wedlock. But what (will one say) need you to write in ye defense of
marriage? is there any man that may, or means to impugn it? yes. Else had
not the holy ghost spoken in Paul, that in the latter 1. Tim. 4.
times some should give heed unto the spirit of error, and deuilish
doctrine of them, which speak false through hypocrisy, and have their
consciences marked with an hot iron, forbidding to marry. We will therefore
bring forth ye testimonies of holy scripture, and that from the first
institution of marriage, against this deuilishe doctrine, against these spirits
of error, against such as forbid to marry. After that Heaven and Earth, the
Sea, and all that in them is, were made, after the creation likewise of man,
the Lord God cast a slumber on Adam and of one of his ribs he made a woman,
and then he said: For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and
Genesis 2.
cleave unto his wife, and they shall be one flesh. Such was the first estate
of marriage, it was instituted in Paradyse. Here is no exception of any man, no
excluding of any woman, no cause is here showed, no prohibition is made, but
that all men may marry. This holy institution was so allowed of all, and
every where with such sincerity received, that if a man should be found lying
with a woman that had a wedded Deuteronomy. 52.
husband, then they both should be put to death. The Prophet Malachie does
bitterly reprove him that puts away or despises Malach. 6.
his wife. Neither in Moses nor yet in Malachie can we find any one word to
prohibit matrimony. Read from the first of the Genesis unto the last of the
Apocalipse, read the first, read the last, you shall find in no place
marriage prohibited, or any kind of person, of what calling so ever, excluded.
O how godly is the state of marriage set forth, and how to marry, in Tobias!
Tob. 6.
O that as well the married, as the unmarried, would read and well weigh it!
Consider chaste Sara, who though she kept not company Ibidem.
with those that pass their time in sport, yet an husband consented she to
take, not for her pleasure, but in Gods fear. The Hebr. 13.
Chamber undefiled is commendable, the estate of marriage is honorable. But
amongst whom? amongst a sort, a certain, a few? No. Inter omnes, amongst all.
This is spoken Ibidem.
universally, not particularlye. If amongst all, then why forbids the Pope
to marie? why defends he that deuilishe doctrine? why maintains he in any,
rather fornication, than lawful conjunction? with what face can he set forth,
that it is lawful for one to have, ( loco vxoris (si coniux Isidor: de did:
nou: and vet: testamen.
d^est) concubinam) in the stead of a wife (and if he have no wife) a harlote?
If the Reader be indifferent, then will he deal indifferently. For my part, I
promise before hand, I will not be partial. I like the unmarried, I mislike not
the married, I commend both, if they follow their calling. But yet be he Priest
or any other person, the 1. Cor. 7.
flesh is frail, if he cannot abstain, let him marry. For it is better to
marry, than to burn, it is better to have an honest wife, than a wicked
harlot, it is better to live in holiness than in whoredom. If one marry
only to aduoyde fornication, non tamen ideo Hieron.
nuptiae malae iudicantur, yet is not marriage therefore counted evil. Well,
when began this deuilish doctrine, through which men are prohibited to marry?
had it any place within ye compass of holy scriptures? No. And that the Pope
knows well enough. The question was moved in the Tripart. hist.
Council of Nice, there they labored that Priests marriages should not be
lawful. But at that time stood up Panutius the confessor, he there expressed
the Scriptures, he persuaded the whole Council, he caused them to revoke their
opinion, so was it left in every man's will, marriage was still lawful. What?
was not this a decree of Council. Gangren.
their own? If any do this think of a married Priest: that he ought not by
the means of his marriage to minister the Communion, and so does therefore
mislike his ministering: let him be accursed. Here is the proposition at large
framed, if we proceed, I think we shall prove as well the Pope, as those which
over popishly do take his part, to be accursed. The argument is made, if we
say: that the Pope and his adherentes do so think, and for that cause
mislike his ministering: therefore they be accursed. Such is the conclusion. In
this argument, if they deny any thing, it must be their own Proposition,
which was made at a general Council, by the advice of so many fathers.
Gregory the Pope and the Anno domini. 1073.
seventh of that name, who usurped unto himself (as some do write) the
authority, kept a great stir, and labored earnestly to forbid the marriage
of Priests. But the whole Clergy resisted him, in so much that the Popes
deputy in that behalf, the Bishop of Mentz, had great a do, much trouble,
and no small peril in dealing therein. So odious unto all was the prohibition
of matrimony, so usurped, yea, so wicked then, seemed that deuilish doctrine.
But what? whose sons were O sius, Bonifacius, Agapitus, Damas. Hieron.
Theodorus, Siluerius, Deusdedit, Felix, Gelasius, with a number more, who were
Popes of Rome? were they not all Priests children? how then can they excuse,
but that either their fathers were married, or else that they were filthy
fornicators, and very lesude livers? Concerning the Apostles, specially such
as were married, is it to be thought, think you, that they never came where
their wives were? the Popes friends say, they came not. And how prove they it?
forsooth, because there is no mention thereof made in the Scriptures. A proper
proof. Because we read only by Math. 8.
name, of Peter's mother in law, which lay sick in his house, therefore shall
we think that she lay succourlesse? that her daughter was gone? that there was
none in the house but she? Came not Peter's wife, came not his daughter
Petronella with him into Rome? hereof I report me unto their own histories. S.
Paul, when he wrote unto the Corinthians, was unmaried, but what if afterward
he had a wife? and that I come not with bare iffes, I will allege mine
authority: it is Leo the Pope of Rome himself, Leo. 9. contra epistolam
Nicet. Abbatis.
that so says. They must either blame his holiness, or else knowledge Paul
to have been a married man. This is a hard choice. What shall I speak of the
deuilish diuorcementes, and most ungodly separations, used in these later
days, even in less than sixtene years past? why were at that time the married
Priests separated from their wives? because (says the Pope) their marriage was
no marriage, because they were adulterers. What? because of their former vows?
O Augustine, were thou now living, thou would lay this heresy vowne. But
though he be dead, do not his writings yet live? wrote he not against this
before he died? yes. And these are his De bono coniug. ad Iul.
words. Quidam nubentes post votum asserunt adulteros esse, ego autem dico
vobis, quod grauiter peccant, qui tales diuidunt: There are some which say that
those which marry after their vow, be adulterers, But I tell you that they
offend grieuouslye which separate such. Now if they be adulterers, how do
they offend that separate them? But if they do amiss which separate them,
then be they no adulterers. Whosoever (says Augustine) will separate such,
he does grievously offend: but Calixtus the Pope does separate such:
therefore he does grievously offend. I dare boldlye say that they have
nothing hereunto to answer, I am plain, the argument is good, it cannot be
denied. Montanus est qui docuit nuptias Nauclerus.
solui, it is Montanus the heretic, who first taught that marriage should be
dissolved, they are Montani, they are of his sect, they are heretics that do
it. What other authorities need we? the thing is plain, what would we more?
in the end let this one authority suffice. Si quis docuerit sacerdotem Canon
Apostolorum.
sub obtent u religionis propriam contemnere vxorem, anathema sit: if any shall
teach, that a Priest under the pretense of Religion, may in any wise contemn
his own wife, let him be accursed. What? is not this a decree of their own
sinode? Non in perpetuum, sed tempore oblationis, a complexu suarum vxorum
sacerdotes abstineant. Their Latin is so embracing, as let them english it
that like it. We will (says that sinode) that henceforth Syn. 6.
the marriage of spiritual men shall be in force and good. Thus have I passed
over, first the miserable estate of such as be in blindness, then have I
disproued the usurped primacie of Rome, I have battered down the rotten walls
of Purgatory, I have defended the right use of the Lords supper, I have
proved that there are no faults in our translation, I have showed that the
service and prayer ought to be in the English tongue, I have declared the
true use of fasting, prayers, repentance, and alms deeds: I have set forth
the right doctrine of justification, I have defended the honorable estate of
matrimony, I have also (as occasion served) without partiality answered all
the objections of the adversaries. All which things as they are briefly done,
so wish I the reader to consider of them indifferently. I wish that odious
terms may cease, I desire that charity in us all may increase, It is not
enough to term men heretics. Remember what Gregory says: Theotist. patrit.
there are many even of the faithful, which are puffed up with an ignorant
zeal: and many times while they hate others as heretics: they are the cause
of heresies themselves. Away with your excommunications, renounce your
cursings, leave off your threatenings, your weapon is naught, your authority is
nothing. Have in memory what S. Hierome says: If any be Hieron. in Leuit.
put out and sent forth not through the right judgment of such as rule in the
Church, if he before went not out, that is, if he did nothing whereby he
deserved to go forth, it is not hurtful unto him at all, though he seem to
be thrown out by the unright judgment of men, and so it happens oftentimes,
that he which is cast forth, is within: and he that seems to be within, is
without. Weigh this well, and you shall esteem the bannings of Rome, as they
be, you shall if you have eyes, see, that you were abused, and holden under the
heavy yoke of a most bitter bondage. Shake off therefore self will, cast away
self love, away with estimation, care not for a vain credit, consider your
estate, help to redress that is amiss, we seek but the putting away of
shadows, vanities, errors, blindness, superstition, arrogancy, and abuses.
That this may be done, join hands, help forward the building of Gods
house, deserve well of your country: whereunto God exhorts you, our Princes
your most gracious Queen prays you, your friends do desire you, your
countriemen do beseech you, your native soil, your country it self, this
flourishing realm of England, do together, and most earnestly entreat you.

FINIS.
A brief vewe of the erring estate of the Bishops of Rome.
IF the gates of Hell it Math. 16.
self, if all the power and force of Satan shall not prevail, as in deed
they can not, against the Church of Christ: how then, and with what face, may
ye bishop of Rome, in whose person sin has triumphed, and in whose religion
hell has rejoiced, how may he challenge himself to be the head, supreme and
chief of that Church, whom the holy ghost rules and orders, whom he
directs until the consummation of the world, in the way of all perfection
and truth? if the Bishop of Rome be the head, in what estate (O Lord) are the
limbs, what a monstrous body would that be? And not to speak of the first
heretic Nouatus, qui a quibusdam 1 Nauclerus.
sibi adherentibus sactus est Papa, who by certain of his adherents was made
Pope: did not Marcellinus being bishop of Rome offer sacrifice unto the Idols?
did not 2 Siluester (which is a great fault, for a hyreling flies, when he
sees the Woolfe Joan. 10.
come, and forsakes his sheep) Did he not for fear of Maxentius, fly unto
the hill Soracte, which is.xx. miles from Rome? did he not with a few of his
Clergy, neither he, nor yet they, regarding their poor sheep, there in a
manner hide themselves? was not 3 Liberius banished, 4 and Foelix chosen Bishop?
was not Foelix displaced, and Liberius again received? subscribed he not unto
the heresy of Arrius? between 5 Damasus which was accused of adultery, and 6
Vrsicinus, much slaughter there was, whiles both of them labored with force
and arms, to enter into the Bishopric. Did not 7 Victor offend in cutting
(as they say) from the unity of the Church, so great, and so many Churches?
does not Ireneus reprehende him therefore? the strife was great between 8
Bonifacius and 9 Eulalius, they at one time both being chosen bishops of Rome.
To let pass 10 Sixtus which was accused by Passus, did not 11 Anastasius favor
the heretic Achatius? died he not in his error, and miserably? did not the
Clergy withdraw themselves from him? 12 Simmachus and 13 Laurentius were both
chosen to be Bishops, great contention was amongst them. The like stir was
between 14 Bonifacius and 15 Dioscorus. Yea, did not Bonifacius contrary unto
all order choose 16 Vigilius to be his successor? was not 17 Siluerius chosen
by simonie? was not 18 Pelagius elected contrary unto all former custom? what
broyle was there in the choosing of 19 Sergius? what wickedness was wrought
between 20 Sisinius and 21 Dioscorus? 22 Constantinus came to be bishop
through ambition. 23 Sabinianus was a very lewd man. As for Pope 24 Ioane, an
honest woman she was. What was 25 Stephanus? an example of much mischief. What
cruelty used he toward the dead body of 26 Formosus? what a wolf was 27
Christophorus? what cruelty was in 28 Sergius? it is horrible to hear what
wickedness was committed in a manner by twenty and eight Bishops of Rome. Did
not eight Bishops reign within the space of twelve years, who had together
forsaken the steps of S. Peter? What was 29 John? a very monster: he was
slain (they say) in his filthy adultery. What ado was between 30 Leo, and
31 Benedictus? Was not 32 Bonifacius a murderer? Was not 33 John the.xv. a
loud man? as for 34 John the.xvij. his wickeducsse is horrible. What was 35
Siluester the second? a Coniurer. In 36 Benedictus (if his friends write
truly) there was great fault. What? were not 37 Benedictus the.ix. 38 Siluester
the.iij. and 39 Gregory the.vi. at one time Bishops of Rome? led they not ill
lives? the one played the Bishop at S. Peter's, the second at S. Mary's, the
third at S. John's. 40 Damasus (if they write the thing as it was) intruded
himself into the Bishopric with mere force. I will not speak of the warrier
41 Leo, as he was a lewd Captain, so had he evil luck. Between 42
Benedictus, and 43 Nicholas, what sturr^, what a do was kept? the like was
between 44 Alexander, and 45 Cadolus. Touching 46 Gregory, he was
excommunicated by the Bishops of Italy? and why? for simonie, manslaughter,
and adultery. How great was the dissension between 47 Guibertus, and 48
Paschal? 49 Gelasius offended. 50 Honorius became Bishop through ambition. 51
Innosentius, and 52 Anacletus contended for the dignity. 53 Eugenius forsook
his flock. So did 54 Pascall. 55 Adrianus was to blame. Lord, what debate was
between proud 56 Alexander, and 57 Victor? what should I show how one Pope
cursed another? 58 Innocentius did lewdly. 59 Calistus was a very thief. I
will omit dreaming 60 John, who promising unto himself a long life, was
suddenly slain with the fall of a chamber. What was 61 Nicholas, and 62
Bonifacius? the one was unthankful and cruel. They both preferred rather their
friends, than such as feared God. 63 Clemens was chosen by simonie. What
dissension was between him and 64 Vrbanus? 65 Bonifacius was young and
unlearned. With him did 66 Alexander contend. What? were not 67 Innocentius,
68 Benedictus, and 69 Gregory, all three at one time, clayming and chalencing
the dignity? Was not 70 John a very fool? did not 71 Martinus, and 72
Clemens contend at one time? Did not 73 Eugenius forsake his flock? was not 74
Foelix a wicked and an ambicious man? was not 75 Paulus lewd? was not 76
Xystus unprofitable? I reckon not up one name twice, if I have declared that
many of one name were lewd, they were so, they were sundry men, and sundry
Bishops. Well, is here all that were wicked bishops of Rome? No. For a great
number besides there were, but touching these, they are tried in a manner
without study by their own authorities to be such. And shall these be the head
of Christ his Church? O Christ, I commit the judgment thereof to such as do
knowledge thee, to such as in deed be Christians, to such as use some
indifferency.

P:
Vae misero mihi, mea nunc facinora
Aperiuntur, clam quae speraui fore.
My hidden faults be uttered now, a wretch, alas, I am:
By Pride and fond desire to reign, to passing shame I came.
Psalm. 1. Beatus est vir, qui non abijt in concilio impiorum: Happy is the
man that follows not the way of the wicked.

To the Reader.
YOU have seen here what a number of lewd men, were Bishops of Rome. And yet
some peradventure will say, that their lives and wickedness can stand in no
force, to bar them of their dignity, of their usurped title of primacie. No
can? Can any be a member of Christ his Church, who is so void of the holy
Ghost, that he has in him dwelling the right riches of Satan, simonie, I
mean, ambition, pride, murder, and cruelty? if such then may not be called
a member, how shall we term him, how shall he claim to be the chief, the
head, the supreme? Judge indifferentlye, for so you shall profit your selves,
and easily be eased from the clog of bondage, wherewith*agaynst all reason,
good authority, and Scripture, you have been tied. Farewell, and judge of me
as these my writings deserve.

Examini, and iudicio verae ecclesiae, quae fidelium, sanctorum, and electorum
societas est, and communio, constans fide, spe, dilectione, ac spiritu Christi,
hoc ego opusculum humiliter ac demisse subijcio: I do with humility, and
lowliness submit this small work, to the judgment and examination of the
true Church, which is the society, and communion of the faithful, holy, and
elected, the same being known, and agreeing in faith, hope, charity, and the
spirit of Christ.

Appollodorus. Good men use few words: neither Stobaeus sermon. 34.
needs the truth much babbling. A Copy of a Letter, sent by the Emperor unto
the Pope
Frederick by the grace of God, the Nauclerus.
Roman Emperor, always imperial,
unto Adrian bishop of the catholic Church, sends greeting, willing him to
stand unto all those things, which Christ began to do, and to teach.
THe law of Justice, does restore unto every man, that which is his own,
neither do we any injury unto our parents, unto whom within this our
Realm, we do exhibit due honor, and from vvho^ as our progenitors, we have
received the dignity of our realm and crown. Is it found that Siluester
Bishop of Rome in the time of Constantine the Emperor, had any Kingly
possession, or authority? for thorovv the permission of the Emperors godly
affection, the liberty of the church was granted, peace was restored, and
what Princelye thing soever, your popedom is known to have, the same you do
hold through the liberality of Princes. Therefore when we write unto the
Bishop of Rome, by good right and of old, we do write first our own name,
and that he so do, as the rule of justice is, vvriting unto us, we grant.
Pervse the chronicles, and if you have neglected the thing you read, that
which we allege, you shall find it there. But of those which belong unto
God by adoption, and do hold any Kingly thing of us, why may not we
demand homage, and oath due unto a prince? seeing the appointer of us, and of
you, receiving nothing of a man that is a king, but yielding every good thing
unto al, paid for himself and for Peter, the tribute due unto Caesar, giving
thereby unto you example to do the like, and so he teaches you saying: learn
of me, for I am meek, and humble in heart. Wherefore let such either restore
unto us our princelye possessions, or if they adiudge these things profitable,
let them pay unto God that which is Gods, and unto Caesar that which is his.
Also unto your Cardinals, the Churches be shut, the cities are not open, and
that because we see them not to be preachers, but spoylers, not peacemakers,
but money catchers, not the redressers of the world, but the insatiable
scrapers of gold. Yet when we shall perceive them to be such as the church
requires, when they prove to be peacemakers, when they will give light unto
their country, and when they will assist the cause of the humble in equity,
then lo shall we aid them with necessary stypendes, and safeco^ducts. But
you have not a little offended against humility, which ought to be the keeper
of your virtues and meeknes, when you set forth unto secular persons such
questions as are very small furtherance unto religion. Wherefore, let your
fatherhoode foresee, vvhiles you move things which we adiudge unworthy,
least you be an offense unto those, who as unto a latevvard shoure, are
desirous to yield their ears unto your mouth. For we can not, but aunsvvere
the things we hear, when we see the detestable beast of Pride, to have
crept, even unto the seat of Peter. And in thus doing we do alvvaies well
provide for the peace of the Church. Fare you always well.

FINIS.
Seen and allowed according to the order appointed. Anno. 1568.


