THE BARREN TREE. A Sermon Preached at Paul's Cross October 26. 1623.

BY THO: ADAMS.

LONDON, Printed by AVG: MATTHEW'S for JOHN GRISMAND, and are to be sold at his
Shop in Paul's Alley, at the sign of the Gunne. 1623.

TO THE REVErend and learned, Doctor DONE, Deane of St. Paul's, together with
the Prebend-Residentiaries of the same Church, my very good Patrons.
RIGHT WORSIPFVLL,
NOt out of any opinion of this Sermons worth, to which I dare not inuit your
Judicious eyes. Nor, any ambition to merit of my Patrons, whom I read styled,
Petty creators. But in humble acknowledgement of your favors, I present this
small Rent of Thankfulness; the poor fruit of that tree, which grows on
your own ground, and has not from the world any other sustenance. Vouchsafe,
I beseech you, your Patronage to the child, who have made the Father of it,

Your VVors. devoted Homager THO: ADAMS.

To the Reader.
I Neither affect those Rheumaticke Pens, that are still dropping upon the
Press: nor those Phlegmatic spirits, that will scarce be coniur'd into the
orb of employment. But if modest forwardness be a fault, I cannot excuse my
self.

It pleased God Almighty, to make a fearful Comment on this his own Text,
the very same day it was preached by his unworthiest servant. The argument was
but audible in the morning, before night it was visible. His holy Pen had long
since written it with ink, now his hand of Justice expounded it in the
Characters of blood, There, was only a conditional menace, So it shall be:
here a terrible remonstrance, So it is. Sure! He did not mean it for a nine
days wonder. Their sudden departure out of the World, must not so suddenly
depart from the memory of the World. Woe to that soul that shall take so
slight a notice of so extraordinary a Judgment. We do not say, They perished:
Charity forbid it. But this we say, It is a sign of Gods favor, when he
gives a man Law. We pass no sentence upon them, yet let us take warning by
them. The Remarkablenesse would not be neglected; for the Time, the Place, the
Persons, the Number, the Manner. Yet still we conclude not, This was for the
transgression of the dead: but this we are sure of, It is meant for the
admonition of the living.

Such is our Blessed Saviors conclusion, upon a parallel instance: Except ye
repent, YE shall all LIKEWISE perish. There is no place safe enough for
offenders: but when the Lord is once up in arms, happy man that can make his
own peace! otherwise, in vain we hope to run from the Plague, while we
carry the Sin along with us. Yet will not our wilful and bewitched
Recusants, from these legible Characters, spell Gods plain meaning. No
impression can be made in those hearts, that are ordained to perish. For their
malicious, causeless, and unchristian censures of us, God forgive them: our
requital be only pity and prayers for them. Howsoever they give out, (and I
will not here examine) that their piety is more then ours: Impudence it self
cannot deny, but our Charity is greater then theirs. Now the holy fear of
God keep us in the ways of Faith and Obedience; that the properation of Death
may never prevent our preparation to die. And yet still, after our best
endeavor; From sudden death good Lord deliver us all. Amen.

T. A.

THE BARREN TREE.
LVKE. Cap. 13. Verse. 7. Then said he to the Dresser of his Vineyard; Behold,
these three years I come seeking fruit on this Fig Tree, and find none: cut it
down, why cumbreth it the ground?


News is brought to Christ, of a certain Judgment, which was not more
Pilates, then Gods, upon some Galileans; who, while they were sacrificing, were
sacrificed; their blood being mingled with the blood of the beasts, on the same
altar. Lest this should be wholly attributed to Pilates cruelty, without due
respect had of the omnipotent Justice, he samples it with another; of
eighteen men miscarrying by the fall of a Tower. No Pilate threw down this,
here was no humane Executioner: the matter of their death was mortar and
stones; these bad no purpose to kill them. This therefore, must be an
invisible hand, working by an insensible creature: the Iustrument may be
diverse, the Judge is the same.

Now, Poena paucorum, terror omnium: as an exhalation drawn from the earth,
fired and sent back again to the earth, smites only one place, but
terrifieth the whole country. So their ruins should be our terrors; let them
teach us, that they may not touch us. They are hitherto but like Moses his
Rod turned into a Serpent: not into a Bear or Lion, lest it should have
devoured Pharaoh: but into a Serpent, that he might be more afraid then hurt.
It is Gods special favor to us, that others be made examples for us, and not
we made examples for others. Nothing could teach them, let them teach us.

Of these fearful Instances our Savior makes this use; setting down a
peremptory conclusion: Vel poenitendum, vel pereundum: Except ye repent, ye
shall all likewise perish. Such vengeance is no way to be avoided, but by
repentance. But here the Jews might flatter themselves; If we be greater
sinners then they, how comes it to pass that we speed better then they? To
this silent objection, Christ makes an Apologicall answer, verse 6. You are
not spared because you are more righteous, but because God to you is more
gracious. You deserve such or sorer Judgments; and the reason of this
impunitie is not to be looked for in your innocence, but in the Lords
patience: nor because you are not worse to him, but because he is better to
you: who offers you space and grace to amend, if (at least) at last you will
bring forth the fruits of Repentance.

There be some terms in the Text; (as that the Vineyard is the Church, every
Christian a Fig Tree, God the Owner, every Pastor a Dresser:) wherein your
understandings may well prevent my discourse: these known and familiar things I
take as granted of all hands.

It is a Parable, therefore not to be forced every way, nor made to warrant a
conclusion which the Author never meant. This were, when it offers us the
company a mile, to compel it to go with us twain: or to make Christ's
Messenger speak our errand. Such is the trade of Rome; what their own policy
has made necessary, they will teach God to make good: this is to pick
darkness out of the Sun. No. Verificatur in sensu suo. like a good creature,
it does only that it was made for. A Parable is not like a Looking-glass, to
represent all forms and faces: but a well drawn Picture, to remonstrate that
person whereof it is a counterfeit. It is like a knife, with the haft it cutts
not, with the back it cuts not, it cuts with the edge. A Candle is made to
light us, not to heat us: a Stoue is made to heat us, not to light us: if
this Parable, like the Sun, may give both light and heat; the more
profitable, the more acceptable.

Then said he to the Dresser, The Distribution.
etc. That part of it, to which I limit my present Discourse, delivers it self
to us in these four passages.

A Consultation; Then said he to the Dresser of his Vineyard. Complaint.
Behold, these three years I come seeking fruit on this Fig Tree, and find
none. Sentence; Cut it down. Reason; Why cumbers it the ground?


The Consultation. Then said he unto, etc.

Dixit, non percussit: he spoke, he stroke not: he might have spared words,
and begun with wounds. The Tree had rather deserved the Axe and Fire, then a
Consultation of recovery. How easily would man have rejected his hopeless
brother? as when a piece of clay will not work to his mind, the Potter
throws it away: or we cast fouie rags to the dunghill, little thinking
that they may become white paper. But with God, Verba antecedunt verbera; he
will be heard before he be felt. Our first Parents, when they had sinned,
Vocem andiuerunt, Heard the voice of God: Genes. 3.8.
He reasoned with them, before he condemned them. If the fathers word can
correct the child, he will let the rod alone. Wicked men use the sudden
Arguments of steel and iron; as Ioah discoursed with Amasa, in the fifth ribbe,
2 Samuel 20.10. 1 Kings 22.24.
they speak Daggers points. So Zedekiah disputed with the Prophet, a word and
a blow; yea, a blow without a word: he struck him first, and spoke to him
afterward. God deals otherwise; Behold, I stand at the door, Revel. 3.20.
and knock: he knockes at the door, does not presently break it open. He
gives us warning of his Judgments, that gave him no warning of our sins. Why
does he thus? That we might see our miserable estate, and fall to timely
deprecation: that so punishing our selves, we might save him a labor.

Dixit, non destinauit: as if the Lord would double and repeat his thoughts,
before he decreed it to irreuocable ruin. A divine president of moderation!
If he that cannot transgress in his wrath, nor exceed in his Justice, will yet
Consulere amicum, advise with his friend: how ought frail man to suspend his
furious purposes to mature deliberation? It is too common with us, to attempt
dangerous and desperate actions, without further counsel then our own green
thoughts. So Anger is made a Solicitor, Passion a Judge, and Rashness an
Executioner. The wise man first considers, then speaks or does: the mad man
first speaks or does, and then considers. Which drives him on necessity to
play the after-game; with shame and sorrow to recover his former estate, or
give it lost for ever. O holy deliberation, whither art thou fled? David's Harp
did cast the evil spirit out, this would keep him from ever coming in. It is
a Porter at the Gate of Gods spiritual Temple, Man; that would be as sure to
keep out his enemies, as David would have bin ready to let in his friends. How
many desperate precipices of sin would be prevented, were this Rule remembered;
Consule Cultorem? For matter of estate, we are counseled by the Lawyer: for
health of body, advised by the Physician: we trust the Pilot to steer our
course by Sea, the Survey or to mete out our Land: but for the soul let it be
as barren as this Fig Tree, we take no counsel of the Gardener. Do worldlings
consult the Preacher, concerning their usurious trade before they undertake it?
Do Gallants advise with him, before they meet in Aceldama, the field of blood?
O that they would admit an answer from such a friend, before they give an
answer to such an enemy.

Dixit Vinitori. Such is the honor God does his Ministers, to acquaint them
with his own purposes. Surely, Amos 3.7.
the Lord will do nothing, but he first reuealeth it to his servants, the
Prophets. Nothing; which may conduce to the office of their Ministry, and the
good of his Church. Luke 8.10.
To you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of Heaven. To you,
not to the world, they have no such revelation. It is given, it is none of your
inheritance, you were not borne to it. To know Mysteries, Sapere alta, not
common things. Of the kingdom (not secular; such mysteries are for the
knowledge of Statizing Jesuits; but) of heaven. Genesis 18.17.
Shall I hide from Abraham the thing that I mean to do? The matter concerned
Sodom, not Abraham: yet was it revealed to Abraham, not to Sodom. But does
God need any man's counsel? Romans 11.34.
Who has at any time been his Counselor? Will the Potter take advice of his
pots? No; when Christ asked Philip where supply of bread might be had for the
multitude; This he said to prove him: John 6.6.
for he himself knew what he would do. His questions are not his, but our
satisfactions. Thus does he credit his own Ordinance, teaching the world how
to esteem of them whom himself so singularly honors. How poor a place soever
they find in men's thoughts, the King of heaven and earth calls them to his
counsel. Priest, Numb. 17.
was a title whereof the Princes of Israel were ambitious: they would not,
every man have written his name on his rod, but in hope that this Dignity
might fall to his lot. Now, is the Ministry of the Gospel inferior to that
of the Law? Was the service of death more glorious then the service of life,
and salvation? If the Evangelical Covenant be better, is the Ministration
worse? The Sons of the great think scorn of such an employment: what they
held an honor, these count a disparagement: In one and the same subject meets
their ambition and our scorn. It is ill when the Fig Tree shall despise the
Dresser, but it would be far worse if the Dresser should despise the
Fig Tree.

To the Dresser. This is the whole Congregation of his Ministers, to whom he
has committed the culture of his Vineyard: all which, by an Enallage numeri,
are summed up in one Dresser. Acts 4.32.
1. Quia Cor vnum, because they have all one heart. Ephesians. 4.12.
2. Quia officium vnum; all their labors meet in that one common term; the
edification of the Body of Christ. 3. It is usual to name one proceteris, for
all the rest. Peter says, Though I should die with thee, I will not deny
thee. Math. 26.35.
Did Peter only promise this? No, but So said likewise the rest of the
Disciples. Had not this been a Parable, I never found a place of more probable
color for the high Priest of Rome to challenge his universal Supremacy by. But
surely, he will never dress Christ's Vineyard, as it ought, unless in a
Parable. Nay, would his Instruments forbear to sow it with brambles, to
manure it with blood, and to cast Nabaoth out of his own vineyard, it were
somewhat. But let them pass! When the Spirit wrote to a whole Church, he
inscribes his Epistle under one particular name, Revel. 2. and 3.
Angelo Ecclesiae, to the Angel of the Church.

To the Dresser. Dressing implies labor and heedfulneesse. I might here touch
upon the Ministers diligence, that Christ's Vineyard never lie rude and
vnpolishd through his default. But this age will look to that well enough:
never did the Egyptians call so fast upon the Israelites for making of Brickes,
as the people call on us for making of Sermons: and our allowance of materials
is much alike. They think it recompense bountiful enough to praise our pains;
as if we could live like Camelions, upon the subtle air of Commendations. So
they serve us as Carriers do their Horses; lay heavy burdens upon their backs,
and then hang belles at their ears to make them music. But be our reward
little or much, God forbid we should slack dressing the Vineyard of Jesus
Christ.

To the Dresser. Why to him? Vt intercederet that he might plead for the Tree.
So unwilling is God to destroy, that he would have us manacle his hands with
our prayers: he would be entreated to forbear. Exodus 32.7.
Go thy ways down, for the people which thou broughtest out of Egypt, have
corrupted themselves. Why this to Moses? That he might pray for them. He that
meant to spare them in mercy, meant withal that Moses should be beholden to
him for that mercy. And Moses indeed charge the Lord, sets upon him with so
holy a violence, that as if his prayers could vincere inuincibilem, he hears,
Let me alone. O that every Vine-dresser were full of this gracious affection to
the trees under his charge: yea, who fears God, and in some measure has it
not? The people forgot Moses, Moses remembers the people: they could be merry
and happy without him, he would not be happy without them. Men rob us of our
means, lode us with reproaches: all our revenge is to solicit heaven for them
by our supplications: they sue us, we sue for them: they impouerish our
temporal condition, we pray for their eternal salvation. We could never
hope for good to our selves, if we should not return them this good for their
evil.

Corah had drawn a multitude to rebel against Moses and Aaron, Numb. 16.22.
Moses and Aaron pray for their rebels. They were worthy of death, and they had
it; yet would these merciful Leaders have prevented it: refusing to buy their
own peace with the loss of such enemies. Yea, they are so far from caruing
their own just revenge, that they would not have the Lord to revenge for them.
Let us fill our hearts with this great Example: the people rise up against
their Pastors, the Pastors fall on their faces for the people. Certainly, if
God had not meant to hear us, he would never inuit us to pray. But as it
pleases Him to make us His mouth to you; so also, your mouth to Him: both to
tell you what He does say, and to return Him what you should say; to preach
against your sins; to pray for your souls. Do you hear us plead for
Christ, for Christ hears us plead for you. Indeed, we are men of polluted
lips and lives: but as Gods power is not straightened through our weakness, so,
nor is his mercy lessened through our unworthiness. Therefore as Paul had his,
Vae mihi si non praedicauero; Woe unto me, if I Preach not: So Moses, in
effect, had his Vae mihi, si non intercessero, woe unto me, if I pray not: God
forbid I should cease praying for you. But as all our Preaching can work no
good upon you, but through the holy Ghost: so all our Praying can bring no good
to you, but through Jesus Christ. We pray for you, forget not you to pray for
us. Indeed, weak ones pray with us, malicious ones pray against us, covetous
ones prey upon us, few pray for us. We entreat for you, do you entreat for us;
and that only Mediator betwixt God and man plead for us all.

The Complaint. Behold I come, etc.
This has in it two passages.

His Access. Behold, these three years, etc. Success. I find none.


First, the Access.
Behold. Ecce is here a note of complaint. He that can thunder down sin
with vengeance, raines on it showers of complaint. Behold the Tree; he might in
a moment have put it past beholding, by throwing it into the infernal furnace.
Why does he complain, that can compel? Habet in manu potentiam, in cord
patientiam: there is power in his hand, but patience in his heart. To do
Justice, we (after a sort) constrain him: but his delight is to be merciful.

He complains. All complain of lost labors: the Shepherd after all his
vigilance, complains of straggling Lambs: the Gardener after all his
diligence, of withering Plants: the Husbandman after all his toil, of lean
Fields, and thin Haruests: Merchants after many adventures, of Wrackes and
Pyracies: Tradesmen of bad debtors, and scarcity of moneys: Lawyers complain
of few Clients, and Divines of fewer Conuerts. Thus we complain one of
another: but God has just cause to complain of us all.

Well, if the Lord complain of Sin, let not us make our selves merry with
it. Like Sampson, it may make us sport for a while, but will at last pull down
the house upon our heads. Cant. 2.12.
The voice of the Turtle is (not) heard in our Land. Vox Turturis, vox
gementis. True penitents be more rare then Turtles. The voice of the Sparrow
we hear, chirping lust: of the Night-bird, buzzing ignorance: the voice of
the Scriech-owle, croaking blasphemy: of the Popiniay, gaudy pride: the voice
of the Kite and Cormorant, covetousness and oppression: these, and other
Birds of that wing be common. But, Non audita est vox Turturis: who mournes
for the sin of the time, and longs to be freed from the time of sin? It
was an unhappy spectacle in Israel, to see at once, Lachrymantem Dominum, and
ridentem populum: a weeping Savior, and deriding sinners. We complain of our
crosses and losses, we complain of our maladies, of our injuries, enemies,
miseries: the Lord open our eyes, and soften our hearts, to see and feel the
cause of all, and to complain of our sins.

I come. The Lord had often sent before, now he came himself; even by his
personal presence, accepting our nature. The Son of God that made us the
Sons of men, became the Son of man, to make us the Sons of God. He came
voluntarily: we come into the world, not by our own wills, but by the will of
our parents; Christ came by his own will. He came not for his own benefit,
but ours. What profit does the Sun receive by our looking on him? We are the
better for his light, not he for our sight. A shower of rain that waters the
earth, gets nothing to it self; the earth fares the better for it. He came for
our fruits: these cannot enrich him: Psalm. 16.
Lord, our well-doing extends not to thee.

Never came such an Inhabitant to our Country, as Jesus. Had God granted men
the liberty to beg of him what they would, and have it; they durst not have
been so bold as to ask his only Son. When the King gives a free concession
to his subject, to make choice of his own suit, without denial; he will not
be so impudent as to beg the Prince. Let us entertain him well, we fare the
better for him: the profit of our redemption blesses all the rest unto us.
Far be it from us to welcome him with scandals, with blasphemies, and
neglect. He may then reply, as Absolon to Hushai, 2 Samuel 16.17.
Is this thy kindness to thy friend? No, you say, we make much of him, hold him
in the highest regard, trust him with our whole salvation. But know, Christ
fares not the better for thy Faith, but for thy Charity. Faith is a beggarly
receiver, Charity is a rich giver. Thy Faith is a hand that takes something
from him, to enrich thy self: thy Charity is a hand that gives some thing to
him, in his distressed members. Indeed Christ is the subject of all tongues,
but he is not the object of all hearts. The School disputes of him, the Pulpit
preaches of him, Profession talks of him, Profane men swear by him, few love
him, few serve him. He is come, let him be made welcome, by setting our best
cheer, and choycest fruits before him. Whom should we entertain, if not our
Savior?

Seeking. But, did not He know before? What need he seek, that has found?
He that understands our thoughts long before they are borne, cannot be
nescious of our works when they are done. My answer shall be short: the
Lords Quaerit, is a Requirit: he does not seek a thing that is hid from him,
but requires a debt that is due unto him.

Seeking. This is no rare, but a continued act. It is not Veni, I came: He
came unto his own, etc. Nor a Venturus sum; John 1.11.
Yet a little while, Revel. 22.
and I will come. But (...): as Revel. 3.20. S to pulsans, I stand knocking: so
here, Venio querens, I come seeking. He seeks continually: will you hear how
long?

These three years: Much time has been spent about the Interpretation of
this time; how it is appliable to the Jewish Synagogue, to whom it was
immediately referred. I find no great difference among Expositors, saving only
in their terms. Some by the first year understand the time before the
Captivity; by the second, their return to Jury; by the last, the coming of
Christ. Some by the first year, conceive the Law given by Moses: By the
second, the Prophetical attestations: by the third, the grace of our Lord
Jesus. Some resolve it thus; the first year was the time of Circumcision, from
Abraham to Moses: the next, the Leuitical Law from Moses to Christ: the last is
the year of Salvation by the Messiah. Others understand the first year to be
of the Patriarchs, the middle year of the Judges, the third of the Kings.
After all this he was entreated to forbear it a fourth year, till it was
instructed by the Apostles: and then being found fruitless, it was cut down
by the Romans. But I rather take a definite number to be put for an
indefinite: three years is time long enough to wait for the proof of a tree:
such a proportionable expectation had the Lord for that Church. If literally
you would have it, I take this to be the probablest exposition. These three
years were the very three years of his Preaching, healing diseases, casting
out Devils, working Miracles before their faces. The other year which he
added, was the time while the Apostles offered them the Gospel of salvation.
Whereof the refusers were cut down, the accepters were saved.

three years; that is, three reuolutions of Ages, thrice five hundred years.
Or he has tarried the leisure of the whole world three years: the first
year, under nature: the second, under the Law: the third, under Grace: the
fourth is now a passing, and who knows how far it is spent?

three years of our visitation, has been so many scores of years. Conceive
the foremost to be in the days of King Edward 6. who purged the gold from the
rust and dross of Superstition, Ignorance, and Cussenage, which it had
contracted. The Sun began to shine out in his bright luster: the Lord came
seeking our fruits; but not finding them answerable to his expectation, nor
worthy of the glorious Gospel: he drew another cloud over our Sun:
teaching us better to value that heavenly Manna, wherewith we were so suddenly
grown wanton. The second year, under Queen Elizabeth, of so blessed memory:
that Royal nurse, upon whose Bosom the Church of God leaned to take her rest.
She did again vindicate this Vineyard, which had so long lain among Friars
and Monks, that it had all-most quite forgotten the language of Canaan: She
taught it a new to speak the Dialect of the Holy Ghost. When that Gracious
Queen was taken from a Crown of gold to a Diadem of glory, then began our
third year; wherein our present Sovereign was sent; Dignissimus Regno, si non
natus ad Regnum: under whom we know not, whether our Truth or Peace be more.
Only let us bless him, and bless God for him, that we may all be blessed in
him. Thus far we may say of our Land, as Syluius did of Rhodes; Semper in
Sole sita est: the bright reflection of the Gospel compasses us round about.
Now he comes this third year seeking our fruits: which when we consider, we
can say no more but Miserere Deus; Lord be merciful to us: for never were
such blessings requited with such unthankfulness. We condemn the Jews for
abusing Christ's patience: God grant they rise not up at the last day to
condemn us.

three years. 1. In Youth. I have planted thee in my Vineyard, given thee the
influence of my mercies; where is thy fruitfulness? Alas, the young man sends
him away, with a Nondum tempus ficorum: it is too early for me to fall to
Mortification; would you put me to penance, before I have had the leisure and
pleasure to offend? He is ready to send Christ away in the Language of that
foul Spirit; Math. 8.29.
Art thou come to torment me before my time? But whose charge is it to
Remember thy Creator, Diebus Iunentutis? Then the conquest is most glorious,
because then it is most difficult. You say, It is never too late; but I am
sure, It is never too soon, to be gracious and holy. The Devil is a false
Sexton, and sets back the clock of Time in prosperity: in the day of
trouble, he will make it run fast enough. 2. In middle age; and now the buying
of Farms, and trying of Beasts; the pleasures of Matrimony, the cares for
posterity. take up all the rooms of the soul. Men rather busy themselves to
gather the fruits of earth, then to yield the fruits of heaven. Here is
strength of nature, and fullness of stature; but still a defect of grace.
Perhaps, Christ has now some fair promises, of fruits hereafter: Luke. 9 61
Let me first go bury my Father, then. But (a thousand to one) he finds
something in Domo, left by his father, that keeps him a Domino, from following
his Master. To prevent this, it is his caution to the entertained servant;
Forget thine own people, Psalm. 45.10.
and thy fathers house: rather forgo and forget thy fathers house, then thy
Makers service. 3. In old age: now the decay of body should argue a decay of
sin. The taste finds no relish in riot, the ears cannot distinguish Music,
the eyes are dim to pleasing objects, very Desire fails: now all things
promise mortification. He that cannot stir abroad in the world, what should
he do but recollect himself, and settle his thoughts on the world to come?
Now fruits, or never. Not yet: Morositie, Pride, and Avarice, are the three
diseases of old age: men covet most, when they have time to spend least: as
cheating Tradesmen then get up most commodities into their hands, when they
mean to break. Still he comes seeking fruit, and is returned with a Non
Inuentus.

sign to Hezekiah; This year ye shall eat such as grows of it self: and
the second year such springs of the same: and in the third year ye shall
sow and reap, etc. the third year might afford him somewhat. But does he
forbear all trees thus long? No, some are snatched away in the flower and
pride of their life: yea, they be not few, that will not allow themselves to
live; but with riot and intemperance hasten their own ends, before they have
well begun or learned what life is: like bad Scholars, that slubber out their
books before they have learned their lessons. That in stead of, Non est
fructus, we may say, Non est ficus, the tree it self is gone. And that goodly
person, which like a fair ship has been long a building: and was but
yesterday put to sea, is to day sunk in the Maine. We do not eat, drink,
and sleep, and take such refections of nature, vt non moriamur, that we might
not die; that is impossible: but that we should not dye barren, but bear some
fruits up with us to him that made the Tree.

Seeking. It is fit we should offer our fruits to God, and not put him to
seek for his own. We should be like those ripe-figs, Nath 3.12.
that fall into the mouth of the eater. The best liquours are they that drop
from their cells, of their own accord, without pressing. The most acceptable
of all oblations, be the Free-will-offerings. Howsoever, let us be sure not to
disappoynt the Lord when he seeks.

On this Fig Tree. It is fit, that he that plants a Vineyard, should taste of
the Wine: good reason, Prou. 27.18.
his own tree should yield him some fruit, considering what he has done for
it he may well challenge it.

1 He has planted us: we spring not up naturally; as the Oak grows from an
Acorne, the Peach from a stone: but a gracious hand has set us. We are not
borne of flesh, nor of the will of blood, John 1.1^.
or of man, but of God.

2. He has planted us in his Vineyard within the enclosed Garden of the
Church. Had he left us to the unregarded wilderness, without any Dresser to
look to us, there might have been some excuse of our barrenness. The ground
that is left to it self, is (in a manner) blameless, though it be fruitless.
But in Vineasua, which he has fenced in with his providence, blessed with his
fauing influence, husbanded with his Dressers diligence, forwarded with the
beams of mercy, and showers more precious then the deawes of Hermon that fell
upon the hill of Sion. Where we participate the fatness of the ground, are
fed with vnperishing Manna, compassed about with Songs of deliverance, and have
seen our desires upon (his and) our enemies. Where Righteousness is our
walls, and Peace our bulwarks, and the ways be milk where we set our feet.

3 We are Figtrees: not brambles, no man expects Grapes from thorns. Math.
7.16.
Not Oaks or Cedars, to be a dwelling for the Storkes: But Figtrees, apt for
fruit, for pleasant fruit. If the rest be fruitless, they serve for other
purposes: but what shall become of the barren Figtree?

4. He is our Lord, and Querit suum, he seeks but his own. If our own Kine
give us no milk, our own sheep afford us no wool, our own land return us
no increase, we are displeased: whereas these be reasonlesse creatures; but we
have sense above common nature, reason above sense, grace above reason: We are
but tennants of these, Christ is Lord of us: our sins bring the curse of
barrenness upon them, but there is no fault in God, if we be unfruitful.

5. He comes seeking: not threatening, raging, wounding, not felling down the
tree, nor stocking it up by the roots; but seeking. Dignatur expectare
fructus, cui licet eradicare Infructuosos. Man is a loser by the barrenesse of
his garden-tree: were there not a tree left, God is never the poorer.

Now lay all these together: a Lord that owes us, we are his trees: to come
into his Vineyard, where he may be confident; we live on his ground: to look
upon a Figtree, made of an apt disposition to good fruit; such a one as
himself has planted, not casually grown up: a tree not neglected, but whereon
he has bestowed great care and cost; waiting, not destroying: what can we
plead for it, if it be fruitless? God is our Lord and Proprietary, England is
his Vineyard, every one of us his Fig Tree, thus planted, watered, blessed by
his gracious mercy: He comes to us with patience, that should run to him with
penitence: seeking our fruits, that should make tender of them unsought;
waiting, that might command: now, fear, obedience, and thankfulness, keep
us from sending him back with a Non inuenio, I find none.

Fruit. This is that inseparable effect that God expects from every Tree
planted in his Garden. Romans 7.4.
We are married to Christ: to what end? That we should bring forth fruits unto
God. He seeks not for leaves, buds, or blossoms, but fruits. Could leaves
content him, we would not leave him unsatisfied: he should have an Arbor
large enough to reach to the Worlds end. Psalm. 19.4
Our tongues run apace, not seldom faster then our wits. We are Gods
debtors, and if he will take our words, so: that is all he is like to have.
Might buds please him, or blossoms: we have intentions to good, certain
offers and shows of obedience: which we wear like a cloak, or some loose
garment, that when Lust calls, we may quickly slip off. But when he seeks for
works, all our Consonants be turned into Mutes, we are speachlesse. O would he
ask us for any thing but fruits: Matthew. 22.12
but what should be expected from the Figtree, but Figs?

Of every soul here he seeks for fruits. Of the Magistrate, that he bring
forth the fruits of Justice; determining causes with sincerity of decision,
and conuenience of expedition: being so far as equity permits, a husband to
the widow, and a father to the fatherless. Of the Minister, that he bring
forth the fruits of knowledge. Aarons Rod was his Pastoral staff: in one and
the same night it brought forth buds, and blossoms, and fruit. Fruitfulness
is the best argument that God has called us: there is not a plant of his
setting, but the very branches thereof shall flourish. I do not say, our
pains shall always convert many Souls; that is Gods fruit, not ours: He
charge us to be industrious in Preaching, let Himself alone with the work
of saving. Of the private man, he expects the fruit of his calling: to be
idle, is to be barren of good; and to be barren of good, is to be pregnant
of all evil. Bella gerant alij, Protesilaus edit: but let us that are called
to work, work in our calling; otherwise at last, we shall make but a sorry
answer to that Question, Vbi fructus? Let us all produce the fruits of
Charity: rich men do good turns to themselves; as they play at Tennisse,
tossing the Ball to him that will toss it to them again: seldom to the
poor, for they are not able to bandy it back. Pride cuts, and Riot shuffles,
but betwixt them both, they deal the poor but a bad game. The fruit of
Christianity is Mercy; when the rich, like full ears of Corn, humble
themselves to the poor earth in Charity. Feed him, that feeds you: give him
part of your Temporalls, from whom you expect Eternalls: you cloathe Christ
with your blackes on earth, he will clothe you with his glorious whites in
heaven. Our mercy to others, is the Fruit of Gods mercy to us.

Fruit. Nothing is created for it self, but so placed by the most wise
providence, that it may confer something to the public good; though it be
but as the Widows two Mites to the Treasury. The poorest creature yields some
Fruit, wherein it does imitate the goodness of the Maker. We know not readily,
what good Serpents and Vermin may do; yet certainly, they have their fruit;
both in sucking up that poison of the earth, which would be contagious to man;
in setting off the beauty of the better pieces of creation: Aug.
(for though the same hand made both the Angels in heaven, and the worms on
earth; yet the Angels appear the more glorious being so compared) besides
their hidden virtues abstracted from our knowledge. Of stones they make iron,
rubbish serves to raise Bulwarks, the small pebble for the sling, worms and
flies are bayts for Fishes: every thing is enabled with some gift for the
vnniuersall benefit, and to produce those fruits is their natural work.

The Sun comes forth of his Chamber like a Bridegroom, fresh and lively; and
rejoices as a Giant, to run his diurnall course, to lighten us with his
refulgent beams, to generate, cheer, and mature things with his parentall
heat: this is his fruit. In his absence the Moon and Stars adorn the
Canopie of Heaven, reflecting their operative influence to quicken the lower
world: this is their fruits. The curled clouds, those bottles of rain,
thin as the liquour they contain, fly up and down on the wings of the
wind, delivering their moist burdens upon the earth, teats whereon the hungry
fields and pastures do suck; yet they expect no harvest from us: this is
their fruits. The subtle winds come puffing out of their cauernes, to make
artificial motions, wholesome airs, and nauigable seas; yet neither earth,
air, nor sea return them recompense: this is their fruits. The earth, in a
thankful imitation of the Heavens, locks not up her treasures within her
own Coffers; but without respect of her private benefit, is liberal of her
allowance, yielding her fatness and riches to innumerable creatures, that hang
on her breasts, and depend upon her as their common mother for maintenance. Of
the beasts that feed upon her, Kine give us their milk, Sheep their wool:
every one pays a tribute to man, their vsufructuary Lord: this is their
fruits. Fruit bearing Trees spend not all their sap and moisture upon
themselves, or the increase of their own magnitudes: but the principal and
purer part of it is concocted into some pleasant Fruits; whereof they nor
their young Springs ever come to taste; but they proffer it us, and when it is
ripe, they voluntarily let it fall at their Masters feet. Never did the Olive
annoint it self with the own Oil, nor the Vine make it self drunk with the
own Grapes, nor the Tree in my Text, devour the own Figs: yet they all
strive to abound with Fruits.

Let me raise your Meditations from earth to heaven: the holy Angels there are
called Ministering Spirits: those royal Armies fight for us against our
enemies: like Nurses, they bear us up in their arms, and (though unseen) do
glorious Offices for us: this is part of their fruit. John 5.17.
The blessed Trinity is always working: Hitherto my Father works, and I
work. The Father by his providence and protection, the Son by his mercy and
mediation, the Holy Ghost by his grace and sanctification: all dividing the
streams of their goodness, for the best behoof of the world. The more any
thing furthers the common good, the more noble is the Nature, and more
resembling the Creator.

The Earth is fruitful, the Sea, the Air, the Heavens are fruitful; and
shall not man bring forth fruits, for whom all these are fruitful? While all
the Armies of Heaven and Earth are busied in fructifying; shall Man, of more
singular graces and faculties, be idle, a burden to the world and himself?
Both the Church of God for the propagation of piety, and the world it self
for the upholding of his estate, requires our Fruits. If Happiness consisted
in doing nothing, God that meant Adam so happy, would never have set him about
business: but as Paradise was his Storehouse, so also his workhouse: his
pleasure was his task. There is no state of man that can privilege a folded
hand: Our life is, Vita pulueris, non puluinaris. Lands, Means, and Moneys,
men make the protections of Idleness: whereas Adam commanded the whole earth,
yet work expected him. In Paradise all things did labor for man, now man must
labor for all things. Adam did work because he was happy, we his children
must work, that we may be happy. Heaven is for joys, Hell for pains, Earth
for labor. God has three houses; this is his Worke-house, that above is his
Warehouse. O then let us be fruitful; that others benefit may be ours, our
benefit theirs; and the glory of all, the Lords. If Magistrates yield not the
Fruits of Justice, Ministers the fruits of knowledge, private men the fruits of
Charity and Obedience; it is as unnatural, as if the Sun should forget to
shine, or the earth to fructify. God made all these for man, he made man for
himself: of us he looks for Fruit, of us let him find it, from us accept it,
in us increase it, and to us reward it, through Him, in whom alone we expect
mercy, Jesus Christ.

The Success follows. Non inuenio.
We have brought the Lord into his Vineyard, heard him calling for the Dresser,
showing him a Tree, telling him of a three years expectation: now, if after
all this we inquire for the event; himself certifies us, (...), I find none.

None? Peradventure he came before the season; Nondum tempus erat Ficorum. When
should a Tree bring forth fruits, but Tempore suo? This is the praise of the
good Tree, that it brings forth the fruit in due season. Psalm. 1.3.
If the Fig Tree could have objected to the Owner, 2 Kings 5.26
as Elisha to his servant; Hoccine tempus; Is this a time to plant Vineyards,
or gather fruit? Or as the man replied to his neighbor, Luke 11.7.
that came to borrowe loaves at midnight; Is this a time to lend Bread, when my
self and family are in bed? The Spring is the season of fructifying, the
Autumn of gathering. Cant. 2.12. Job 38.38.
When the time of the singing of Birds is come, Then the Figtree puts forth
her green Figs. But Cum fermento perfundatur puluis, when the dust is
leauened with mire, and the bands of Orion have locked up the influence of
Heaven. Who seeks fruit in Winter; he must be content with Winter fruit. There
is the Winter of an afflicted Conscience; no marvel then if neither ripe
Figs, nor so much as green leaves appear: when all the Sap is retired to
the Root, as in extreme cold the blood runs to the heart to succor it.
When the Babylonians required of their captive Israelites some Hebrewe Songs,
they could soon answer; How shall we sing the Lords Song in a strange Land?
Is this a time or place to be merry? Psalm. 137.4.
But did the Lord come out of season? No, he required it not the first day, or
month, but waited the full time, expecting fruit in the Autumn or Vintage
season. Gloss.
Non ante tempus querit, qui per triennium venit. He came not with a
Trienniall Visitation, as Episcopal Fathers use to visit, once in three
years; but every year, every month in the year, week of the month, day of
the week. Of another Fig Tree it is said, Mark 11.13.
that The time of Figs was not yet, yet he cursed it: Here the time was
three years past without fruit, yet he cursed it not. But look to it; If thou will not fructify Tempore tuo, thou shall be cut down tempore non tuo, Eccles.
7.17.
perish before thy time. There is not a day in the year, wherein he forbeares
seeking our fruit; yet Venio, non inuenio; I find none.

None? Nunquid quia male quaesiuit Dominus? Was there any error in his search?
Men often seek Bona, good things, non been, not in a good manner. Either they
fail in their Quando, as Joseph sought Christ after a days journey; whereas
he is too precious to be missed one hour: Psalm. 32.6.
They shall seek thee Tempore inveniendi, when thou may be found. Or in the
right Vbi: as Mary sought her Son in Cognatione Carnis, among her kindred; who
was in Domo Patris, John 2.39.
in the Temple. So the Papists seek now him in Pictures, who promised to be
found in the Scriptures. Or in their Quomodo, as they that seek aliud pro
illo, aliud prae illo, another instead of him, another besides him, another
with him, another before him, which they do not seek for him. All these seek
and miss, because they seek amiss. The world is commonly mistaken in their
search: Quaerunt bona locis non suis, they seek for things out of their proper
orbs. Men seek Honor in Pride, whereas Honor is to be found in Humility.
They seek reputation in bloody revenge; alas, that is to be found in
Patience: It is the glory of a man to pass by an offense. They seek content
in Riches, which is as if one should seek for fresh water in the midst of the
Sea. But in none of these circumstances did this Seeker fail: not in the Vbi,
for he sought in the Vineyard: not in the Quando, for he came in the Vintage:
not in the Quomodo, for he sought fruit on that Figtree, about which he had
been at so great charges; yet I find none.

None? Happily not so thick with fruits as the Vines of Engedi: every Land is
not a Caanan, to flow with Milk and Honey. But yet some competent measure,
enough to pay the Landlord rent for the ground it stands on; no, None. If
there be none to spare, whereof the owner may make money; yet, Sufficiat ad
vsum suum, ad esum suum, that he may eat the labors of his own hands; no,
None. Romans 9.27. Esaias 6.13
If the number be not as the Sand, yet let there be a Remnant. If there
cannot be a whole harvest, yet let there be a Tenth. If not a Tenth, yet let
there be some gleanings; Mich 7.1
and that is a woeful scarcity: if the gleanings be not allowed, yet let
there be here and there a Fig, a Grape, a Berry, Esaias 17.^.
on the outmost branches; that the Planter may have a taste: It is too
defective, when Non florebit ficus, Hab 3.17.
the Tree does not flourish: but Quando non erit Vua in vitibus, non ficus in
ficulneis: Ierem. 8.13
when there shall not be a Grape on the Vine, nor a Fig on the Tree; this is
a miserable sterilitie. Some thing has some savor, but None is good for
nothing. Indeed all Trees are not equally laden: there is the measure of a
hundred, of sixty, of thirty; an Omer, and an Ephah: but the Sacred deawes of
Heaven, the graces of the Gospel, bless us from having None. I find none.

None? Peradventure none such as he looks for, no Fruits delicate enough for
the Almighties taste. Indeed, our best fruits are never perfect and kindly
ripened; still they relish sour and earthly, and savor of the Stock from
which they were taken. They are heavenly Plants, but grow in a foraigue and
cold Climate, not well concocted, nor worthy the charges and care bestowed
upon us. Set Orange or Figgetrees in this our cold Country, the fruit will not
quit the cost of the planting and maintaining. But the complaint is not here of
the imperfection or paucitie of fruits, but of the nullitie; None. Some
reading that Text with idle eyes; that after all our fruits, Luke 17.10.
we are still unprofitable Trees: because they can find no validity of
merit in their works, throw the Plough in the hedge, and make holyday. But
shall not the Servant do his Masters business; because he cannot earne his
Masters Inheritance? Shall the Mason say, I will share with my Sovereign in
his Kingdom, or I will not lay a stone in his building? Yet good fruits have
their reward; though not by the merit of the doer, yet by the mercy of the
accepter. Sour they be of themselves, but in Christ they have their
sweetning: and the meanest fruit, which that great Angel of the Conenant
shall present to his Father, R^^. 8.4
with the addition of his own precious Incense, are both received and
rewarded. In their own nature they may be corrupt; but being dyed in the
blood of Christ, they are made pleasing to God. Yea, also profitable to the
Church, and useful to men, seem they never so poor. Even a troubled Spring
does often quench a distressed Souldiersthirst: a small Candle does good, where
the greater Lights be absent: and the meanest fruit of holy Charity, even a
cup (though it be not of the juice of the grapes out of the Vineyard, Math.
10.42.
but) of cold water out of the tankard, in the name of Christ, shall have the
recompense. But here the complaint is not of the meannes, or fewness, but of
the Barennesse; None at all.

None? Every Tree is known by the fruits, it is Christ's everlasting rule.
Howsoever the tree lives by the sap, and not by the fruits: yet it is known
to live by the fruits, and not by the sap; for this is hidden. The just man
lives by his faith, not by his works: but he is known to live by his works,
not by his invisible faith. Neither does the fruit make good the tree, but the
tree makes good the fruit. Opera bona non faciunt iustum, Iustus facit bona
opera. Good works make not a man righteous, but the righteous man does good
works. Our persons are justified before our actions; as of necessity the tree
must be good, before it can bear good fruit. But how shall that tree be
discerned, that has no fruit? I find none.

None? Why this to us? Why such a Text in such a time? We abound with fruits:
which way can you look, and not have your eye full of our works? They before,
in such places, have successively commended our fruits. Be it so: yet
Euripides being questioned why he always made women bad in his Plays, whereas
Sophocles ever made them good, in his: answered, Sophocles makes them such as
they ought to be, but I make them such as indeed they are. Their former
commendation have told us what we should be; but this Emblem, I fear, tells us
truly what we are. Not all of us; God forbid: here is but one Fig Tree in a
whole Vineyard thus taxed, and far be it from us to tax a whole Vineyard for
one barren Fig Tree.

None? Yes, enough of some fruits, but the Prophet calls them Ficos valde
mal^s, so bad that they cannot be eaten. Iea. 24.8.
As the fruit of the Vine is commended for Quickness, the fruit of the Olive
for Fatness, so the fruit of the Fig Tree for Sweetness; in Iothams Parable.
Ephesians. 5.11.
But if it bear not Fructum natiuitatis suae, the fruit of the own kind, but
bitter figs; here had better be none at all. What an uncomfortable sight is
this to Him, whose heart is set on his Orchard; after the cost of so dear
blood to purchase it, after such indulgent care to cheerish it, and the charges
of so many workmen to dress it; yea, after so much patience to expect it (say
the Fig Tree does not bear so soon as it is planted; in our insancie we can
do nothing, in our minority we will do little, in Gods service: but now it
is grown fructifiable) Iam non gustare fructus, not to have so much as a
taste? Yea, were this all; did barrenness only usurp it: but there is worse
then a mere orbitie or absence of goodness; a position of bitter fruits:
Quaesiui Vuas, Esaias 5.3
inveni^ Labruscas: I find wild Grapes, luxurient fruits. Instead of the hearty
effects, which Wine produces, I am answered with the melancholy preuarications
of malice.

Behold the wonder and spectacle of unthankfulness; among all Gods Creatures,
Man; and among men the barren Christian. Though Israel play the Harlot, Hosea
4.15.
yet let not Judah transgress. What may be expected from the wild Forest of
Paganism, when the Garden of Eden yields such fruits? The sweet fruit of the
Spiritual Fig Tree is mercy: our God is the God of Love, our Savior is the
Prince of Love, the Church is knit together in Love: our Root is Love, our
Sap is Love, our Ligaments Love: now if we shall suck the blood one of
another, violate the relations of peace, concoct all our moisture into malice;
here is worse then, Invenio fructum nullum, I find none: for Invenio fructum
malum, I find cursed fruits. We are grown unnatural; the hand scratcheth
the eye, the mouth biteth the hand: thorns and briars entwine and embrace one
another, Math. 13.27.
while (against all nature) Fig Trees denoure one another. Lord, thou did sow
good seed in thy field, whence then has it Tares? Here is more fruit then God
would have; but for that he expects, I find none.

caten and are fat, Psalm. 22, 29. 1 Cor. 10.7.
that we should worship him. What fruit finds he? We sit down to eat and
drink, and rise up to play: for praying, playing. When we are scourged, he
looks for our humiliation and penance; Sure, in their affliction they will
seek me. Esaias 26.16.
What fruit finds he? Ier. 2.3.
Lord, thou have smitten them, but they have not sorrowed; an insensible
desperatnesse. In this case let us pray; Lord, less of the fruits we have,
and more of them we should have. Instead of righteousness, a cry: Esaias. 5.7.
a cry indeed; a roaring cry of the oppressors, and a mourning cry of the
oppressed. Haec non sunt placido suscipienda sinu.

Our Bells ring, our Chimneis smoke, our Fields rejoice, our Children dance,
our selus sing and play; Iouis omnia plena. But when Righteousness, has
sown, and comes to reap; here is no harvest; (...), I find none. And as
there was never less wisdom in Greece, then in time of the Seven Wise men: so
never less piety among us, then now, when upon good cause most is expected.
When the Sun is brightest the Stars be darkest: so the cleerer our light, the
more gloomy our life with the deeds of darkness. The Cimerians, that live in a
perpetual mist, though they deny a Sun, are not condemned of impiety, but
of ignorance: but Anaxogoras; that saw the Sun, and yet denied it, is not
condemned of ignorance, but of impiety. Former times were like Leah,
bleareeyed, but fruitful: the present, like Rachel, fair, but barren. We give
such acclamation to the Gospel, that we quite forget to observe the Law. As
upon some solemn Festival, the Bells are rung in all steeples, but then the
Clockes are tied up: there is a great untuned confusion and clangor, but no man
knows how the time passes, So in this universal allowance of liberty by the
Gospel, which indeed rejoices our hearts, had we the grace of sober usage)
the Clocks that tell us how the time passes; Truth and Conscience, that show the
bounded use, and decent form of things, are tied up, and cannot be heard.
Still Fructum non inuenio, I find no fruits. I am sorry to pass the Figtree
in this plight: but as I find it, so I must leave it, till the Lord mend it.
So I come to

The Sentence. Cut it down.
Macah's gods, perhaps he will make him no more. If this will not do, cut off
some of the arms and branches: weaken his strength, sicken his body, lay him
groaning and bleeding on the bed of sufferance: griue his heart strings with
the sense and sorrow of his sins: any thing rather then Cut it down: alas no
fruit can grow on it then, but sad despair. A man's house is foul, or a little
decayed; will he pull it down or rather repair it? There is hope of a Tree
though the root wax old in the earth, and the stock die in the ground; Job
14 ^.
yet the springs of water may put new life into it: but once cut down, all
hope is cut down with it. When a man has taken delight in a Tree, conveniently
planted in his garden; what variety of experiments will he use, before he cuts
it down? Alas, thus poor silly men, we reason: we measure things that be
unmeasurable, by things that be measurable, by things that be miserable. What
we in a foolish pity would do, we think God in his merciful wisdom should
do. Yet which of us would endure a dead Tree three years together in his
Orchard? We would say, If it will not bear fruit, to cheer us; it shall make
a fire to warm us. But the Lord has been fix and thirty Moons gracious in
his forbearance, give him now leave to be just in his vengeance. If so much
indulgence cannot recover it, there is little hope of it: Cut it down.

Cut it down. Who must do this? The dresser. An unpleasing office to him,
that has bestowed so much labor upon it, esteemed it so precious, hoped for
some reward at his Masters hand for his diligence about it; now to give the
fatal blow, to Cut it down? And if it must fall, let it be Manu aliena, non
sua, let another hand do it. Hagar will not behold her dying Son; dye he
must, she was persuaded; Genes. 21.
Modo non videam, Let me not see the death of the Child. But he must obey;
Arbor non est Cul^oris, Cris.
sed Parris familias: the Tree is not the Dressers, but the Lords; and his own
is at his own disposing: Cut it down.

Cut it down. But how? How can the Minister be said to cut down a barren
soul? Some may conceive here a reference to Excommunication: Whether the
Greater, which depriues a man of all benefit by the Churches public Prayers,
and the Society of Christians. 1 Cor. 5.
Which St. Paul calls, Tradere Satana, to deliver unto Satan: so himself
Excommunicated Hymencus and Alexander, 1. Tim. 1.20.
delivering them unto Satan: a miserable condition, to be subjected to a slave,
to a dog, a drudge; but then especially fearful, when God grants unto Satan
a Writ or faculty, Pro excommunicato cap^endo. The ignominy of ignominy;
besides the peril: For as Christ protecteth all the Trees in his Vineyard; so
if any be transplanted to the wild desert, they are under the god of this
world. Or the Less; which is indeed, no other properly, then an Act of the
Churches Discipline, whereby she corrects her unruly children: that smarting
with the absence of wonted comforts, they may be humbled by repentance, and so
recover their pristine state. This censure may be either too cruel, or to
triuial. Approved by the Counc. of Trent. Sess 26.
The Church of Rome grants Excommunications for things lost: a man has lost
his horse, he may have an Excommunication against him that detaines him: so the
Father may hap to Excommunicate his own Son, and for the body of a Jade,
hazard the soul of his Child. Yea, which is worse, they publish
Excommunications for sins not yet committed: The Lord of a Manor has set a
row of young Elmes, he may have an Excommunication against all those that
shall do them any harm. This is to hang a man, before he has done the fact
that deferues it. These in rite, forcelesse, bugbeare Excommunications, the
ridiculous affordments of a mercenary Power, are not unlike those old night
spells, which blind people had from mungrel Witches, to set about their Orchards
and Houses, antidotes and charms against theeuing; wherein distrusting the
providence of God, they made themselves beholding to the Devil for safety.
Creditors, that would be paid in their moneys, may procure an Excommunication
against their Debtors, if they pay not by such a day. This were an excellent
project for you Citizens, a rounder course then arrests and tedious trialls at
Law. But it is to be doubted, that your Debtors would fear the Popes
Parchment less then the Scriueners, and an Excommunication far less then an
Outlary. There Is but four things exempted from the power of their
Excommunication, as Nauarrus notes: a Locust, an Infidel, the Devil, and the
Pope: so he has marched them, so let them go together. For the Excommunicate
must be a man, a Christian, mortal, and an Inferior: now the Locust is not a
man, the Infidel is not a Christian, the Devil is not mortal, and the Pope
has no Superior. But too much of that; this is a Parable, and here is no
foundation for such a building.

Cut it down. How? with an Axe of martial iron? This were an exposition fit
for Doway, or the Gunpowder-Enginers: that by Cutting it down, understood,
Blow it up: turning their Axe to a Petarre. Had God said to them, Cut it down;
the axe had bin instantly heaued up: yea, they did it, when God said no such
thing. Rather then fail of cutting it down, they would have stockd it up,
root and all: this is their mercy. But the Spiritual Axe is to cut down,
Culpas, non Animas: when we read of cutting down, remember it is meant of
men's sins, not of their souls. Preachers indeed do wound; but it is Gladio
oris, not ore gladij. with the Sword of the Spirit, not a Rouillac's Knife. If
God had meant such a cutting down, Nero had been a fitter instrument then Paul.
Psalm. 19
We read, that their sound went through the World: but that their Sword went
through the World, we never read,

Cut it down. How then? Succide, that is, Succidendam minare; threaten that I
will cut it down. Cast them out of my sight; Eijce, Iere. 15.1.
that is, Eijciendos pronuncia; say that I will reject them. Quod moritur,
moriatur: Zach. 11.9.
Quod succidendum est, succidatur, That which dies, let it die. God sometimes
sends such farewels and defiances to sinners that will not repent. Ephraim is
joined to Idols, let him alone. Revel. 22.11
If they will not be persuaded to return, let them go on to their ruin, let
them alone. If any man will be unjust, let him be unjust: He that will be
filthy, let him be filthy still; let them perish. Abeat, pereat, profundat,
perdat.

Cut it down. This was, Sententia eris, the sentence of the mouth: but it may
be this was not Consilium cordis, the purpose of his heart. Saepe Deo minante
quod peccans meretur, peccanti non fit quod Deus minatur. Nor can this tax God
of leuitie: for he that speaks with condition of repentance, may change his
word without suspicion of lightness. Tu muto sententiam tuam, Deus mutabit
suam. Thus was Nineveh cut down: Aug,
euersa estin malo, vt aedificaretur in bono: the subversion was menaced, the
conversion was intended. The Father shuts his rebellions Son out of doors,
will not allow him a lodging, not so much as among his servants: yet he does
not mean to let him perish with hunger and cold in the streets: but when he
has well smarted for his disobedience, upon his humble submission he is
re-entertained. The very mercies of the wicked are cruel, but the very
judgments of God are sweet. This Cutting down, is Medicinale, not mortale:
Disciplinans, non eradicans: for restitution, not destitution; for remidie not
for ruin. Indeed, if all this denuntiation and threatening cannot persuade them
to return, then comes their final predition: when they have cut off
themselves impenitently, God will cut them off impartially. But if we turn to
deprecation and repentance, he will turn to commiseration and forgiveness.
The Tree is barren, and the Lord says, Cut it down: the Tree fructifies, and
he will say Let it stand. O then let us humble our selves, and with seasonable
repentance Cut down our sins, that this terrible Sentence may never Cut
down our souls.

The Reason. Why cumbreth it the ground?
Romans 9.20.
Curita facis? His Judgments are not always manifest, they are always just:
nor does he things because they are good, but they are therefore good because
he does them. Should he make short work on the earth, and dispatch all
barren Trees in a moment: yet thou continuest holy, O thou worship of Israel.
If he strickes us, we are not wronged; it is our desert, and his Justice. If he
spares us, we have not merited; It is his mercy. Huic fit miserecordia, tibi
non fit iniuria: that man receives mercy, thou have no injury. Yet that he
might be justified, and the mouth of all wickedness stopped, he is content to
give a reason of this sentence. Think not I deal hardly with this Fg-tree;
let us confer together, and hear one another with patience. I will show thee
sufficient reason of cutting it down: do thou show me some cause why it
should stand. My reason is, It cumbers the ground. Terram reddit otiosam,
inutilem. It is not only barren Formaliter, but Effectiue. In a word. 1. It
does no good. 2. It does much harm.

Terra bona, and Gens mala; are an ill match: an opulent Land, and a pestilent
People. Aug.
Peccator non est dignus pane quo vescitur. The wicked man is not worthy of the
bread be eats, of the water he drinks, of the air he breathes, of the
ground he goes on. The rich thinks himself worthy of delicate viands, costly
garments: dutiful attendance, Quia-Diuts, because he is rich: yet he may not
be worthy of a crumme, a rag, a respect, Quia malus, because he is evil. It
will one day grieve such fruitles Nabals, when they must receive a
multiplicitie of torments, according to the number of their abused benefits,
and they will wish that they had not fared so well upon earth, that they might
fare less ill in Hell. They live in the Vineyard, eat the fat, and drink the
sweet; turning all this juice, not into fruitful clusters, for the behoof of
Gods servants; but into their own arms and branches: raising their Houses out
of the ruins of Gods House. What good do they? Cut them down, Eccles. 2.26.
Why cumber they the ground? It is fit, that the Riches of the sinner should
be laid up for the righteous: dentur dignioribus.

London. What innumerable swarms of nothing does beleaguer this City? men and
women, whose whole employment is, to go from their beds to the Tap-house, then
to the Playhouse, where they make a match for the Brothel-house, and from
thence to bed again. To omit those ambulatory Christians, that wear out the
Pauement of this great Temple with their feet, but scarce ever touch stone of
it with their knees; that are never further from God, then when they are
nearest the Church. To omit that rabble of begging and pilfring vagabonds, that
like beasts, know no other end of their creation, but recreation; but to eat,
and drink, and sleep. What an army of these might be mustred out of our
Suburbs? But that Idleness has disabled them to any service: they are neither
fit for God nor man. Did they yet but like worms and insects, spend up the
corruption of the Land, and leave us the less, it were somewhat. But they are
worse, even diseases and unwholesome airs, to breed infection among us. Let
Authority look to their castigation, or answer for their mischiefs: so far
as they deserve, let them not be spared; Cut them down, Why comber they the
Ground?



1 It occupies the room where a better Tree might grow. The Kingdom of God
shall be taken from you, Math. 21.4^
and given to a Nation that will bring forth the Fruits thereof. A fruitful
Nation would be content with such a dwelling. Christ foretells this mutation.
Paul shows it accomplished. They are broken off, Romans 11.19
that we (in their places) might be graffed on. Friend, how cammest thou in
hither, Math. 22.12.
not having on a wedding garment? Why do thou vsurp the ^ea^e, where a worthy
guest might sit? Thus David used to purge his Court; Psalm. 101.8.
admitting the righteous into the offices of the unrighteous. As in case of
calamity, the godly are delivered out of trouble, and the wicked come^ in his
room: so in case of felicity, the ungodly shall be turned out of their
happiness, and the reighteous shall come in their stead.

A Judge is corrupt; he is girded with Justice, but the girdle saggs to that
side where the purse hangs; God will cut him down; here is room for a good
man, that will do equity. A Magistrate is partial, and draws the Sword of
Justice in his own quarrel; which he puts up in the cause of Christ: he must
be cut down, here is room for one that will love and adhere to the truth. An
office is abused by him that holds it; he bought dear and he cannot sell
cheap: it is time he were cut down; this place will maintain a man, that
will maintain the place, with uprightness. A Minister is barren, has no
milk in his breasts: Ministerium eius accipiat alter; Acts 1.20.
Let another take his office; here is room for one that will feed the people.
A profane Patron will let none into the Lords Vineyard, but at the
Non-licet-Gate; by which good men will never enter: his Clarke shall be Simon,
himself will be Magus: vengeance shall cut him down; here is room for one
that will freely put faithful Laborers into the Viueyard. There grows an
Oppressor, sculking in a corner; the nedy cannot find him, or if they do,
they find no fruit from him; Cut him down, here is room for one that will
pity the poor. The Lord will root out such bastard Plants, and replenish his
Garden with fruitful Trees.

neither enter themselves, Matthew. 23.13
nor suffer others. What should become of them, that will neither do good, nor
suffer good to be done, but cutting down? A great Oak pines all the underwood
near it, yea spoils the grass that should feed the cattle. Esaias 5.^.
A great Oppressor engrosseth all round about him, till there be no place left
for a fertile Tree. Mean while, himself has only some leaves, to shadow
his Sychophants; but no fruit, unless Bramble-berries, and such as the Hogs
will scarce eat.

they starve the rest by an insensible foaking. When mother earth, the Church,
would derive her sap to some young hopeful Plant, these intercept it. There is
maintenance due to the Minister, but the barren Impropriator stands in his way,
and sucks it al from him: perhaps he leaves him some few drops, to cool his
temples, but not enough to preserve life.

Abscinde, cut it down. How charitable would Lazarus have been, had he been
owner of Dives his estate? How would Mordecai have promoted the good of Israel,
had he been as great a favorite as Haman was? How freely would the conscionable
man give spiritual preferments, were he a Patron? He that fears God, would
justly render the Church her dues, did he drive such trades, and dwell in such
houses, as you do. But that God, who disposes all as it pleases him, mend all
when it pleases him, even for his own mercies sake.

Thus from a plain Text I have derived you familiar persuasions: for I came
not hither to satisfy the curious head, but the honest heart. Admit but two
considerations more, and I have done.

challenge him: if he sends us good things, we are bound to thank him. The last
year, how general was the complaint all over this Kingdom? The Mower could
not fill his sithe, nor the binder up of sheues his bosom. The beasts perished
for want of fodder, yea, children dyed in the street with hunger: the poor
Father not being able with all his weeks labor to buy them (only) bread. The
fields were thin, and the barnes thinner: little in many places there was to
gather, and the unseasonable weather prevented the gathering of that little.
The emptines of their bowels did justly fill our bowels with compassion: Famine
is a sore plague. We then cried unto the Lord for fruits, and he heard us: Lo
in how plentiful a harvest he has answered our desires, to his own praise,
and our comfort! Yea, he concluded all with songs and triumphs, a joyful
haruest-home; the best sheafe of our Wheat, the best grape of the Vintage, the
best flower of our garland, the best fruit of that royal Tree, the safe
return of our gracious Prince. These be the fruits of his mercy to us, where
be the fruits of our thankfulness to him?

Ezech. 15.3
is of all trees most vselesse. It is compared to noble and worthy things: to
the good woman, Vxor tua sicut vitis: Psalm. 128.3. John 15.1. Judge. 9.13.
to the best man, I am the true vine: it checres the heart of God and man. But
if barren it is good for nothing, not so much as to make a pin to hang a bat
on. Oaks and Cedars are good for building, Popplars for Pales, very bushes for
hedging, doted wood for firing: but the fruitless Vine is good for nothing.
Matthew. 5.13.
Salt keeps other things from putrefying, but if it self be putrefyed, what
shall season it? A sweet Singer delights us all; but Quis medebitur cantatori a
Serpente percusso? If a Serpent has stung him, who shall recover his voice? If
the eye be blind, what shall look to the eye?

Ad nihilum valet, quod non valet ad finem suum. It is good for nothing, that
is not good for the end it was made. If a knife be not good to cut, we say it
is good for nothing: yet may some other use be invented for it. If a Plough be
not good to break the ground, we say it is good for nothing; yet it may stop a
gap. If a hound be not good to hunt, we say he is good for nothing, yet may he
in the night give warning of a thief. But if a Fig Tree, a Professor be not
good for fruit, he is indeed, good for nothing. The refuse of other things have
their uses: sour Wine will make Vinegar, old Rags make Paper, Lees are for
Dyers, Soil is good to fat the Land, Potsheards and broken tiles to mend high
ways; all good for somewhat: yea, they offer to sell the combings of hairs;
Ladies and Gentlewomen know whether they be good for any purpose or no. But the
fruitless vine, the sauourlesse Salt, the lightlesse Lamp, the Figlesse
Fig Tree, the graceless Christian, is good for nothing.

We all have our Stations in the Vineyard, to bring forth fruits, but what be
those fruits? It was a smart Invention of him, that having placed the Emperor,
and the Pope, reconciled, in their Maiestick Thrones, he brought the States of
the world before them. First comes a Counselor of State, with this Motto, I
Advise you two: then a Courtier I Flatter you three: then a Husbandman, I Feed
you four, then a Merchant, I Coussen you five: then a Lawyer, I Rob you
six: then a Soldier, I Fight for you seven: then a Physician, I Kill you
eight: Lastly a Priest, I absolve you all nine: This was his Satyr. But in the
fear of God, as our Sovereign does govern us in Truth and Peace; So let the
Counselor advise, the Judge censure, the Husbandman labor, Merchant
traffic, the Lawyer plead, the Soldier bear arms, the Divine preach; all
bring forth the fruits of righteousness: that this Kingdom may flourish, and
be an exemplary encouragement to our neighbors: that our Children may be
blessed after us, our Enemies convinced, Aliens converted, Satan confounded,
the Gospel honored, the Lord glorified, and our own souls eternally saved.
Which grace, the happy fruit of the Gospel; and glory, the happy fruit of
Grace; God the Father grant us all for his mercies sake, God the Son for his
merits sake, God the Holy Ghost for his Names sake: to whom three Persons, and
one most glorious God he rendered all honor and obedience, now and for ever.
Amen.

FINIS.

