A METHOD unto Mortification: Called heretofore, The contempt of the world,
and the vanity thereof.

Written at the first in the Spanish, afterward translated into the Italian,
English, and Latin tongues: now last of all perused at the request of some of
his godly friends, and as may be most for the benefit of this Church,
reformed and published by Thomas Rogers.

Allowed by authority.

1. John. 2. 15. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in
him. Imprinted at London by John Windet. 1608.

To the worshipful, his good friends, M. H. Blagge, and T. Pooley Esquires,
Justices for the maintenance of the peace within the county of Suff. S.
IT is no new thing in these latter days of the world now first put in ure,
but for long continuance among all sorts of the learned a most ancient
custom, to dedicate their labors unto some one or more, who in respect of
their virtue, zeal, wisdom, athority, or one consideration or other them
inciting, are deemed worthy the patronage of the same. In the doing whereof, as
in all other things, if a good foresight be not used, by observation I do
find that the recompense is either privy scoffs, or open, either scorns of
the wicked, or blame and reprehension of the godly: the former they come by
which without all regard of their patrons disposition, hand over head, do
dedicate good books unto ill men; the latter, that blush not to offer ill
books unto good men: the former he gat (to leave examples of this time) which
unto Antigonus, being then in Arms, presented a book of Justice, as though
warriers were not to think of Justice in time of war: the latter they
purchase who dedicate ouerboldly the carnal books of Italy, and other vain
inventions, Aschams. school. 1 book pa. 26. b.
unto virtuous and honorable personages.

The greater the danger is by misse-dedicating, the greater should be men's
care both of the matter which they publish, and of the persons who are to
patronize their doings; least for want of good patrons they be discouraged by
ill words, or thorough diuulgating ill matter, especially under the names of
good men, they hear ill, and deservedly.

I am bold, worshipful, to gratulate your good and safe return from those
dangerous places and persons, with this treatise ensuing: and as I know it is
not in your natures, who are no Antigonists, to reject it, as coming out of
season: so I have good hope that the godly wise, as many of them already have,
will approve the same by their good acceptance, the matter being sound, and
most necessary to be read and regarded of all sorts of men in these loose
days of the world. Yet because the disposition of many is so perverse and
crooked, that oftentimes even good things are contemned, because the doers of
them are not liked; and they whose hands have been in this work, are diverse,
especially for religion, the author being of one, and my self of another; I
think it very necessary something to say in this place, that neither the good
Christians may shun this as a Serpent, because of the author a Papist F.
Dicgo de Stella of the order S. Ir.
; nor the papists condemn it, as heretical, in respect of my self, a
Protestant. For seeing the ground, subject, and substance of the book is such,
as both of us, yea all the wisest of both sides^doe agree in, namely that the
world, and the vanities thereof are to be contemned, methinkes the
circumstance of persons is not so to be regarded, as that any sound
persuasions unto godliness, and unto the crucifying of our selves to the
world, whosoever do move them, should be despised, especially when such care
has been had, as neither any thing is added which might either grieve, or
nusle the Papist in superstition, nor any thing left out, but what would offend
the godly Christian, if it were still in; nor any thing published, but may like
them, whosoever they be, as have grown, and would more and more, into a
detestation of this world, and the vanities of the same.

If any adversaries do say, that much I have ommitted, and therefore take
offense: I answer, the thing is more open than that I can deny it, and my
grounds so good, that I neither am, neither need to be ashamed for so doing.
For has nature taught the Be out of all flowers to choose those as are meetest
to minister the sweet honey and wax, and to leave the rest? and shall not
grace move Christians to make choice of that which may be to the comfort and
profit of the Church of God? Have Carpenters such wisdom, as they will not
build with every tree, but choose one, and leave another, as may be most for
the profit of the builder, the safety of the inhabiters, and their own
credit; and shall not the spiritual builders have the same for the edifying
of the house of God? Shall the holy Spirit command us to Try the Spirits 1.
Ioh. 4. verse 1.
, to Try al, and keep that which 1. These. 5. verse 21.
is good, and are such commended that would receive no more, no not of the
Apostles words than could be justified by the Scriptures of God^ Acts. ^7 10.
11.
, and shall they be blamed which obey so holy a commander, and imitate such
divine examples?

But Authors must have their words, and Readers are to use their judgment in
refusing, or taking as shall be most for their behoof.

The Philosophers many of them wrote much, yet is it lawful for Christians, in
the judgment of S. Austine Lib. 2. de doctrina christiana.
, to take from them, as from unjust detainers, the riches of true wisdom which
they enjoy, and translate the same into the tresurie of the Church of God. For
whatsoever the Philosophers and Poets did writ that was unsound, it came of
themselves; but, says Tertulian In Apobloget.
, whatsoever they published that was good, they either drew it immediately from
the holy Scriptures, or they learned the same of them which had read the word
of God. That which the Fathers have thought of the Philosophers and Poets, we
may judge of all other aliens from the Church and heretics; and therefore we
do them no wrong, when we take but the truth, which is our own, and leave
them the errors, wherein we have none interest.

Again, wha^soeuer is said of our adversaries, sure I am the time was and
still is, that they themselves do so much as we do to others: so that with
what words they do either commend their own, or dislike our doings, with the
very same they commend us, and condemn themselves. For, in proof hereof
though I might aleadge the ^oet Martial purged by Edmondus Augerius a Jesuit:
and of our own writers among others the tables of Spangenberge not reformed,
but deformed in many things by Villamicentius a Friar; and of there own sid
Ludouicus Viues, whose golden locks are shaken off, as were Samsons by dalila,
even by the deuines of Louaine (sufficient profes that if they have done well
therein we do not ill that do the very same which they do, or if we do ill
they cannot be justified which do to others, either more then we will offer,
or as much as we do unto any of the^) yet this very book shall suffice for all,
which is so translated both by G. C. into English, and by Petrus Burgundus into
Latin, both following one and the same Italian translation (for the Author
himself was a Spaniard R. P. Fr Didaci Stellae, Hispani etc. says Burgundu.
, and wrote in the Spanish tongue Recenter ex Hispani calingua in ^^alicam.
traducti per Hieremiam For resti, etc* thongh in the preface of G. C. it is
said to be written in the Spanish or Italian language doubtfully.
, that he which has but one eye, sufficiently may perceive that either the
English is meruailously augme^ted, which has a great deal more than the
Latin; or the Latin has left out very much for it is but an Epitome. or an
Abstract, as it were, in respect of the English. Now if G. C. has truly
expressed the letter, and delivered the Authors mind faithfully, which he
travailed to do both for his own honesty, and the Readers satisfaction G. C
in the preface to his translat.
, surely Burgundus has neither truly expressed the letre, nor faithfully
delivered the authors mind, and so neither dealt honestly with the Author, nor
satisfied the christian Reader for he wonderfully varieth from the English, not
only in respect of the letre, but so in respect of the matter, as if purposely
it were done to shred off many things that were superfluous, I say not only in
the English, but also in the authentical copy. Again if Burgundus have done
well (for he is but a translator nether Ex Italica in Latina^ tra^slati, a
reuerendo petro Burgundo.
, and no paraphrase) then doubtless G. C. is much to blame which inserted so
much, I say not simply matter, but errors too, as are not to be read in the
Latin copy. Now whether of them have dealt the more sincerely I leave it to
their judgment which have the Italian and the Spanish copies and the Authors
own words, which I neither have, nor can get: but their own doings, as they
have, and may, I trust, deliver me from blame, so they troubled me in such sort
when I took this work in hand, that I was enforced to use a Christian
liberty in the doing hereof, and thereby to cul from them both such things as
were for the benefit of the Church: and in them both to ouerpasse whatsoever
was to much redounding in words, or otherwise erroneous for matter, and out of
the^ both to frame such a treatice, varieing so little as might be from the
Authors purpose, as should be profitable ^or the Church of God, and offensive to
none that have any sparkles of true wisdom in their minds.

And though the diversity of translations, and in the tra^slations the great
diversity had not moved: yet the errors were so many, and the scriptures in
many places so vainly applied, so vnt^uly expounded, so dangerously wrested*
and many things so falsesly collected from the word of God both in the English,
and also in the Laten copp^ (as any may perceiu by those Tables a^nexed to the
end of this book) that howsoever they might be tolerated if the book were of
controversies in Religion, yet being purposely penned, to stir up the
affections of Christians to the love of God and of heavenly things, I cold not
discharge the duty of a true servant in the house of God, if I did not both cut
off many things which they had, and use an extraordinary liberty in citing,
expounding, applying, alleging of Scripture, and in the whole matter, least
under the pretense of moving the godly readers to love the good things of the
spirit, they were allured withal to the likeing of most dangerous errors, and
untruths, which God abhors: and so they should reap not so much benefit
by that which is good, as hurt, which is the drift of Satan, to their souls
by that which is wicked.

The doing whereof if it please not mine adversaries, to make the^ to like it
I will spend noe more words at this time: I trust none that be truly
religious, and godly wise, (whom I chiefly respect) but will interpret my
pains in the best part, and withal wish that what else any of the contrary
side in respect of Religion, shall publish to this end and effect if it cannot
for some causes utterly be expressed, which is impossible yet it may carefully
and wisely both be perused and reformed, that good, and none hurt may redounde
unto the people of God.

And this I have thought good to dedicate unto your worshippes, as in that
respect before cited, so partly to signify that the good will and friendship
which from the first time I was acquainted with you, I have found at your
hands, is not forgotten, though little spoken of on my part; and prtely by
some work of mine own, having none other thing so good, to requite in some sort
the benefits received from you both: and, though I desire you not to take it in
good part, because I need not, not in respect of the worthiness of the thing,
so much as of the goodness of both your natures; yet most earnestly I beseech
the almighty God namely for you, that as by the great wisdom wherewith ye
be inspired from above, and by the experience ye have gotten in the world, ye
know how vain, and deceitful the world, and the things in the world, are, so
more and more ye may grow both into a detestation of all the vanities of the
same whatsoever, and into the likeing, and loving, and longing for those
things which are truly glorious, and to be desired: and for the which we are
created Ephesians. 1. verse. 4
in the heavens; and that which I pray for you by name, I desire also not only
for my self, but besides for all the rest of our friends wheresoever.

Your W. in the Lord, Tho. Rogers.

THE First book which displayeth the vanities of this world.
CHAP. I.
We must contemn this vain world, if we would enjoy God.
CHRIST our redeemer does say Mat. 6. 24
No man can serve two masters. Sweet is the comfort of God, yet not to all
men, but to them only, who despise the vanity of the world. For it cannot be
that a man should enjoy God, and with all inordinately desire the things of
this life.

All men indeed are desirous to enjoy the sweet conversation of the Lord: but
few are willing to forgo their own private commodities *, 6, 21. 22
and from the heart to contemn the goods of the earth; they desire, I
grant, the inward comfort of the soul, but so, that with it they may satisfy
the appetites of their fleshly mind. But thou who art purposed to follow
Christ, thou must deny thy self, Luke 9. 23
that having forsaken the world, Christ may be thine. Christ and the Devil
are enemies one to the other, Mat. 8. 29
and having nothing in common between themselves, they cannot inhabit
together in one place.

Deliver thy self from the love of the world, if thou would that God
should have access unto thy soul, For thou shall never taste how sweet God
is, until the goods and pleasures of this world are loathsome, and unpleasant
unto thee. And persuade thy self, that then, and not before, thy soul shall be
able to receive the consolation of Christ Jesus, when as bitter thou abhorrest
the things of this world. As it is impossible with one eye to look up to
heaven, and with the other downewarde to the earth: so against reason is it,
that so-long as thine affection. is bent toward earthly things, thou should
enjoy the comforts of the spirit. If therefore thou have any desire at all
after God, of necessity thou must deprive thy self of all humane joy, when it
is an hinderance unto heavenly consolation.

Fly with all thine heart, from al comfort of the world, and thou shall be
comforted of God Mat. 5. 4.
. Pluck away from thy soul the love of the world, that a place may be left,
wherein the love of God may be ingraffed, and take root.

God would not suffer that one and the same Altar should serve for himself,
and for Dagon too; and though the Philistines with might and maine labored, yet
never could they bring the same to pass 1. Sam 5. 2. etc.
. God will not that the idol of sin, which thou would adore, shall have
any room there, where his heavenly majesty has an abiding place ^. Cor. 9.
14. etc.
.

He cannot abide that himself and the world should be worshipped together. If
thou will love God, of force thou must hate the glory of (...) Mat 11. 29
Purge thine heart from al wickedness, and thou shall come unto that peace.

Learn in every thing to conq^er thy self, so shall thou have the inward
quietness of the mind.

Break thine unbridled appetites, remove away the vain desires of this
present world, abandon pleasures that thou may live at peace and
tranquillity; that nothing may trouble, nor molest thee, that finally thou
may enjoy the sweetness of the spitit, and attain a certain Paradise in
this world.

Nothing can happen unto a righteous man unto his perturbation. Thine own
affections are they which move bates against thee Iam. 4. 1,
, and thine enemies being within, how can thou complain of them without?

He is a great Lord, that can command himself. And this in fine, is the noble
sovereignty of our will, that it has more power than the Kings and Emperors
of the world, who of enemies cannot make friends as can our will, being
disposed thereunto, when she subdueth the disordered appetites.

Why are injuries and afflictions whatsoever grievous unto thee, but because
thou do shun them? Now if they would be sweet rather, and not irksome,
would thou once love them?

S. Paul rejoiced in the Cross of Christ Gal. 6, 14
and those glorious Apostles went away rejoicing that they were counted worthy
to suffer rebuke for his name Act. 5. 41
.

Why did ^hese so holy men rejoice in tribulations, wherein thou have no joy?
Surely that pleased them* which is unpleasant to thee. Once do thou love that,
which holy men have loved, and thou shall find that comfort which they had
in troubles.

If persecutions bring thee grief, complain not on the persecutor, but rather
on thy self, who flyest from that, wherein thou should rejoice Iam. 1, 2.


Conform thy self after the ensample of Jesus Christ, and be a friend of his
cross, and suffering. 1. Pet. 2 21. etc.
Resign thy self wholly into his hands, and love that which he did love* so
shall (...) surely it were alone sufficient to confound then, which in title
only, be Christians.

Let us be ashamed to pass the time in pleasures and delights, when our
Captain lived in great reproach and peril. ^^ee is no good Soldier which
beholding his captain dying before his face, will not venture himself to the
peril of death, without thinking of his own life and pleasure.

If thou seek after honor, seeing thy Captain dishonored, it is a great
argument, that thou art none of his band; and counting thy self a Christian*
thou should greatly blush, if thou find in thy self any love at al of
vanity, which Infidels seek after.

Many there be which say they are christians, but very few do imitate the life
of Christ. They be in name like, it cannot be denied but altogether unlike for
manners.

If the life of many Christians were compared with the life of our redeeme^, it
would then evidently appear how crooked their hearts be, and how much also
they dec^ine from that straitnes, which God did set them in, seeing they turn
themselves unto the love of those things, which his pleasure is, should be
despised.

I would gladly know who has more knowledge, God or the world?

If thou beleeuest that God knows more, mark how he has chosen poverty,
and a base condition Math. 8. 20.
and this only may suffice to teach thee how wicked thy life is.

That so hard cratch, wherein he lay on the day of his birth Luke 2, 7
condemns the delicacie of this world; that stable, does demonstrate how
vain the honors and prosperity of this life are, those vile clothes wherein
his divine majesty was wrapped, do sufficiently show of what account are the
riches of this world.

Consider a little the dicourse of his life, and behold also his death, so shall
thou find, that the Son of God become man Luke 1. 37,
has always adhorted us to contemn the world, as well by example of his life,
John 1. 14.
as by words and doctrine.

The Lord preaching upon the mo^^t thus began his Sermon, Blessed are the poor
in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven Mat. 5, 3.
.

The Lord came not to destroy thee, but to direct thee into the way of heaven,
and to bring thee unto everlasting salvation.

If Christ have not erred, thou do err; if he has chosen the good, thou
chusest the ill; if he through infamy and suffering has entered into the
gates of glory Luke 24 26
, out of question thou take the ready way unto hell, which so love
immoderately honor and vanity.

In great peril thou live, and thou do hazard thy salvation if thou
return not from this way, and detest that which thou so love, and earnestly
determine with thy self hereafter to follow his steps, which cannot err.

O what an abuse is it that a most vile worm of the earth does so desire to be
great, when the God of majesty has made himself so small. Phil. 2. 6. 7. etc.
?

Therefore, Christian soul, if thou see thy husband Isaacke going on foot,
thou must after th'nsample of Rebecca alight from thy Camel Genesis 24. 64
, for thou should blush to behold Jesus in a base estate, and thy self
aloft upon a Camel of worldly vanities.

Come down therefore, come down I say, as she did by contemning the
promotions and vanity of this present world, and conform thy self according
to the life of thy redeemer, that with him hereafter thou may enjoy the true
joy and eternal glory.

CHAP. IV.
All the things of this world, are vain.
Vanity of vanities, says the Preacher, vanity of vanities, al is vanity
Eccles. 1. 2. 14.
. I have considered all the works that are under the Sun, and behold all is
vanity.

This world in the sacred Scripture is rightly called an Hypocrite, who though
to the outward appearance it seem wonderful goodly; yet within is full of
vanity and corruption. In those good things which are sensible, it appears
good, whereas in truth it is full of falsehood and deceit.

Fasten not the anchor of the ship of thine heart in the sea of worldly
love.

The reeds when they begin to spring, do delight the sight, and the eyes are
comforted with their goodly hue and flowers, which notwithstanding if you
break, you shall find altogether empty, and destitute of substance within. Let
not the world deceive thee, neither suffer thy eyes to be taken with the vain
and apparent beauty of the same: for do thou cast thine eyes into the inward
corners thereof, and thou shall find there nothing but mere vanity. If the
world were opened with the sharp knife of truth, it would by and by be found
both vain and deceitful.

For all in the world, either it is already past, or present, or to come. That
which is past, is not now; that which is to come is uncertain; that which is
present is unstable, and but for a moment.

It is vanity to trust, but greater vanity greatly to esteem the favor of the
world. It is vanity to desire the promotions, but greater vanity to love the
riches and pleasures of the same. It is vanity to covet the transitory goods,
and surely vanity is it to make great account of the corruptible substance of
this world. It is vanity to hunt after the wind of humane commendation, vain
be the cares which are bestowed upon the service of this unhappy world. To
end, al is vanity, saving to love and only to serve God.

O happy is that man which is not mindeful of the world, surely he shall live at
ease, neither can any thing reclame him from his spiritual exercises, so long
as he enjoys the sweetness and tranquillity of the spirit.

It is better to be poor in spirit than rich in sin, it is better to be
little in our own eyes then great, it is better to be of small learning with
humility* than to be profoundly learned with and vain and proud mind.

To abuse thy knowledge and other graces unto more licenciousnes, which God
has given thee to bind thee thereby the more zealously to serve him, it is
also mere vanity and arrogance of mind.

Surely surely, that last day, at that straight and rigoreus judgment, where
the books of al men^ conciences shall be opened, Revel. 20. 22.
and red in the presence of the whole world, Romans 14. 10,
shall evidently declare how much better it is to be of small, 2 Cor. 5. 10.
than of great reputation in this world.

It shall then appear, that better it had bin to have loved God, than to have
disputed about many curious, and subtle questions: a good conscience shall do
more good then than many and hie orations, uttered in the world, it shall not
there be demanded what we have said, but what we have done, neither will it do
us good that we follow the deceipts, and false promises, but that we have
contemned the glory o^ this world, and better thou shall find it, at that day
for to have repented thee of thy sins, than for a time to serve thy fleshly
appetites, and afterward for ever to be c^st into the pit of hell. Mat. 25. 41.


Consider with thy self, and count how much thou have bestowed upon the
world, and how little upon God, and that in this life which he has l^nt thee
to serve him in.

what is become of so many years without profit? what fruit have thou reaped
from the tim thou first served the world? The time passed cannot be recovered.
The days are passed thou wottest not how, and death shortly will overtake thee.

What have thou of that which thou have done? Thou have found in thy friends
no fidelity, in them, upon whom thou have bestowed benefits, ingratitude, in
men generally much fraud and dissimulation. See now al is lost whatsoever thou
have done.

That little experience which thou have of man, and the things whereof thou so
complainest, they do al and that continually cry unto thee that God above
should have been loved that he alone should have been served Math. 4. 10.
.

All thy labor is lost which is not bestowed upon the only service of Jesus
Christ. That time only is for thy good which thou emploiest upon the service
of God: but all the rest tends unto vanity and destruction.

If yet more exactly thou will consider the ingratitude of men* and note how a
good part of thy time thou have spent upon their service, it will make thee to
lament the time so unprofitably consumed, and hereafter to address thy self
to serve thy creator.

And seeing the time passed cannot be recovered, would to God at the least now
thou would begin to serve him, and lead such a life now before thou be
very old, as thou think to do when thine hears be hoary and thou drawest
to the grave.

Doubtl^s it is great vanity to spend the life in pleasing of men. Resign
up thine appetites; do away thine off^ctions; and count that as nothing which
now appears something.

CHAP. V.
The end of worldly things show them to be but vain.
Many walk. of whom I have told you often, and now tell you weeping, that
they are the enemies of the cross of christ whose end is damnation, as the
Apostle says phil. 3. 18 19
.

The end of them which love the world, as witnesses the Apostle, is death and
destruction.

Cleave not to the things which the world does offer thee for suddenly thou
shall fall into the snares thereof.

The pleasures thereof be the forerunners of death; fly the deceites, unless
thou would be caught; consider not what is present, but what is to come.

Be diligent in considering the end of sin, by waying as well that not yet
come, as that which is present; so shall thou hate the pleasures and vanities,
which the world sets before thine eyes.

Our life is like a river running unto the sea of death. The water of the river
is sweet indeed, yet the end thereof is to enter into the bitter waters of the
sea. Life is sweet to them which love it; but it will prove bitter to such as
draw nigh death. The end of the pleasant waters of the river proves bitter so
the end of man's life is bitterness it self.

might put her in remembrance of the end of al things.

Again, why did our Lord weep for the same Jerusalem, but only for that she
had not in mind the euilles which were to fall upon it Luke. 16. 41. 42.
. It is a lamental le thing to have an eye only to the joy that is present, and
not unto the pain which follows after pleasure: this made Christ to weep,
that Jerusalem was so foolishly bewitched with present joy, that she had not
regard of the troubles that would follow.

Even so doudtles it is much to be lamented that thou walt suffer thy self so
to be deceived, that thou can not see the cursed ends of all these worldly
pleasures.

Measure not thy self by the things which appear at the first, but wisely
consider what will follow, ^ee ruled rather by reason, than by a vain appetite.

And when thou know how bitter the ends of these worldly things are, make
not account of the goods thereof. Desire nothing before you thoroughly do
know, whether it be convenient you should have it, or no. and mark the end,

After a good thing follows a evil; and after joy, sorrow; and after
pleasurs, bitter lothsomnes.

It is a rule in the world to give a dainty dinner, and after-warde an homely
supper. Al men at the beginning set forth good wine, and when men have well
drunk the^ that which is worse said the governor of the feast John 2. 10.
. So is it the facion of the world to begin with mirth, and to end with
mourning. But it is otherwise at the banqueit of Christ, where the beginning is
somewhat troublesome, but the end is al joyful.

The beginnings conceal but the ends they reveal the wickedness of the world.
When they shall say Peace and safety, then shall come upon them suden
destruction, 1. These. 5, 3.
.

The end gives being to al things. As the end is, such are the things wherein
thou delightest. The end of pleasure is pain Luke 16. 25.
the end of much eating, is sickness Prou. 23 19.
the end of this life, Prou. 25. 16. 2^.
which thou so love, is worms meat and ashes Job. 34, 15.
the end and conclusion of all sin, is extreme and everlasting torment Mat.
^5. 41.
.

CHAP. VI.
The end of worldly things is diligently to be considered.
MAN shall not continue in honor, he is like the beasts that die, says the
Psalmist psalm. 46. 12
.

When God had warned man to consider what should ensue, and to mark the end of
worldly vanities, he would not, but considered only the present honor; not
how bitter the end thereof might be: he dwelt upon the pleasure before his
eyes, and regarded not the pain which was to follow; yea, he thought not
thereof at all, until he felt the smart of the same.

The preacher says Eccles. 3, 18
, I considered in mine heart the state of the children of men, that God had
purged them: yet to see to, they are in themselves as beasts. After that Adam
had sinned, GOD made him coats of skins Genesis 3. 21
, to show that through sin he was fallen into the misery of beasts.

When the sinner had once offended* he cries presently, O that! had not
sinned. But, foolish man, seeing miserable experience now tells thee how
naught the world is, and that repentance comes after unlawful pleasure, why
did thou not foresee it before thou did offend? But what the wise man
does in the beginning, the fool does in the end. It is the property of a
prudent man to forethinke, but of a fool to say, I did think thereof.

Consider aforehand of the lamentable end of these worldly things, so
afterward thou shall not be deceived.

The Psalmist does say psalm. 115 59.
. I have considered my ways, and turned my feet into thy testimonies. By
considering the end of sin, men leave the way of wickedness, and tread the
paths of Gods commandments.

If one should say unto thee as thou art in thy journey, go not that way, for
thou can not escape the hands of thieves and robbers; would thou persist
in thy journey, and not leave the same, or at least take another way? In the
way of voluptuousnes, wherein thou walk, there be thieves which murder, and
steal thy grace, and spiritual good things Mat. 7. 13
: if therefore thou art wise, and would escape the danger of eternal death,
thou will shun so dangerous a way. And let no sooner a tentation come into thy
mind, but think whether the way, of pleasure, which thou art entering into
leads, and leave the same, The Apostle says, The wages of sin is death
Kom, 6. 23
.

Iaacob and Esau being in the same womb striued who should first come into the
world, and in the birth Iaacob his hand held Esau by the heel Gen, 25. 24. 29
. The head is the hiest, and the heel is the lowest, and extremest part of
man. This is the difference between the evil and the good; good men take sin
by the heel, evil men take it by the head: the wicked embrace all kind of
honors, and pleasures, not respecting what is the end of them; but the good
take the world by the feet, considering the bitter ends of the same.

The pleasure, and prosperity of this world do shine like a candle that is set
on fire, whose flame is fair so long as substance is ministered, but that being
consumed, all comes in the end to smoke and stinche. So, though now the
pomp and vanity do delight thee much: yet in conclusion it will bring great
affliction, and remorse, if in time thou take not heed.

It is written in a Psalm, As the smoke vanishes, so shall thou drive the^
away; and as the wax melts before the fire, so shall the wicked perish at
the presence of God Psalm. 68:
. If thou be wise thou will provide for thy self against the time to come.

The Kingly prophet says Psalm. 78. 30 3^.
, The meat was yet in their mouths, when the wrath of God came even upon them
The men of this world do scarce begin to taste of vanity, when the justice of
God comes suddenly upon the^ for the punishment of their sin.

To end, seeing affliction is such an inseparable companion of worldly
things, if at the beginning thou would* advisedly perpend what shall be the
end, it would cause thee to reframe from al vanity thereof.

CHAP. 7
The judgments and words of men are vain.
CAst thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall nourish thee, says the prophet
psalm* 55. 2.
.

Let all thy study be to ^ please God; neither be thou puffed up when men do
praise thee, nor troubled in mind, when they murmr against thee.

The cause why thou art ill spoken of, is, for that thou seek to please
them, to the end they may praise thee. But would thou only seek to please
God, and to get his favor, then should not man's words, be they never so
bitter, offend thee at all. Therefore endeavor thou to please none but God
only, so shall thou live in quiet, with a merry heart.

Let nothing so afflict thee, as the wrath of God; let nothing so delight thee,
as a good conscience.

It is a vain thing to regard the wicked censures of men, when thou art at
peace with God.

Many have been commended of men, which now are condemned in hell; and many
have been counted fools, which enjoy the true happiness of heaven with Christ.
This being so, thou should neither rejoice when thou art commended; nor
lament when thou art ill thought of.

If thou art justly praised for some good within thee, be not proud thereof;
But consider the secret imperfections wherewith thou do abound, which if men
did know, assure thy self they do not so much. commend thee for that which is
good, as they would dispraise thee for thy faults; if thou art pra^sed, for
some virtue which thou have not, labor to attain the same, that the world
be not deceived in thee; if they have cause to murmr, labor to reform thy
self; if unjustly thou art condemned confess them to be me^, who cannot hurt
but profit thee, if thou have patience.

If God were to consult with men, whether he should receive thee into his
glory, or send thee unto hell, or do some other thing with thee, then it were
good policy for thee to procure their commendation, and to be counted for a
Saint: but sure, God only and thy soul, must enter into an account of matters
together, it were vain to procure the praises of men on thy behalf unto God.
For God will not require their opinion concerning thee, and, say they what they
will, God will not refer himself unto their sayings, but unto thy own
consience.

If all the world say thou art a Saint, and deseruest glory, what will that
avail thee before God, which will judge thee according to the constitution of
thy consience? Again, though all men do condemn thee, and God be thy friend,
what can their obloquies hurt For he whom they reprove, is not approved of
God; nor what they allow, is acceptable before him.

The judgments of men are vain for they know neither what men think, nor
what they deserve, they see not the inward thoughts of the m^nde, and
therefore be commonly deceived; they cannot give grace, much less glory to any
man; neither is it in their power either to condemn, or to save thee. I say
unto thee as the truth is: were all the men in the world thine assured
friends, they all could neither prolong thy life half an hour, nor deliver
thy soul from the straight judgment of God 2 Cor. 5. 10
.

How much better shall it be at the point of death, to have God on thy side,
then to have spent thy whole life in the service of a king, or other princes of
the world? who though they love thee much, yet can they not help a whit at that
extremity.

Listen therefore unto me, and afflict not thy self; if thou do thy duty,
howsoever men murmur against thee; labor not to please the people; neither
seek their praises in this world, for it tends al unto vanity, and loss of
time. But turn thy self unto GOD, and labor with all thy strength to serve
and please him, turning away thine ears from the rumors and vanities of this
unhappy world

CHAP. 8
The reproaches of the world must be contemned.
AS touching me, I pass very little to be judged of you, or of man's judgment.
He that judges me is the Lord, Therefore judge not before the time, until the
Lord come, who will lighten things that are hid in darkness, and make the
counsels of the hearts manifest; and then shall every man have praise of God.

This said the Apostle 1 Cor 4 3 4 5
despising the judgments of men inasmuch as God is privy to the hearts and
condition of every man, and he can search the hearts and reins.

At the hour of death it will appear who is the good, or the evil man. Let
this therefore move thee to give no heed to the wicked judgments of men, but
to please God.

They which run a race, regard not what every one does say, but what their
judgment is which must give the reward. Whose example may teach thee not to
care for the praise, or disprayse of men, but altogether to bend thy self to
please God the supreme judge Romans 14. 10,
. If thou take pain for his glory, he sees it doubt thou not, and from his
hand thou shall receive a croune of righteousness 2 Timothy 4, 8
.

Love the truth, and care not what men say, who are moved oft^ through love or
hatred, yet wot they not what is in man Luke 2^, 5
.

be not moved, neither take it grievously, though some have an evil opinion of
thee. Art thou better than Christ himself? Read the Gospel, and there shall
thou find written, that of some he was called a Seducer Luke 2^. 5
a Samaritane Ioh. 8, 48
one which had a devil Mat. ^, 24. Mat. 2. 23
some said, this man is not of God, because he keeps not the Sabbath Ioh, 9.
1^
. Others said, how can a man that is a sinner, do such miracles? Insomuch that
as John does testify, there was a diuisior among them If then so diverse
opini^^s W^^e sparsed abroad of our Savior christ, who knew no sin 2 Cor, 5.
21
, but was very holiness and goodness it self, why art thou so proud, being
indeedeful of imperfections, that would have al men praise thee as thou
do? If the judgments of men were so contrary about our most innocent Lord
and master, what reason have thou to wish that al men with one mouth would
commend thy d^ings? If many praise thee, which art notwithstanding a weak and
frail vessel, let it not grieve thee, if some again speak il of thee.

There is no man so holy, whose life will be commended of al men, nether is
there any work so righteous but wicked persons will murmr against the same.

It were a foul error not to follow virtue because of the contradictions of
men. Go thou about the most holy work that may be, and thou shall be sure
some will speak against the same: now if thou art so light as to esteem what
men say, assure thy self nothing thou will do that shall please God.

That blind man which sat in the way toward Jericho crying unto the Lord for
help, wanted no reprehenders Luke. 18 35, 36, etc
: notwithstanding the more he was rebuked, the more ernestly he cried.

The mouths of the wicked by no means can be stopped, they will speak psalm.
12 4.
. Which being so, draw near unto GOD, abide in the paths of righteousness,
persevere in a good thing, and regard not the words of idle persons, whose
manner is sinisterly to interpret the meaninges and doings of their neighbors.

Thy time is lost if curiously thou mark what men do say. Labor therefore, that
always thou may please God, and do his will. for all the rest is but vanity,
and vexation of the spirit.

CHAP. IX.
To be praised of men is a vain thing.
TAke heed that ye give not your alms before men, to be seen of them, says
the Lord Math. 6. 1
.

And although in an other place our Savior does likewise say Math. 5. 16
. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works: yet
his meaning is not that we should thereby seek our praise, but the glory of
God, and therefore he adds immediately, And glorify your Father which is in
heaven.

He which does good works that he may be praised, seeks the glory of
himself, and not of God.

God does not forbid that we should do good works in the sight of men but he
would have the intention to be good. He forbids thee to seek thine own
praises, and wills that in the good things, which thou do, the glory of God
should be sought of thee.

If thou measure the treasure of good works by the tongues of other men, it is
no longer in thee either to keep, or to forgo, the same. Keep secret the
riches of virtue by thy self, except thou would that flatterers should
bereave thee of them quite.

Ezechias, that showed his treasurs to the King of Babilons messengers, was
grievously punished for the same 2. K. 20. 12. etc.
. Publish not* abroad the good works which thou do, neither seek the praise
of men, least God he punish thee for a vain, and arrogant man. Seek not the
reward of well doing in this world, least thou leese the reward of eternal life,
Be care^ul that the righteous judge say not hereafter unto thee, Thou have
thy reward Mat. 6^1 ^ 5, etc.


Covet not to be justified of men for vain is al commendation of man if thy
conscience accuse thee for wicked before God.

Trust unto it, unless thou fly the praises of men, thou shall both easily be
deceived, and also go without the reward of thy works.

Be not delighted nor moved with the commendations that men do give thee, nor
with the favor of great men for they are vain and deadly things* which
separate from the true felicity.

Pass not greatle what men say, for a good man has more care of works, then
of words. Only the good work is that which is to be commended.

He which h^^teth only after words shall in the end find nothing but bare
works* but a work done in the Lord, shall of the Lord receive a reward.

If thou wai^h thy life by the tongues of men, look never to be quiet, and
thine own man. The righteous man is not moved with fair words, but seeks
only to please God,

Return into thine own conscience there shall thou find, what manner of man
thou art, even a weak person, and a sinner, who shortly ^ust leave the world.
At the time of which thy departure, it shall appear how vain the praises of
men be.

Covet not to be in the mouths of men, for with fained praises they deceive
the man, which is desirous of vain glory.

It is but a vain joy, which is not builded upon a quiet and pure conscience.

As gold is tried in the furnace, so is a man tried in the mouth of his
commenders. The gold is tried in the furnace, and that which is not gold
turns into smoke, and finders; so virtue passing through the furnace of
praise, if it be false, it consumes, and comes to nothing, but if it be
true, it increase^h together with the praise.

If thou seek the praise of men, virtue will shun thee; and if thou waxest
proud when thou art praised, ^hou do banish virtue.

The Babilonians when they heard ^he sound of music, fell down, and ^orshipped
the golden image Dan. 3. 7
: so ^he coueters of humane praises, they (...) down and worship the image of
sin.

The manna, which the Isralites ^eserued for any of the week days contrary to
the commandment of GOD, it was full of worms and stank Ex. 16, 20
; but that which they gathered as Moses bad, that stanke not, neither was
there any worm therein Ex. 16. 24
. The week days signify, as I take it, the time of this present life. All the
works which thou do in the world ^o be praised of men, they are al lost, and
stink: but that which is laid up against the feast of eternal glory, they shall
appear exceeding good, and receive a reward due unto them. Keep them
therefore against the Sabbath of eternal glory.

God comaunding that the stones whereof the alter was made, should be rough and
not hewn by the tool of man Ex. 20, 20
, did insinuate thereby, that what good thing thou do, it should not be done
to be seen of men, but to please God, the stone is not polished on the out
side, but only that it shine in the eyes of men.

Take heed, that thou do nothing, to please man withal. But endeavor to please
God alone, and to serve him in the in ward paite of thy soul. Fly vain
praises, unless thou will fall into hypocrisy.

CHAP. 10
The glory of this world is a vain thing.
Give the glory to the Lord of Israel, says the Scripture Ios. 7, 19,
.

The glory, that is due to any good work, God himself ^oth challenge, as the
auctor and principal cause of that good Iam. 1. 17
. which thou do work.

Take heed thou take not that glory to the self, which God will not give to
another Isa, 42, 8,
.

A foul evil is vain glory, and much hurt to a spiritual man is brought by
selfeloue.

Fly from vain glory, as from a Basiliske, which if upon the sudden ^t thee
behold, his very sight will be^eaue thee of thy life* but if thou see him first
by knowing that it is too much vanity to seek after glory to thine own
works, then shall thou get the perfect victory.

Let God be praised in his works and not man, who is but a vile instrument of
his mercy.

Shall the Axe boast it self against him that heweth therewith? or shall the
saw exalt it self eagainst him that moves it, says the Lord Esa. 10 15
? The praise of the work is not to be ascribed unto th'instrume^t, but only
unto the master that works with the same. If thou do any good, consider how
thou art but th'instrument wherwithal God he works; and always take heed
that thou take not unto thy self the glory belonging only unto God.

The apostle having mentioned the manifold labors which he had endured,
concludes 1. Co t. 5 10
. Yet not I but the grace of God which is in me. Those 24 Elders in the
Revelation Revel. 4. 10.
Fell down before him that sat on the throne, and worshipped him that lives
for evermore, and cast their crowns before the throne. The like do thou, lay
the glory of thy good works at the seen o^ Christ, saying with the prophet Psalm.
1 14. 1.
* Rot unto us. O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give the glory. Thou have
wrought all our works for us, O Lord, says Isay Isay. 16. 12.
.

When Samson gloried of his victory which God had given him, saying Iud. ^5. 16.
. With the ^aw of an ^sse* are heaps upon heaps, with the ^aw of an Ass have
I slain a thousand men; he was so humbled for that pride, that forthwith he
had almost died for very thirst.

Daniel records that while Nebuchad-nezzer was saying Daniel. 4 2^.
, Is not this great Babel, that I have built for the house of the kingdom by
the might of my power, and for the honor of my majesty? A voice suddenly came
down from heaven, saying: O King Nebuchad-nezzer to thee be it known, Thy
kingdom is departed from thee.

That holy man Job did think it a great sin, If a man did kiss his hand
Job. 21, 1^
. which thou do when thou gloriest, and boastest thy self for the good which
thon have done.

The hand of Moses, to the sight was whole and sound, but he no sooner had
thrust it into his bosom, but behold it was leprous as the snow Exodus 4. 6
Though thy works are to sight never so sound, and godly, yet if they ^e
done for vain glory sake, thou ^halt perceive, when thou fallest into a due
account with thy self, that they be polluted with a most filthy ^eprosie.

What has thou, which thou have not received 1 Cor. 4. 7
? O Israel, one has destroyed thee* but in me is thin help says the Prophet
Hos. 13, 9
.

If thou look back unto the time passed, thou shall find that much thou have
done, for which thou may ^ustly be ashamed. If thou behold the time present,
thou shall find thy self in a place of banishment environed about with
manifold dangers. If thou foresee the time to come, there wants no matter of
fear, if thou consider the heavy i^dgements of God hanging over thine head
for thy sins.

Thou should rather fear, and tremble in this vale of tears; than be
joyful, and vain glorious, for thou know neither how acceptable thy works
are in Gods sight, nor yet how long thou shall continue in doing well. Let him
that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fail, says the Apostle 1 Cor.
10. 12.
.

If thou do vainly boast of the glory given unto thee of God, thou shall be
deprived of the same: So says the writer of the ^salmes psa. 30. 6
, In my prosperity I said* I shall never be moved, and because he gloried in
himself, he had a shameful downefal* as himself does say Thou did hide thy
face and I was troubled. 7,


If thou do any good at al, it is by the power of God why then braggest thou
in those good things, which are not thine* They be the foolish virgin^ without
oil in their lamps, which seek the vain and outward glory of this world. If
thou do glorify thy self, thy glory is not worth a straw. If the Angels of
so great honor and excellenci^ in heaven do seek only the glory of God, how
much more ought vile and mortal man to humble him by renouncing al vain glory?

Learn, miserable man, to be lowly in heart, that thereby thou may get
favor before GOD, which through pride* and vanity the wicked Angels have
forgon.

CHAP. XI.
Vain glory is to be eschewed.
HE that rejoices let him rejoice in the Lord, says the apostle. 1. Cor. 1 31


Rejoice not of thy works; 2. Cor. 10. 17
for all the glory of the servant of Christ, should rest in God alone.

Despise the vain glory of this world, if thou desire to have more grace
before the Lord.

The more should thou fear that thou prove not vain glorious, the more
zealous thou art of the glory of God.

Vain glory arises of some good thing, but it goes not away with that good,
but mightily increases. For, as God of his goodness fetches good out of
evil: so the Devil thorough his naughtines, draws evil out of good. For out
of a good work he draws vain glory, that the worker may attain no reward at
Gods hand.

When thou think thou do much, thou do but a little in respect of
other holy men* The thing which seems white, compared with snow, will straight
appear in a manner black. If thou would call to remembrance, how great
things holy men of God have suffered, and with what austeritie of life they
have humbled their bodies, thou will say thy self, that little thou have
done. Acknowledge thine own imbecilitie, and how weak thou art, and never so
vainly do thou vaunt thy self.

Let not this vanity move thee unto good works, neither look for a reward
from men. The wind-mil will not turn about, nor grind the corn unless a gale
of wind do drive the same about: so many will not grind the corn of good
works, except they be moved there-unto by the wind of vanity.

Thou leesest the price, and praise of well doing, if only vanity move thee to
do well. And albeit thou do all which the law commands, yet that have thou
whereof to boast? ^hen ye have don all those things which are commanded you,
say we are ^wor^ profitable servants, says Christ Luk, 17. 10
. (...) thou should al thy life long serve ^OD, yet still thou should
think (...) unprofitable.

For would thou more exactly ^eigh these things with thy self, ^ou
could not but, see that very ^^ten thou have offended God, And ^en, and not
before have thou done (...), when thou art of opinion that ^^ou have done
nothing.

Destroy not the fruit of thy labors either consume thy sweat in vain. ^od
he knows, and that much bet^^r than thou, whatsoever thou do, and what thy
works deserve: he ^^ill not leave a cup of cold water, ^iuen of thee to the
least of Gods ^hildren unrewarded Mat* 25. 4.
.

Then why praisest thou thy selse? (...) thou ignorant that so doing thou ^halt
have no praise of God? Take (...) self but for one altogether vn^^ofitable,
and so God he will take ^ee for one of his profitable, and ^erfect servants.

If thou praise thy self, thou shall be dispraised, though before thou see^mest
to be worthy all praise and commend^tion; If thou think thy sel^
unprofitable, thou shall forth with be^ profitable, though before thou we^^
worthy all bl^me, and reproach.

It is necessary to call thy wits to^gether. To forget thy good deeds it is a
good thing. If thou have thy sins in oblivion, which thou ought est to have
in continual memory: why have thou not the good which thou have done in
oblivion al^o?

He l^ieth up a good treasure, which forgets his good deeds. The Saints in
old t^^e did labor much to call back their sins into remembrance, and
therefore they were humble. But the Pharisie through pride d^d cast away
himself even when he seemed to be most thankful unto God Luke 18 ^1 14
.

If thou praise thy self, both God will abhor, and men will hate thee. If thou
would have thy deeds to be great, count them but small, else can they not
be great.

Therefore in all things be thou lowly before God, and so thou shall receive
the greater grace at his hands.

CHAP. 12
They which would be great in this world, are become vain men.
BE not high minded, but fear. Romans 11. 20


If thou would be great in heaven, be little in earth.

Thou have known many which have been great and mighty in this world, whose
memory now is buried with their bodies.

How many great Prelates and men of power have there been, whose vanity is
vanished like the smoke, of whom no man now has any care at al? Dead they are,
and others occupy their places, which never think whether their souls be
either in joy, or pain.

Why seek thou rule, and to be of power? Why d^sirest thou to be great in
this world? ^aue not others been in that state which thou labourest for, and
has not the world forgotten them* Do thou not consider the end of them?
That which came unto them happen will unto thee: for the world will not leave
his old wont. Think how they did rise, and again how they did fall; and that
their fall was the greater, the higher they aspired.

He, whom those great men contemned in their life, does either bury them with
dust, or tread upon them lying in the grave.

Remember, how in that state which thou desire, others have been, whose names
thou know not, and the world has so forgot, as if they had never been: and
touching their bodies they be reduced into dust and ashes.

Respect not so much the time present. as to come; neither esteem the honor
which this world does offer thee, but mark what will follow afterward. Fasten
thine eye upon the things which will ensue after this short life, and live
content in that state or condition, whereunto God has called thee.

Think not through the instinct either of Satan, or of the world, how thou will serve God in an high calling better than in a low degree* Honor blinds
the eyes of men-Greate men are not their own men, but are bound unto greater
matters. If now thou art more free than they are, and yet do not thy duty in
a lower place how will thou discharge a greater Office, having nothing so much
liberty? If thou can not weeld well a small carriage, how will thou bear an
heavy burden? If a ^ew cares do draw thee from praying unto God, and other
spiritual exercises how can thou serve God when thou art distracted with
manifold cares? He that cannot carry small things, will never go through
with a mighty burden. He that is not a good subject, will never be a good
Magistrate.

Love thou God, keep a pure conscience, and resign thy self wholly to the
pleasure of the almighties ^f it be ordained of God, that thou shall be great,
he will promote thee without thy carefulnes. For of thy diligence he has no
need at al.

Be lowly in thine own eyes, and make no great account of this worlds
preferment. The highest trees, thou know, are most subject to the wind. The
higher state, the greate^ danger. In the fishers net the great fishes are
de^ained, when the smalle^ sdoe escape. The chiefest Princes of Jerusalem were
carried of Nebuchadnezzar into Babel k. 25. 18 19
; when the poor people were not so^l entreated k. 25, 12 22
* Covet not to be a great man, else easily thou shall fall into the snare of
Satan. Desire not to advance thy self, lest thou fall into the confusion of
Babel.

Call into thy mind the end which great men often do come unto, and choose to
be of a low degree. Be content with that calling wherein God has placed thee,
so after this life thou shall inherit the throane of glory.

CHAP. 13
Vain men hunte after the preferment of this world.
Ye know not what ye ask, said the Lord unto the two disciples which would
be preferred above their fellows Math. ^0* 22
,

Through the ignorance of themselves men desire to command, and ^eare rule
over other men.

Honor is the reward of virtue. If thou take thy self worthy of promotion, and
to be endued with virtue if there were nothing else, it is cause sufficient why
thou should go without all preferment. It is enough that thou be counted
good, though thou think not thy self so; and if thou art of opinion that thou
deseruest promotion, that self same thing should make thee to suppose how thou
deseruest none at al. Of ambition sping herisies* It is a very hard thing to
stand in hie place, and to be void of lofty cogitatio^s. If thou covet
pre^acie, and supremacy in the world, assure thy self thy danger is at hand.
Neither would any man, I think, se^ke readily after preferment, did he
advisedly consider the bands of Prelates.

They which covet prelacie, little note, what it is to he preferred. A prelate
ought so far to excel the common people, as a shepherd does in excellency
surpass the flock.

In schools the degree of a Doctor is not bestowed upon those men which newly
give themselves to learning, but upon them who a long time diligently have
applied their book. Let not him be promoted, who says he now does begin to
lead a virtuous life, but which has already subdued the wicked affections of
his mind. He ought to be a very good man, which is to govern others.

God gave commandment that at the first blast of the trumpet, the Princes or
heads of the people should go into the field Number. 10. 4 etc*
, and after them the whole host should follow: At every first s^und from God,
the guides of the people must be ready, and they are to show themselves for
most in the service of God.

Inferiors be not so bound, as be they in highest place, for that such
perfection is not required of these as of them.

The higher thou art for authority, the better thou should be for virtue.
Thou owe much, because thou have received much. The greater thou art, if thou
sinnest, the greater shallbe thy punishment, for by so much is the fall
greater, by how much thy state is higher. It will keep thee from an asspiring
mind, if thou consider that both thou art bound to better behavior by thy
promotion than other men, and also if thou sin, c Wis. 6, 6.
thy punishment shall be the more greiu^us.

The eyes of all are fixed upon thee, therefore if thou do not thy duty, thou
shall offend many. An evil prelate, or governor is worthy of so much
pu^ishment as he has ministered occasion of sinning to the little ones by his
ill example.

In the house of their eldest brother the children of Job did end their lives
Job 1, 18* 19
. So do the subjects perish many times through the il example of their
governor, who is their eldest brother as it were.

As the rods were which Iaacob laid in the gutters before the sheep, of that
color were the lambs which their sheep conceived Genesis 30. 37. 38 etc.
. In like sort, such as the examples are which the governors do show, such
are the lives of subjects, good or bad. The subjects work will have a spot,
if he see a spotte in the rulers life. Thy works, whether they be good or ill,
are the rods which thou laiest before the eyes of thy people, the sheep. It
cannot be but as thou live, so will they.

When the pillar, which lead Israel both by day and night Exodus 13, 21, 22,
did go, the people also did go; but when it stood still the people moved
not. So a gouern^ur if he proceed in the way of godliness, the subjects also do
the same: but if he cease from doing well, the subjects likewise will do no good.
Proceed in godliness therefore thou which art a ruler, and a guide of other
men, and thy people, doubt thou not, will follow thee apace.

Works do move more then words. The Physicion drinking a bitter potion, does
more move a sick man to take the same, than if only he should say drink.
Thou shall sooner perswad inferior persons to run, if you say, ^et us go,
and do go thy self before them, than if you bid them to go, and stand still
your self. Christ our Lord, like a good Prelate* began first to do, and
afterward to teach, as S. Luke notes (...) 1. 1,


Trouble not your self, and others with many words, when your works be naught;
It is monstrous that the tongu should be larger tha^ the hand: so is it as
offensive to speak more than thou will perform.

If thy life be despised, think not that thy doctrine will be regarded. Be
thou foremost in the service of God and thou shall perceive by good experience,
that so thou shall profit more than by a prolixious tale, and enticing words.

Great folly it is, ambiciously to seek preferment, which who so has must
give an account to GOD of men's souls. O how will it afflict thy mind when thou
must answer not only for thine own, but also for the sins of them committed
to thy charge. He is a fool which binds himself to pay for that which
other men have eaten. At the hour of death it will be grief sufficient for
every man to study what answer he may make for hims^fe, though he be not
made to answer for the souls of other men. I^ then thou shall be so busied,
that hardly thou shall unwind thy self from the sentence of condemnation in
respect of the sins committed by thy self; then much more hardly shall thou
escape the same, having taken upon thee to answer for the consciences of other
men. It must needs therefore be a vain thing after this manner to bring thy
salvation into so great a danger.

It is vanity to covet supereminence over others in this place of banishment.
God for his part will more love thee, if thou be a good man; and good men for
their part will more esteem thee being a godly subject than a proud prelate.
I grant indeed, thou shall not be feared being not preferred, but thou shall
be loved, which is the better of the twain.

Do away therefore thy inordinate affections, and keeep thine heart from
vanity. Love humility as the servant of Jesus Christ, and cast from thy mind
the desire of honor: For at the hour of death it will not help a whit, but
rather hurt thee.

CHAP. 14.
This world is not our native country, but a place of banishement.
WHile we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord; again, Here
we have no continuing city, but we^ seek one to come, says the Apostle 2.
Cor. 5 6.


There is no journey taken without labor. Heb. 13, 14
There is no pleasure to be sought for in this world, wherein we do but
soiorne.

Covet not to build much, or to abide in the world, seeing thou have a father
in heaven so rich and mighty; but hold on a right course toward that land
where all manner of felicity does abound.

S. Peter says 1 Pet. 2. 1^,
, I beseech you as strangers and Pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts which
fight against the soul. It is the manner of Pilgrims to lead an hard life.
They are always like for, rainers, their true friends are in an other country.

Procure not that friendship which is hurtfu^l to thy soul, neither take it
grievously though al things fall not out according to thy desire; For thou art
but a traueler in this present world, which if thou would bear in mind,
much dangers thou could not but avoid. Make speed therefore away like a
post neither purpose thou to stay in this miserable world.

He that betaketh himself to an Inn, there to tarry only for half an hour,
bedecketh not the house for so short a time, for then would he be counted an
egregious fool. Thou art a Pilgrim upon earth, yester-day thou came, and to
morrow thou shall depart: Care not therefore for these honors, riches, or
vanities of this world, but let thy whole mind be touching the land of the
living psalm. 143, 5
, where the Saints with Christ do everlastingly triumph; have in mind the
land of the heavenly father, but set not thine heart upon this place of
banishment.

It is a wonder how thou can promise to thy self in this world any
stability at all, seeing this life is so short, and the hour of death so
uncertain, that thou know not whether thou shall live till to morrow, or
not. Think how the troubles of this world are of small continuance, and very
shortly thou must go unto heaven, where thou shall rest for evermore Revel.
21. 4
.

Would thou bear in mind that the life, which we do look for, shall
continue, yea is everlasting, surely thou would think this life though it
were to last a thousand years, in comparison of that to come scarce half an
hour in length. Yea al our life compared to that is but a moment.

This moved The Apostle patiently to bear the troubles of his pilgrimage, as
himself writing unto the Corinthians, does say on this wise 2 Cor. 417
Our affliction which is but for a moment causes to us a far mooe excellent,
and eternal weight of glory, while we look not on the things which are seen;
but on the things which are not seen, for the things which are seen
arte^poral, 18.
but the things which are not seen, are eternal. Thus did the apostle meditate
of heaven waying with himself the shortness of this liefe.

If thou be a stranger in this world, marvel not though thou be unknown to men;
if the labor of this life trouble thee, be not disquieted in thy self, for
shortly thy journey shall have an end. The fathers in the old Testament
confessed they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth, Heb. 11, 13 38
and wandered in wildernesses, and mountains, and dens, and caves of the earth,
and never found rest.

Never be of mind that thou must inhabit this earth. Kain was the first that
we read of, which built a city vpearth Genesis 4. 17
, and lost he not heaven? Neither was Saint Peter rebuked without cause, who
being a stranger, would yet have an house builded upon mou^: Thaber Math. 17 4
etc.
as if he had been to inhabit thereupon.

They which travel like pilgrims, use not to buie fruit trees and such like
things, as are too heavy for them to bear, but such things as are of light
carring, but yet of great price, as precious stones, and other jewels. In like
sort forsake thou the honors, and riches, of this life; and ^arrie about thee
the precious jewels ^f an vnspoted conscience.

Why then heapest thou promotion upon promotio^ so fast, which of neces^^tie
thou must leave behind thee? Why would thou be laden with ^^ches in the
race of this life. Rather ^eeke for the inestimable jewels of good works, that
thou may live in perpetual riches, and honor in the heavens.

CHAP. 15
Beauty is a vain thing.
Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vanity, says Solomon prou. 31, 30,
.

If no vanity is to be accounted of any thing at al, and beauty is a vain
thing, surely beauty is nothing to be accounted of. Then most vain are they
which have in great price the vain beauty of the body.

Let not thy beauty puff thee up, neither cast an eye unto the shadow of thy
countenance, least thou fall into destruction, and loose thy life as Nareissus
did, who beholding his beuty lost his life. Absolons goodly locks of hair
were the haltars to hang himself withal 2. Sam. 18, 9.


Beuty is given unto man to the end he should lift up his mind unto God the
giver of the same. When thou find a little vain of water, thou followest the
same till thou come unto the spring from whence it flowed first: Even so when
thou meetest with a beutifull body, leave not until thou come unto the author
of the same, which is God himself the fountain of al beuty.

Little children, thou know, do wonder at the gay letters, and pictures
which are in books, but the substance which is the learning comprised therein,
they regard no whit. Show thy self not a child, but a man of wisdom, gaze
not so curiously upon the external beuty of any creature but mark diligently
what is written therein, to the end thou may love the author, and creator of
such fairness.

Creatures be spectacles as it were which serve us to behold, not our selves,
but other things withal. Thou ^ust use the creatures of God not for (...)
behold them, nor thy self in the^, ^ut God, who for all things is highly (...)
be praised.

If thou love thy self, because ^^ou art fair, I demand, comes ^^at
beuty of thine from the body, ^r from the soul? Not from the bo^y. For take
the soul from the bo^y, and the beuty foorth-with is tur^ed into foul
deformity. It is the ^ule which gives beuty to the bo^y.

Is thy body beutifull in thine eyes? ^hen love the soul the more, which the
cause of that beuty. If the pre^nce of the soul be the cause of such ^euty,
how beutifull then is the soul ^er self?

In the soul consists the true ^euty, in comparison whereof all over beuty
is but a shadow, which passes away in the twinkling of an eye.

Abide not in the contemplation of (...) the outward bark, but consider the
root, even God I mea^e, the author of all beuty.

Trust not in thy beuty which quickly vanishes away, which sickness comes.

Thy days runaway like a post; youth passes, and thou withal unto age, and
so unto death: And then, I beseech you, what shall become of all that corporal
beuty?

Fire does not so inflame, a^ beutie does. For no man is burned of the fire but
he which touches it, but beuty burns a far of.

Consider a while with thy self, what filthiness lies hid under that painted
figure of beuty.

Fall not suddenly at the first view of a beutifull body, but consider
advisedly the vanity of the same: so with a pure and good soul clean from all
such vanity shall thou serve thy God.

Above all things apply thy self to the adorning of thy soul with that
inward beauty, which is of continuance, for that outward is vain,
corruptible, momentany* and transitory, whose end, and that upon the sudden,
is mere misery and wretchedness.

CHAP. 16
Gaie, and costly apparel is but a vain thing,
BE not proud of clothing, and raiment, says a wise man Eccle. 11, 4,
.

Had not the superfluity of apparel been an evil thing, neither ^ould Christ
have commended John ^aptist, as he did, for his base artire Luke 7. 25
. nor S. Luke dispraised the rich ^lutton for his pompous garments Luk, 19. 16
, Besides the Lord says, how They which wear soft clothing are in Kings
^ouses Mat, i1. 8.
, he means of temporal Kings, not of the King of heaven. ^l which does
show that to take a ^ride in gorgious attire, is a vain thing in the sight of
God. When thou do attire thy self so pom^ouslie, if thou do it not to an
ill and, yet at the least thou loosest time which is to be had in great
estimation.

Commonly they who are so ar^aied, they covet to be seen, and proceed smally in
godliness, but wax cold in true devotion. And when they have bestowed
greatest cost, and taken the most pains to pranck themselves out, yet are they
not co^parable to the lillies in the field, as neither Solom^ was in all his
glory Math. 6, 28. 29.
Having food and raiment let us then with be content, says The Apostle 1. Tim
6, 8
. Simple, and common apparel agreing to each man's calling, may suffice the
servant of God. As for all curiosity, abandon it: because it is a token that
thou have small regard of matters spiritual, when thou art so occupied about
things corporal.

While Solomon gave his mind earnestly to the setting out of himself an^ his
court, he so forgot both himself, and God too, that he fell at the end to flat
idolatry 1. K. 1. 45
.

Man looks upon the outward appearance, but the Lord beholds the heart. 1.
Sam. 16 7
. If therefore thou spend ^uch time upon outward things, thou give the world
to know how thy desire is to please men, and so doing, thou art not the servant
of Christ, according to the doctrine of S. Paul Gal. 1. 10.
.

Were thou truly mortified, as thou should be, all these supreflu^^us
cares, which not only hinder, but also quite cut off the adorning of the inner
man would be abandoned.

The Apostle says, that the holy me^ before the coming of Christ, They
wandered up and down in sheeps Skins, and in goats Skins Heb. 11. 37
, For conside^ing that naked they came out of their mothers womb, and naked
they should out of the world again Job. 1. 21,
, they were content to live attired even like pilgrims upon this earth.

Before man fell through sin, he ^eeded none apparel. For as the Sun is
clothed with light: so was man adorned with grace; and the li^ly is not so
white, as he was bright for innocence. But having no sooner lost that
innocence, he blushed to be seen naked Genesis 3. 7
: therefore unto our first parents did the Lord himself make coats of Skines,
and clothed them Genesis 3. 21
,

He that boasts of his apparel is like unto that man which braggeth of the
clouts that covered his filthy soars; which glory turns unto his greater
shame. For a fool is ^ee sthat glories of his soars and sickness.

It seems Job was simply attired whne he said Job. 16. 15
, I have sowed a sack cloth upon my skine. Course was the apparel of holy King
David when he said Psa. 35. 13
, I was clathed with a sack. God he threatens to the^ which take a pride in
their apparel, by the Prophet Esaias Isa. 14. 11
, The worm is spread under thee, and the worms cover thee, declaring that by
these vanities God is much offended.

Let every man carefully take heed that he devise no new and strange attire,
and fear we the heavy judgment of God, denounced by the prophet Zephaniah
Zeph. 1. 8.
, I will visit the Princes, and the kings children, and all such as are
clothed with strange apparel. For in such there wa^teth neither lightness o^
mind, nor vain glory.

Ecclesiasticus does say Eccl, 19. 28
, A man's garment and his excessive laughter, and going, declare what person he
is. The delicacy of apparel declares the leuity, and infirmity of the mind.
Therefore cast them from thee, if thou covet to be taken for a sober, and
honest Christian.

Thou take that from the poor which thou bestowest immoderately upon thy
self. Wear not that apparel which beseems not thy calling, but cloth thee
so as thou may seem to have an honest mind, void of all vanity.

Think how thy Savior Christ hunge naked on the Cross for thy sake, and
spare vain expenses, so shall thou be free from many frivolous and idle
cogitations.

CHAP. 17.
It is a vain thing to boast of the worthiness of our ancestors.
I Shall say to corruption, Thou art my father, and to the worm, Thou art my
mother and my sister, says Job Job. 17. 14
.

Would thou see the original of thy stock? Do but open the grave, and
there behold it.

It is an argument of great vanity, that the son of Adam, a vile worm, dare
boast himself so much, because of the nobleness of his stock, or kindred.

A wise man he was that said, wh^^ profit these great titles? why are those
arms, and ancient enfignes?

Though every corner of thine house were filled with monumentes of thy
ancestors, yet virtue alone is the true nobility.

It were better for thee to be the son of poor Thirsites, having the brows
of Achilles, than to be the son of noble Achilles, being thy self
contemptible Thirsits.

Be thou of good behavior, and thou shall bring nobility to thy posterity,
albeit thy predecessors were but obscure. But be thou of an il conversation,
and thou shall obscure the glory of thy blood. It is better to be the founder,
than the ouerthrower, and of more fame it is to be the first than the last of a
noble house.

An argument of virtue is it to begin, but to destroy an house of renown, it
is a token of a leude behavior, For evil manners overthrows a house, were
it never so hie in the estimation of man.

If thou have none eyes of thine own to see withal* be not so mad as to borrow
the eyes of other men. To speak plainly what I mean hereby, nothing will the
nobility of other men help thee, if thou art thy self of a base mind.

It is better to be noble indeed, than to be the child of noble parents. And
better is it a great deal to be thy self virtuous, then to beg thy virtue of
other folks.

If thou have any true nobility of thine own, thou will never seek for
credit else where, nor set thy self out with the feather of an other bird,
Surely thou art very poor, if thou desire to be enriched by the noble acts
of thy renowned ancestors.

Art thou descended of a noble house? Surely the more thou art bo^d to be noble
thy self, that the world may say, thou art of the offspring of such noble
persons.

From one and the same root proceed both the thorns, and the rose; and of one
mother both a noble child may be borne and an abject. Therefore seeing others
may be roses, take heed thou prove not a thorn. Kain Cham, and Esau had both
noble parents, and noble brethren, yet they and their progeny were base
minded and blemished the nobility of their ancestors.

Thou art not truly noble, unless thou do those things which beseem a noble
person. It is for a noble man to forgive injuries, but a base minded man will
seek reuengement. A noble heart will endure afflictions with a courageous
stomach, and occupy the mind with heavenly cogitations; but* a vile person
thinks continually of the transitory things of this world. The true noble
man is furnished with Christian virtues, but the vile person is of leude
conditions.

It is not the glory of a stock, but the nobility of virtues that makes a
man acceptable in the sight of God.

Virtue is the true nobility, the which as no man can give, so none can take
it from us.

Why do thou arrogate any thing to thy self by that, which other men have
atchiued? Why boastest thou of that, which thy parents have left thee?

Nobility of blood comes by generation: but nobility of the mind is thine
own by the grace of God.

From a root that is bitter may come fruit that is sweet; and of a base
house may come a noble man.

Many that come of noble paren^ take boldness thereby unto them of sinning most
licentiously. The things which bind them* unto the better behavior, they
take for the committing of greater wickedness. But truly to say, the noble by
birth are bound as it were by oath, to continue and uphold the virtues of their
founders. And they which are not, neither study to be such, whatsoever they
deem of themselves, they are taken for monsters among men because they
resemble not their virtuous parents.

Never boast of thy parents nobility, unless thou would of wise men be
reputed for a fool.

God, to show that he passed but little for the antiquity of a stock, he
elected Saul for king, being of the meanest tribe of all the Israelites 1 Samuel
91
. Christ also chose for his Apostles, not persons of nobility, but for the
most part men of small account Mat. 4 ^3
. Again, to what does he compare himself, but to a silly shepherd John 10.
?

Remember how thou art but ashes and dust, even as thy parents be. The worms
will not thee spare, as they have not spared thy parents.

The nobility received from thy parents, is mortality and corruption. These
be the arms to be in graven upon thy shield, not to hang behind the doors of
thine house, but before the sight of thine eyes.

Let these and the like things be daily in thy mind, the better to expel
both vain and idle cogitations.

CHAP. 18.
The riches of this world, are but vain things.
IF riches increase, set not your heart thereon, says the Psalmist psalm. 6 2. 0
.

In great detestation should the servant of God have those things which may
cause a separation between God and him.

The riches of this world are vain, because their end is vain.

The great rich men of this world, have slept their sleep, and when they did
awake they found nothing in their hands.

That must needs be vain which separateth man from so excellent an end, as
God himself is.

Blessed is the rich which is found with out blemish, and has not gone after
gold nor hoped in money and treasures Eccl. 31. 8
Name us that rich man, and we will praise him. A rich man is commonly taken to
be either an unjust man himself, or the heir of an unjust man

The falcon when he is full does not know his master. The Prodigal son
seeing himself rich, forsook his fathers house Luke 15. 13 17 etc.
: but being pinched with poverty, he made return again unto his father. His
abundance of wealth did turn his heart from God but nipping poverty brought
him home again.

If thou have a desire ernestly to serve God, then rid thy self of all
unnecessary business, at the least from the love of this world. Why art thou
troubled about many things? One thing is necessary, says Jesus Christ Luke
10. 41. 42,
; if thou seek this one thing, thou shall deliver thy self from al
unnecessary cogitations of worldly things.

When our first parents lived in the estate of innocence al occupied about the
spiritual meditation of God, they had so little mind of their bodies, that they
knew not themselves to be naked at al: but no sooner had they committed sin,
and given their minds unto earthly things, but straightway they perceived
themselves to be naked Genesis 3. 6. 7
.

S. Paul the Apostle was taken up into the third heaven, but whether in the
body, he could not tell, or out of the body, he could not tell 2 Cor. 12. 1
. Men whose minds are taken up with celestial cogitations, they give no
regard to these bodily things. This ignorance is commendable, yea it is
sovereign wisdom.

The Disciples of Christ being addicted to the Doctrine of their master, had no
great mind of exterior things, insomuch that they sat down at the table
sometime without washing their hands Mat. 15. 2
: but the Pharisees did clean otherwise. This teaches us how the cogitations
of Gods servants do greatly differ from the cogitations of worldly men, who
while they busy themselves about things of small moment, neglect greater
matters; and while over earnestly they give themselves to things belonging to
the body, they have scarce any time to think of matters pertaining to the
soul.

Wordly thoughts and cares be the children of riches, and the occupations and
business which they bring with them do suffocate aod choke up all good motions
of the spirit.

Despise the vanity of these incorruptible goodsr* so the more freely shall
thou serve God. For it is impossible for thee to fly up unto heaven, unless
thou break the bonds of this world wherewith thou art detained.

Let not the pleasure of this world separate thine heart from the love of
Christ. Poison commonly is given in some sauery and well relished meat; but
he that receives the same, lives not long after. Riches are sweet to such
as love them, but such as embrace them they puff up with pride, and so bring
them unto everlasting destruction.

The preacher says Eccle. 5, 9,
, He that loves riches shall be without the fruicte thereof: And they that will
be rich fall into tentation and snares, and into many foolish and noysom lusts,
which drown men in perdition and destruction, says the Apostle Tim. 6, 9,
.

Al creatures be such unto man, as man is unto himself. A good man cannot be
the worser for these outward things, nor an evil man the better.

What good does an heap of riches to this corruptible flesh; they cannot
deliver the soul from death. O happy is that soul which is not subject unto
riches.

The men of riches have slept their sleep, says the prophet: men of riches,
that, is the servants of riches, not the masters.

That gain which is gotten with the loss of a good name, may well be counted
a great loss, and no gain at all.

When the servants have a care of the masters good estate, then may the
masters give themseules to ease.

But so it is not with riches, for they are so far from vnburdening their
masters of care, that they press them sore with worldly cogitations.

A very vain man art thou, if thou place thine happiness in these corruptible
goods.

Despise therefore from thine heart al these earthly riches, so shall thy mind
be filled with most heavenly treasure.

CHAP. 19.
Al earthly riches but vain.
I Have counted al things bnt loss, and do judge them but dung, said the
Apostle Phil. 3, 8,
, when he spoke of these worldly things.

He could find nothing more fit then the very dung, whereunto he might
compare the riches of the earth.

And surely though otherwise they were of great account, yet in respect of
heavenly treasure, they are of little, or no price at al.

For what is gold? the very dross of the earth. What silver, and precious
stones? the dregs of the ground gathered together on a heap. What be your fine
sattins, damaskes, and al kind of silks? the dung of vile worms. What is
your best cloth? the wool of sheep. What be your costly furs? the skins of
dead beasts. Your painted palaces, your lofty toures, your sumptuous
buildings, your large and populous tounes, what are they? Even very earth.
What is honor? Nothing. To conclud, what soever is in the world; it is but dust.

Do thou love the good things of the earth (if they may be called good)?
Surely thou love nothing but earth* Consider the vanity of those things
which the world offers unto thee, and beware thou set not thine heart upon
them.

A wonderful thing it is, that thou, so excellent a creature, made to serve
and to have the joy even of GOD himself, can so debase thy self as to cast
thy mind upon so vile things.

If thou would be accounted noble, love noble things, I mean things
spiritual according to that nobility which God has imprinted in thy noble
heart.

Even as love does change the lover into the thing loved, insomuch that he is
not his own, but the things which is loved: So in loving these vile things
of the earth, thou give that which is better, for that which is worse, that
is, thou give thine heart which is all precious even for very doung, which is
most filthy. These things are far unseemly for a man of reason, whereby
thou show that not only thou art forgetful of thine estate, but also
renouncest al thy chiefest privileges. God therefore would have thee to love
him, not because his heavenly Majesty does need thy love, but for thine own
advantage and preferment. For while thou transformest thy self into his
likeness as it were through love, thou gettest great commodity* For thou
give that which good is for that which for excellency is so surpassing that
it cannot sufficiently be either praised, or prised.

God in depriving his especial friend Job of al his earthly substance, at the
instance of Satan Job. 1, 12
, would have thee to learn how little he esteems the goods of this world.
Open thine eyes, and consider how shamefully thou debasest thy self, man,
while inordinatly thou couetest after earthly riches; and again, how worthily
thou look up, when thou despisest them.

Reclaim therefore thy mind from al these vanities, and give it wholly to the
service of Christ:

CHAP. 20
To be proud of riches, it is a vain thing.
I Compare not precious stones unto wisdom; for all gold is but a little grauel
in respect of her, and silver shall be counted but clay before her says the
wise man Wis. 7, 9*
.

To be worldly rich, is to be very poor.

Cast not thy mind upon the vanity of creatures, but lift it up unto heaven
where God is. Humble not thine heart before these earthly things:

God has made thee to love heavenly, and to contemn the things of the world.
And because he seeks thy good, he has laid al necessary things, which
he knows thou shall need, upon the face of the ground, as bread, wine,
flesh, and such like, that readily thou may find them; but as for things
less necessary, as gold and silver, he has buried them deep in the earth,
that as they are out of sight, so they should be out of mind.

Covet not greedily for vain things. David says Psalm. 4, 2
, O ye sons of men, how long will ye turn my glory into shame, loving
vanity, and seeking lies? Seeing God has endued thee with reason, why abusest
thou it in placing thine happiness in earthly goods, when thou art created to
be the heir of heaven.

All that thou love is vanity, says the Psalmist; and whatsouer the world
promises thee, is but lies

This gold is but earth; and this silk, whereof thou vauntest, it comes from
the vilest worms. These precious stones, wherewith thou glitterest, and those
borders of imbrodered work, which thou set out to th'vttermost, what are
they all but vanity?

Glory not therefore in thine apparel, nor in thine hangings, nor in thy
glorious cortins, and such like, for these be not the riches, these make not a
man rich, these make not him that is foolish, wise; that is proud lowely; that
is cholerike, patient, that is incontinent, chaste, that is uncivil, courteous:
they make neither the angry man, mild; nor the envious, charitable and loving:
but the contrary they do. Then if nothing they further unto virtue but hinder
much, why so impatiently do thou covet them?

Art thou so blind that thou see not, how embracing riches, thou nourishest
a serpent, or scorpion in thy bosom? For as the scorpion will kill them with
poison which cherished them with their heat: so these riches, which with the
heat of in ordinate desire, thou do nourish and augment, they will eat thy
bowels, gnaw thy conscience, choke the good spirit, hinder thee from salvation,
and bring thee to destruction, both of body and soul. This is that thou
love* O thou blind man, this is that thou seek: this is that lastly that
destroieth.

Call thy wits together a little, and behold the falsehood of these riches, so
shall thou lift up thy mind not only unto the liking but also unto the loving
of things far much greater, and every way more true.

CHAP. 21.
To love riches and earthly things, it is mere vanity.
Love not the world, nor the things in the world, says S. John 1 Ioh. 2. 15


By the light of nature we are taught not to love these natural things in
regard of themselves. For love is a thing so precious, that it should be
bestowed only upon him who can with like affection of love answer the good
will. But seeing no creature natural can with like measure recompenc thy love,
therefore thou ought not to apply thine heart to the things of this world.

Doubtless, could thou percei^ thus much, in desiring to enjoy the things
which be ordained only for thy use, thou do pervert the order of God, God
alone thou must enjoy by loving him, as the sovereign good thing, from the
bottom of thy heart Math 2. 37,
: but use thou must the things of the world as servants, referring the love of
them unto God, and to the setting out of his glory. God created man after his
own likeness Genesis 1. 27
, to the end that as other living creatures do, he should love his like, Seeing
therefore thou have no likeness with earthly things, thou art bound of equity to
love not these earthly things, but God after whose similitude thou art made.

All the while that Jacob had children by Leah, and her handmaide, he never
thought of returning into his country; but so soon as Rahel had borne him a
son, he had a longing forthwith to return home again Gc. 31. 25.
: So the men of this world while they are occupied about earthly things, they
are forgetful of the Celestial country; but when they once bring out the
fruit of Godliness, then begin they to loath their former state and greatly to
desire the happiness of heaven.

When the king of the Egyptians was dead, the children of Israel sighed for
their bondage, and cried, and God heard their moan Ex. 2. 23. 24.
; but before his death though they cried bitterly, yet were they not heard. Both
good and badde al cry unto God, but none be heard save they which have killed
the king of Egypt, that is the love of this world, which worldlinges have not.
Let the love therefore of the world once be dead, and God will hear thy prayer
out of hand.

It is the law of unfeigned love, that you do show your self to be such, as
that is which you love. Our soul is like unto wax which takes the form of
that which is imprinted thereupon. As that is which you love, such is thy
soul, earthly or heavenly.

If thou put a glass toward heaven, thou shall see the figure of heaven
there-vpon; if thou turn it to the earth ward, there shall thou behold the
figure of earth. So thy soul is like unto that whereunto thou appliest the
same, insomuch that whatsoever goodness or badnes is in thee, thou may
ascribe the same to that thing which thou so leuest.

Nebuchad-nezzer loving the world became a beast and did eat grass like an
ox Dau. 4. 29 31.
, but lifting up his eyes unto heaven by true repentance, he came again unto
his former shape.

When God had made the Sun, the Moon, and all other creatures, he said of
them all that they were very good Genesis 1. 31
, and for such did approve them: but man being created, he was neither said to
be good nor ill, not thereby preferring other creatures above man, for whose
sake they were all created. Why then said God of all other creatures how they
were good, and said not so of man, who was better then they? The reason is
because God he looked that man according to his freewil should work, and as he
made his choice, so should his titles be, good or evil. When he loved the good
he was good; but when he loved the evil, he was ill. For man only of all
creatures had free liberty to choose either good or ill.

The holy Apostle, speakinge of certain wicked men said Romans 1. 23
, They turned the glory of th'incorruptible God to the similitude of the image
of a corruptible man, and of birds, and four footed beasts and of creeping
things. As they made God, such were they themselves; and the images ^^ey made
of God were not so unlike him, as they resembled their images which they made
psalm. 11. 5. ^ psalm. 136. 18
. The proper seat of the soul is in heaven, where they only do inhabit
which be perfect men, as the apostle does say Phi, 3, 20.
, Our conversation is in heaven.

Love not riches, and thou shall be rich. It is great riches, not to covet
riches.

Who possesses much? Even he that desires little.

God gave in commandment that no man to his proper use should take any part
of the rich spoils of Jericho Ios. 6, 8.
, which in respect of the mutabilitie thereof represents the world; the
treasures whereof should not be desired of Christians, least they com unto
that destruction which Adam did. Ios. 7. 25.


CHAP. 13.
The rices of this world are to be contemned.
Whosoever renounceth not all that he has he cannot be my Disciple, says our
Savior Christ Iuk. 14. 33
.

Despise from thy heart these transitory things.

They which followed Christ frosooke so much riches, as they could desire which
followed him not. And so infinite is our will in coveting, that he shall never
be satisfied which follows the same; and he which renounceth it, renounceth al
things* Insomuch that poor S. Peter left as much indeed, as ambitious
Alexander could in heart desire.

These things if thou contemn, thou shall find thy self; but if thou do
them love, thou do for-doe thy self.

Happy is that soul which earnestly despises these transitory things, which
the covetous mind so greedily desires. For by contemning things corruptible,
the riches which are eternal be attained.

Gold and silver are to load a beast, not a man. Yet no beast is so void of
understanding that will^ngly will take more than it can bear. Only the
covetous man, as more void of reason than a beast will offer himself to bear
it, lay on him what, or how long soever ye will. But, if thou be wise, thou will unburden thy self, by renou^cing the vain riches of this world, so
assure thy self thou shall go the lighter.

A fond man thou art, that may have poor men in ough to bear some of thy
carriage, and yet wilt go for all that with an heavy load.

He goes best that is unburdened and does wrestle best which is naked. If thou
strive with Satan naked, thou shall easily overcome him; but if thou be clad
with vain attire, he will quickly subdue thee. Christ up- (...) naked came I
out of my mothers womb and naked shall, I return thither againg. Job. 1, 21,
.

The wheel though it turn all the day long about, and stay not, yet at night
it is to be found where it was in the morning, it changes not his place: So,
howsoever thou run a-about the world for wealth, yet at thy death thou shall
be found as poor, as thou were at the coming into this world. Naked thou
wast received out of thy mothers womb, and naked shall thou be delivered unto
the gra^. So in that state which thou begannest in the very same thou must
end thy days. Even as thou came, so shall depart.

Labor what thou can to become a great rich man, thy carke and care will be to
no purpose.

It is a vain thing thou see in this short life to heap riches upon riches:
despise them therefore, and so with Christ thou shall triumph worlds without
end.

CHAP. 23.
The joy of this world is but a vain thing
WOe be to you that now laugh, for ye shall wail and weep, says the Lord
Luke 6. 25.


Woe be to you that have your comfort in this world, for in the life to come
ye shall be tormented.

Woe to the^ which live in delighte, for they shall suffer pain, and
tribulatio^s.

But blessed is he that in this world being mortified for Christ, does
allwaies bear in mind the grievous pain of his holy passion.

Blessed is he which feeds himself with the bread of tears in this vale of
mourning. Much ought man surely to weep, while he thinks upon heavenly Zion,
his quiet and true country, while he sees himself banished amids the
confused and bitter streams of this Babylonish world.

Blessed are ye that weep now, for ye shall laugh, says the Lord Luk 91. 32
; God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes Re. 7^, 17
Blessed are those tears which the godly hand of thy creator shall wipe away.

(...) self, but he is in good earnest with thee. O that thou would let
this sink into thy mind, surely, surely thou could not chose but lead a
more sparing life, and shun vain pleasure more than thou do, if still in
fresh remembrance were the pains of hell, where, if thou repent not in this
life, thou shall be made `wil thou nil thou, to pay full dearly for all thy
cos^ly cates.

And as Job, in the person of good men said, My sighing comes before I eat,
which is the manner of the Saints of God: So of worldly men writes the same
Job Job 21. 13.
, They spend their days in wealth, and suddenly they go down to the grave.
Even as Abraham said to the rich glutt on Luke. 16. 25
, Son, remember that thou in thy life time receiuest thy pleasures and likewise
Lazarus pains: now therefore is he comforted, and thou art tormented. This is
that which worldly delights do bring unto, and this is the end of the glory
of this world.

We never read that Christ laughed at any time, but that he wept we often
read. For at his nativity he wept, at the raising of Lazarus from death he
wept (...) 11 35
, over Jerusalem he wept (...) 19. ^1 42.
, on the (...) ros^e hanging he wept Math. ^7. 49.
, what do ^ mention particulars? his whole life was a daily lamentation, and
continual sorrow for the sins of man.

Verily I say unto you, Mar. 15. 37
says the Lord Mat. 8 3.
except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into
the kingdom of heaven. A little child we see, has none other weapons for his
defense, but tears: do thou likewise defend thy self against the rage of
Satan by those weapons.

It is a vain thing to give thy self to pleasure in this world with so great
dangers.

The wise man says Eccles. 2. 2
, I said of laughter, Thou art mad; and of joy, what is that thou do? Moses
he chose rather to suffer adversity with the people of God, than to enjoy the
pleasure of sin for a season Heb. 11. 25. 24.
, and would not be called the son of Pharaos daughter.

The tears of the righteous shall be turned into joy, so says our Savior
Christ Ioh. 6. 20
, your sorrow shall be turned into joy. And the Psalmist Psalm. 64. 19
, In the multitude of the thoughts of mine heart, thy comfortes have rejoiced my
soul.

It is better to be troubled with the righteous, then to eat the bread of
pleasure at the table of sinners; it is better to lament solitary, then to
laugh in the pleasant palaces of ungodly Princes.

Despise therefore the joy of this world, which is but moment any, that
afterward thou may t^ste the ioies of heaven, which are everlasting.

CHAP. 24.
The pleasures of this world are merely vain.
WHat joy can I have that fit here in darkness, said ^obit unto the Angel Tob.
5, 1^
? As if he should say It is a vain thing to affect pleasure amids the darkness
of this world. For we walk in the d^rke and see not what is expedient for us,
and what is not, insomuch that we know not one the other.

The wise man says Wis. 9, 1.
No man knows either love or hatred. Little pleasure can he take in his
journey, which doubts of the way, whither it be good or ill And when thou
walk in the night and doubtest of the way, it is a ma^uel how thou can be
merry at the heart.

Little joy can he have that sees his neighbors house on fire. And sure a
vain man thou art if in pleasure thou pass thy time, especially beholding thy
friends even every hour to leave this world before thy face.

That die thou shall, thou art sure, but how thou must leave this world thou
wottest not: therefore vain thou art, if casting the face of God from thy
mind, thou give thy self to immoderate pastimes and delights.

More sorrow then joy has that pa^ent, which in one and the same day sees
his son both to be borne, and to leave this world* Short and of small
continuance is the love of this world.

Solomon says Pro. 15. 2
: Foolishnes is joy to him that is destitute of understanding. It is a vain
thing to bewitch the heart with delights, who take an end oftentimes before
they are well begun.

The prophet Isaie has these words Isa 24. 8. 4
, All that were merry of heart do morun. The mirth of ta^ret rests; the noise
of them that rejoice, ends; the joy of the heart cease.

Small is the pleasure which either birds in the snares of the foulers; or
fishes have by the deadly bait of the fishers: Even as vain, and surely, like
the unreasonable creatures art thou, if thou joy and glory in the prosperity
of the world, seeing death continually is at thine elbowe. The time that
remains is but very short: therefore let them that rejoice, be as though
they rejoiced not 1 Cor. 7. 30
.

Wisdom leads righteous men the right way Wis. (...) 10
. The way is right when the middle annswereth proportionably both to the
beginning, and end of the same. He that straieth out of the way fetches a
compass many times that he may so come into his way again. The holy
scripture does liken us in many places unto way faring men, and strangers. At
our birth we begin the journey, and at our death we finish the same. Ask
the wise man what our beginning is* Wis. 7. 3
When I was borne, says he, I received the common aer, and fell upon the earth,
which is of like nature, crying and weeping at the first, at all the other do, 4.
I was nourished in swaddling clothes, 5.
and with cares. 6.
For there is no king that had any other beginning of birth Al me^ have one
entrance unto life, and a like going out. Thou wast borne with tears, and thou
shall die with pain, and will thou live in joy? If thou art of that mind,
thou go not the way of righteous men; but fetchest a compass with the
ungodly. Let the middle of thy life be correspondent to the beginning, and end
of the same, that is, so live both as thou wast borne and as thou shall die.

Care not much for riches, but say with Job Job. 1 21.
. Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return thither. ^uild
not large and sumptuous houses, but remember that a poor little cradle did
hold thee being newely come into the world; and forethinke that being dead
a small pit shall contain thy body. Never covet in this world to be great,
seeing thou were so little at thy birth, and shall be so vile when thy breath
(...) gone.

Into the world thou came not great and rich, but little and poor. Thou
came not like a Champion, and thou shall not go to thy grave like a w^^rier
with a drawen^ word in thine hand. And therefore see that thou live in peace,
and quietness while thou art in the world.

Love not riches, hunt not after promotion, consume not thy time idly in
delights, bewail thy sins* Repent in this life, that thou may be blessed
in the life to come*

The Lord says Ioh. 9 20
, Your sorrow shall be turned into joy. O happy sorrow that shall be so
rewarded. Love holy compunction of the heart; sigh after the celestial cun^rey,
and make not this present banishement thy paradise of pleasure.

Thou art utterly lost, and wanderest out of the way, if thou would spend
thy time altogether Pleasantly in this world. Return therefore, and come into
the right way again, embrace the light by thinking upon the most bitter
passion of thy Redeemer, so shall thou attain unto the desired end, even unto
that happiness whereunto at the first thou wast created.

CHAP. 17.
The true joy is in the Lord.
Rejoice in the Lord always again I say rejoice says the Apostle Phil 41


The joy of the servant of GOD ought only to be in his Lord God.

A vain man is he which rejoices in any other the^ in God alone.

It is not the will of God that thou should live in sorrow, but in joy and
mirth: only he requires thee to change the cause of thy joy, and in steed of
that false joy of the world, to embrace the true comfort of the soul.

The Apostles rejoiced when they told our Lord how the devils were subdued to
the^ through his name Luke ^o 17. 10
. But it was answered them forthwith, In this rejoice not, that the spirits
are subdued unto you, but rather rejoice because your names be written in
heaven, So he forbideth not al, but the false joy.

All joy without God is vain, and without a foundation: in God only you
should rejoice, nor in any other thing under heaven. Say with the Apostle 1
Cor. 1. 12
, Our rejoicing is this the testimony of a true conscience, (...) good
conscience is a pleadge of the true joy which thou shall taste in heaven.

David he was without God, as he thought, therefore breaks he forth into
tears day and night, wanting the presence of his God psalm. 4. 2, 2 3.
, Signifiing that where God is not, there can be no true joy. The worldly joy
is not the true joy, because it is not founded upon a good conscience* S. John
the Baptist he sprang for joy in the belly of his mother Luke 1. 41.
, this was a true joy. All other joy is vain which has not grace for the
foundation thereof. Get therefore Grace before God, and thou shall get the
true goodness of the heart.

Desire thou riches? Riches, and treasurs be in his house psalm. 112. 3
. desire thou beutie? The Lord says to the spouse Sal. 5. 4. 1
Thou art fair, my love, Desire thou life? I am the life, saiteh the Lord
Ioh. 14. 6. 1^. 25.
Desire thou salvation? He shall save his people from their sins Mat. 1. 21
Desire thou peace? The Lord is our peace, as witnesses The Apostle Ephesians. 2,
14.
. Desfirest thou honor? Hear the Psalmist, Thy friends be very honorable,
and their praeeminence is very comfortable. If thou have God with thee, thou
have the true joy. What more desire thou?

Well may he rejoice which has wi^h him the fountain of grace. Renounce
therefore al temporal joy, and more esteem thou the smalest quantity of
spiritual consolation, than all manner of worldly joy whatsoever.

There is no true taste where God is not, nor true joy but in God, for son
vanished the comfort of this world.

Soon was the water spent which Abraham gave Hagar, and Ismael his son after
the flesh Genesis 21. 14 15.
: but Isaac, his soon after the spirit, he wants noe water Genesis 26, 1^ 31. 22
. I he comfortes of the world do soon leave the ungodly; but the consolation
of the righteous are as wels of living water, which may be drawn but never
dried up This joy is certain and everlasting which no man shall take from
you, Ioh. 16. 21
says the Lord.

Of worldly folks many glory in their brave apparel; but this glory is
their apparels not their own: others glory in their riches, and this glory
also is not theirs, but their riches. For take them away, and the glory is
gone. Bnt the joy which is in the Lord, proceeding from a good conscience, no
man can take from us except we will our selves: Which joy is rightly numbered
among the other fruits of the holy spirit Gal, 5, 22.
.

In creatures there can be no full joy, but the joy in the Lord is full,
because it is infinite, and answers to his infinite goodness.

Joy does answer unto desire, as rest does unto motion; For then is our rest
quiet and consummate when there is not any thing more to be moved. Even so
our joy shall be full when their is nothing besides to be desired. Now because
in worldly things the desire is never perfect rest Eccles 1, 8
, it follows that among the creatures there c^n no true rest be found. But
because God (...) he satisfies our desire, he is alone to be loved; that our
joy be full.

The Kingly prophet he says psas 10 3. 5
, that God he satisfies our mouth with good things, and Anna the mother of
Samuel, she says 1 Samuel 2. 1.
, Mine heart rejoices in the Lord, mine horn is exalted in the Lord.

To conclude, seeing the worldly joy is vain and false, in God only we are to
rejoice.

CHAP. 23.
The honor of this world, sis vain.
THy friends be very honorable, O God and their dominion is full of comfort
says the prophet.

If thou desire honor love thou God, for he whom God likes, he only shall be
advanced Psalm. 75, 6, 7
.

It is folly to seek after the honor of this present world, for with much
labor it is attained; and maintained with great charges; and when all is done
easily forgone. The true honor belongs properly to the servants of God.
But they al were not the friends of God whom the world does honor.

The honor, which the Saints both in heaven and in earth also, be adorned
withal, they got the same not by seeking but by shunning promotion.

Would thou be had in honor, and reputation? Then humble thy self, and be
low in thine own eyes Iam, 4. 6.
. Would thou be known of al men? Labor to be unknown. The shaddowe flies
from him that follows it, but tarrieth with him that boweth himself to the
ground. Promotion it is got by humility, but either comes not unto, or
tarrieth not with the ambitious man.

If thou covet the eternal, fly temporal honor. Consider the end whereunto all
these honors do come, so easily thou will condemn them al.

In processions, the manner is to carry about, and that with great p^mpe and
pride, some wodden image, costly bedecked with other men's jewels, which foolish
people gaze upon, and have in admiration: but when the procession is done, the
gaie things are taken away, and it remains as it was a very block* Even so
fares it with thee, which art advanced, the image is wood, thou art earth and
a great sinner be thou never so hie: the gaie ornaments which it had were
other men's, thine honor and riches it is but borrowed for a time, it was gazed
upon of all men, so shall thou be, being aloft; but when the procession is
ended, and thou have played thy pageant, and that restored again wherewith
thou wast adorned, and thou art laid naked upon the flower to be carried unto
the grave, then who honored thee in thy prosperity, they will set light by
thee in thy most base estate.

Great kings and mighty men we have known, which being decked with rich
apparel, and excelling for honor were had in great admiration like that wodden
image; and yet being now buried in the earth, how are they trampled upon with
the feet of men? And so yesterday advanced, to day thrown down; yesterday
commended of all, to day remembered of none. The wind of that vanity, is
passed away, the feast is past; their honor is even withered.

And would to God that these honors of the world, and of preferment were not to
expect another punishment after death, but only should be forgotten of men;
and that might not befall upon them, which often comes unto the image,, which
being broken into pieces is cast into the fi^e, so they also for their reward
be cast ^ead^long into the fire of hell. Se you not the goodly end of this
vain honor?

The servant of Jesus Christ he hunteth not after the honor of this time,
which he knows is but vain and transitori^.

The servant of Christ more loves the honor of his Lord than his own.

Happy is he which in all things that he does seeks only the honor of his
God. Happy is he which in all humility follows Jesus Christ and from his
heart despises the vain glory of this world to the end he may reign for
ever with Christ.

Covet not the honor of this world, and thou shall attain the true honor of
heaven, beware thou forgo not the truth for the shadow.

The Apostle says 1 Cor. 14. 20,
be not children in understanding The child makes more account of a reeden
horse, and of a puppet of clou^es, than of true horses, and very gentle-women
in deed. Take heed thou set not more by a shadow of truth, than by the truth
it self. The riches and honors of this world are but shadows as it were of
true riches, and glory of heaven. Cast not thy mind upon these to^es and
vanities, seeing thou art a reasonable man endued with judgment and discretion.

CHAP. 27:
The men of honor, and authority in this world, be in dangerous state.
Ask not of the Lord preeminence, neither of the King the seat of honor Eccl.
7. ^


They which clime up to the tops of high and steep buildinges are in great
danger, and therefore they had need to have a good brain, least they break
their necks. If thou have an aspiring mind after preferment, get thee a good
brain, and call for the assistance of God, otherwise thou can not but fall
into the pitt^ ^f hell.

Prosperity is more dangerous than adue^sitie* a thousand shall fall at thy
side, and ten thousand at try right hand, Psalm. 91. 7
says the Psalmist, Mo^^ perish on the right hand of worldly honor, than on
the left hand of a low degree.

The felicity of worldly men is an evil that stands in need of all manner
of correct on.

Mount not up to the place of honor, lest thou be made to go down again with
shame enough.

The phrenticke man suffers many imaginations, which if he drive not aware
from his mind, they will hasard his estate. Banish these cares of honor from
thine heart, which if thou do not, thy soul must needs be in danger: and if
thou would attain salvation, remove from thee all, roude cogitations, which
will never permit thee to have a quiet and contented mind.

Dangerous greatly is the honor of this world; and in the same many have
perished and be cast away.

Many for the maintenance of their credit among men they blush not to offend
God, and to defame their neighbor; many had rather go hedlong into hell, then
to fore-goe their countenance in the world by paying their debtes.

Even among the chief rulers many believed in him, says S. John John 12. 42.
43*
, but because of the Pharisees they did not confess him, lest they should be
cast out of the sinagogue For they loved the praise of men, more the^ the
praise of God. This is that dangerous condition wherein the lovers of temporal
glory do live, they had rather loose their soul, than their worldly
reputation.

Pilate, though he knew the innocence of Christ John. 18. 38.
; and that for envy the Jews had delivered him Mat. 27. 18
yea though he had a desire to set him at liberty: John 19. 5.
yet hearing his accusers to say, If thou deliver him, thou art not
Caesarsfriend Ioh. 19* 12,
and fearing least by contrarying their affection, he should be deprived of the
honor, which immoderately he desired, he pronounced the sentence of death upon
our Savior; yea he renounced al justice equity, reason, yea and God too
rather than he would fall into the displeasure of Caesar, and leese any whit of
his reputation in the world. If thou therefore make more of worldly honor
than of the favor of God, it cannot be but thou must al into an infinite
number of these and such like most noisome cogitations, and errors.

Many are deprived of all heavenly joy, because they will not be deprived of
some worldly authority. This is a perilous condition, for temporal to forgo
the glory which is eternal.

O that men would prudently consider the dangers that they are in which be of
hie degree, su^ely I am of mind they would soon be weary of their glorious
estate.

M^nie have bin loss, and spoiled themselves in their chiefest glory. Genesis 3,
6. 7 etc.
Adam in that earthly paradise in great glory he sinned, Job contrariwise
encountering with manifold tribulations, offended not: Adam was in great
dignity, obeyed of all, and fell; but Job, in great misery, despised of all
and yet stood.

He that stands in an hie tower, or some slipperie place is in great danger
of falling. In more danger be they which stand on the top of lofty buildinges
than they which are upon the firm ground. In a low degree thou need not
fear so much, and more securely thou shall live.

Noble, and men of glory in this world, they reign for the most part in
idleness which is the mother of vices, and the step dame of Christian virtues.
They spend the time idly, and consume it in pastimes and pleasure, in vain
delights and banqueting. More do these men offend than the poor laboring men
which get their living with the sweat of their brows.

Woul dest thou attain the life which is everlasting? Then set thy ^oue upon
those things which be here of great account. The mercha^t ^uieth his ware
good cheap, where (...) is plenty, and sells it again in places where it is
scant. Thou desire to go to heaven, and thetherwarde thou art bounding, take
not that with thee thither which is good cheap there. There be all manner of
true honor, riches, and abundance, Carry with thee thither the ware which is
not there to be gotten, so shall thou be sure to be well paid for the same.
Contempt, persecutions tears, fastinges, repentance are not there to be
found, if therefore thou provide thy self good store of these wares, when thou
come thither thou shall be sure to be well rewarded for the same, infomuch
that thou will say thou art rich indeed, and of great honor. but if thou heap
to thy self honor upon honor in this world, be thou well assured thou shall
not find them there.

Fly therefore from the glory of this world, so shall thou be glorified in
heaven.

CHAP. 28
The prosperity of this world, it is vain.
THE prosperity of fools destroys them, says the wise man 2 Pro. 1. 32
,

Much ought thou to fear the prosperity of this present world, if thou
have any desire to be of a lowly mind, and to serve thy Savior Christ.

Saul* than whom there was not a more holy, and better man in his low estate 1 Samuel 10 9
being once advanced over the people of Israel, his heart withal became
exceeding proud 1 Samuel 13 13 14
David in his adversity spared the life of his enemy Saul 1. Sam 24 9. 10. etc.
; but in prosperity took away the life of his faithful servant Vriah(^) 2 Samuel 11 15 16, etc
. He that in the time of persecution gave life unto them that had deserved
death, in prosperity brought unto death such as deserved life. It is a hard
thing to be wise and prosperous too.

Look how thou use prosperity well, for such shall be thy punishment, as thou
have been negligent in thy flourishing estate. Dangerous is that life, which
seems to be the nourisher of great security and negligence. Many of good men
became proud and dissolute, being once advanced unto high degrees of promotion.

After prosperity follows the forgetfulness of God. The request of Joseph
unto the chief butler of Pharao was that he would have him in remembrance,
when he was in goodcase Genesis 40 14
yet the chief butler did not remember Joseph, but forgot him, says the
Scripture Genesis 40. 23
. The king of Aegipt Pharao in his prosperity said Exodus 5, 2
, who is the Lord, that I should hear his voice, and let Israel go? I know
not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go. but in his tribulation he began
to know God, and besought Moses and Aaron to pray unto God for him Exodus 8. 8
.

S. Peter being aloft in glory upon the mount Thabor, wished for three
Tabernacles there, One for Christ another for Moses, and the third for Elias
Mar. 9. 5
but he had neither himself, nor his fellow Disciples in remembrance. And no
marvel, for in prosperity man forgeteth commonly both himself, and his
friends too.

It is more dangerous sailing upon the sweet waters of the running rivers,
than upon the salt waters of the wide sea, In more danger thou art in the
joyful time of prosperity, than in the troublesome storms ofaduersitie.

The nigher thou art to prosperity, the nigher thou art to thy peril; the
uniting thereof to the flesh, is the killing of the soul.

Think of prosperity as of a thing lent thee but for a short time, and may
easily be taken away; think again of adversity that it is momentanie, so
the more patiently shall thou endure the same.

Fly from prosperity, and the vain honors of this world, if in the other you
would live for euer-more with Jesus Christ. It is better to be troubled with
Christ, than to spend thy life in a flourishing state. Despise therefore from
thine heart the felicity of this present world, so shall thou come unto the
glory of heaven which is eternal.

CHAP. 29.
Great good comes by persecution.
ALL that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution 2 Timothy 3 12
,

Evil trees which bear no fruit are not beaten, but hewn down by the
roots, and cast into the fire, as our Savior says of the withered fig
tree ^uke 13. 6, 7 etc.
: but it is otherwise with good trees, which are not hewn down, though they
be beaten. The Lord compares men unto trees, among whom the evil so well as
the good do suffer persecution; but when death once approaches the wicked shall
be cut up by the roots and thrown headlong into the fire of hell.

If thou suffer persecution, take it not grievously, but thank GOD that has
admitted thee to be one of that number which he has chosen for himself.

Christ himself has suffered persecution Ioh. 5. 20
, and all that have loved Christ at any time have endured the same. If thou
therefore art without persecution, fear least all manner of evils fall upon
thee at the point of death, that may forever root and raze thee out of the
joys of heaven.

Think not thy self the more acceptable in Gods sight, because thou suffer
no persecution. Christ we read Ioh. 13 26
, gave unto Judas a sop when it was dipped, when the rest of the Disciples did
eat dry bread: yet was not Judas any whit the holier and more perfect for all
that. Think not thy self the better, if thou eat thy bread with variety of
pleasant sauses, yea, better it may be are the poor feeding on the dry
bread. It is the w^nt of God to deal his earthly blessings more liberally
upon sinners than upon righteous men. Did not the Lord betrust Judas with the
money bag Ioh. 1^. 9 Ioh. 1, 29
. But the rest of the Disciples ha^ the charge of preaching committed unto them.

Judas had the sweet morsel given him. but the Apostles had the sour. Yet I
Say unto thee, it is better to be poor with the Apostles, tha^ rich with
Judas, and better it is to eat the dry bread of repentance in sadness and
sorrow with Christ and his Disciples, than to live in deliciousnes with ungodly
men.

In the time of persecution fainte not, but be of courage, listen what the
Lord does say John. 5. 20
: If they have persecuted me, they will persecute you also. His most holy
mother by many tribulations came unto the glorious condition of the heavenly
Saints: and think thou to attain thereunto by ease and pleasure?

It is great persecution not to suffer persecution, The sick man of whose
recovery there is no hope, has all things given him by the Physician that his
heart can desire. If all things fall out as thou would have it, thou have
just cause to suspect that God is much displeased, and has given thee over.

An happy man is he that patiently receives tribulations from the hand of God.
Blessed are they which suffer persecution for righteousness sake Mat. 5, 10
.

Thou can patiently endure to have thy veins opened, and diverse other
things for th'attainement of thy bodyly health; why then for the welfare of
thy soul, do thou not abide persecution? Look not upon the pain present,
but unto the health that will ensue; regard not the present affliction, but the
blessed reward that in the end thou shall have.

He that passes over any arm of the Sea, that he may not be troubled with
the giddines of the head, will cast his eyes not upon the waters, but upon the
firm land. So east thou the eyes of thy soul upon the land of the living,
and not upon the raging waves of persecution, so many afflictions shall thou
easily avoid, sailing upon the tempestuous sea of this troblesom world. S.
Stephen when he was persecuted, looked steadfastly into heaven Act. 7, ^5.
, from whence he expected a crown of glory.

We must through many afflictions enter into the kingdom of God, Act. 14. 21
. Persecution is the money wherewith God rewards his servants in this world.
Many are so childish that rather they had to abide sick and diseased, than to
receive any physic that is better, or to be seared with iron, if necessity
do so require. The glory of a Christian is in the patient suffering of a
affliction, for the name of Christ.

S. Paul, though taken up into the third heaven 3 Cor. 21. 2. 3. etc,
, and adorned with special graces of the holy Spirit, yet of himself he would
not rejoice, except it were of his infirmites. A valiant soldier will more
boast of his manhood shown, and of his wound-receaued in the wars, than of
the favor of his Lord and Master: So a Christian should more rejoice in
tribulation, than in all the graces and gifts received from God.

Let thy glory be in the cross of the Lord thy God Gal 6, 14,
, and in thy sufferring for his sake Mat. 5, 10
. If we be dead with him, we also shall live with him* If we suffer, we also
shall reign with him. 2 Timothy 2. 11, 12


CHAP. 30.
To be in favor with great men of this world, it is a vain thing.
KIng Ahashuerosh did promote Hama^ and exalted him, and set his seat above all the Princes that were with him Ester, 31.
.

But what good had he by the favor of king Ahasuerosh? Surely it made to his
greater shame, and destruction.

Though promotion come from the Lord psalm. 75. 6 7.
, yet by reason of thy wicked inclination it does more hurt than profit thee
many times.

Christ commended Peter, saying he was blessed Mat. 16. 17
because flesh and blood had not revealed the confession which he had made of
Christ, but the heavenly Father. But so was he blinded with that favor, that,
so much as in him lay, he would have hindered the passion of our Savior
Christ for which he had a sharp rebuke, and that deservedly. If therefore we
abuse the favor of God himself to our hurt, 22.
the favor of man will do little good thorough our own default.

The grace and favor which his mistress in AEgipt showed him, tended but
unto the mere destruction of Joseph Gen 39. 7 ^8 etc,
.

As pure wine does disquiet the head: so the favor of this world works our
annoie: therefore it is good to mingle the same with the water of detraction,
that we grow not proud through our gracious being in the eyes of the great.
When the word of adulation does puff us up, then is the tongue of the
murmurer necessary to bring us down. The rebukes and hatred of other men, they
bring us directly to the knowledge of our selves.

He that lives in disgrace knows himself, though no man else do know him:
It is much better to know our selves, than to be known of other men; and more
hurt does favor and friendship, than displeasure and hatred many times.
Displeasure profits, because it humbles, and brings a man to the knowledge
of himself, whereas favor does us blind that we cannot see our selves.
Living in disgrace thou art driven to seek, and so shall find God: but being
in the favor of men, thou may easily loose him.

Take not thy self for the better man, though thou have a good countenance of
men of power, but bear in mind that saying in the Gospel Luke 16, 25
, Remember that thou in thy life time receiuedst thy pleasures, and likewise
Lazarus pains, therefore is he comforted, and thou art tormented. Thou shall
hardly be of honor in this life, and in the other too.

They which enjoy this world, and are exalted here being not the servants of
God, shall in the end be excluded from the inheritance of the heavenly
kingdom which is reserved only for the good. They which despise worldly
favor, shall have heavenly felicity.

If wicked men do prosper, grieve not thy self, for they cannot look for any
part or portion of celestial joys.

Therefore as the servant of Jesus Christ, contemn thou the favor of worldly
men, and with patience expect that glorious day, at which thou shall enjoy the
everlasting favor of God.

CHAP. 31
Afflictions are profitable.
WE must through many afflictions enter into the kingdom of God, says the
Scripture Act, 14 22
; and the Psalmist in the person of God does say Psa 91. 15
I will be with him in trouble.

Affliction is a faithful messinger; he that does injury to the messinger of a
king, does offer injury to the king himself; So he offends God likewise
which is grieved at the affliction which God does send, and let him look to
be punished as Hanun was of David, for abusing the messe^gers which he sent
unto him 2. Sam. ^0 4 ^ct^.
.

That which the fan is to the corn; the file to the iron, the fire to the
gold, that is tribulation to a righteous man.

Be favorable unto Zion for thy good pleasure, build the walls of Jerusalem,
said the Prophet psalm. 51 18
Saint Peter calls us lively stones 1 Pet 2. 5
. Thou can not make an high building without a low foundation; and unless
thou be exercised, and hewn, thou can not serve for any use in the
spiritual building. Persecutors be the rough masons. He therefore that
flies persecution refuses to be of Jerusalem that is about.

Better was David than Solomon, inasmuch that certain it is the father was
saved, whereas the safety of the son comes into question. The whole life
of David was full of tribulation and tears; but Solomon contrariwise lived
altogether in prosperity and peace; by tribulation K. David entered into
heaven, and by the prosperity of Solomon whether he be saved or no, many are
in doubt.

Much good comes to the soul by adversity. Whereas prosperity quenches the
good spirit, adversity enlighteneth the understanding of the mind.

While Joseph showed much honor to his brethren, they knew him not Gen, 43.
32, 33. 34
but having once made them sad, they knew him Gen, 45. ^ 5. etc.
. Therefore does God send thee tribulation, even that thou should know him;
for when he does good to thee, thou soon forgettest him.

Because thou sleep securely, as unmindful at all of God, therefore his
majesty does deprive thee of thy delights, wherein like a beast thou did
toss thy self and tumble, to the end thou might awake and confess thy God.

Grieve not thy self, when God does bereave thee of worldly comfort, for he
always does it for thy profit. So dealt David with Saul when he took from
him being a sleep his spear, and pot of water, not for his hurt, but for his
good, as it appears not only by his own words, but also by Saul his humble
confessing his offense 1 Samuel 26. 12, and 2^
.

By afflictions, if thou be the child of God, assure thy self that thou shall
recover the inward sight of thy soul, even as Tobias did the outward sight of
the body by the gale of the fish Tob. 1^, 10 ^2 etc.
.

At the baiting of a Bull, if a man perceive that he may fall into any danger
thereby, he will carefully give place, that the horns of the Bull goare him not
at all. In like sort therefore does God suffer thee to be in peril sometime, to
the end thou should see unto thy self by flying unto the Lord for refuge
with unfeigned repentance.

Even as prosperity turns the mind of man from God: so adversity draws
man unto God. In my trouble did I call upon the Lord says David psa. 18. 6,
Psalm. 118. ^
.

The more the waters of the ^loude did increase, the more was the Ar^ke of Noah
lifted up Genesis 7 17 18 etc.
, the more the people of Israel were vexed in Egypt, the more they multiplied
and grew Exodus 1. 1^
; the more we are afflicted, the more both we for our parts do think upon
God, and God for his part does increase his blessings upon us.

Like well therefore of tribulation, for it opens a way for thee unto heaven.

The first thing that God wrought in the conversion of S. Paul, was that he
flang him upon the ground Act. 9. 4.
. leting us thereby to know that the first entrance into the service of God is
tribulation.

As in the barn, the chafe and the corn are mingled together; so in this
world the bad and the good they live one with another: but when the wind of
tribulation begins once to blow, the wicked are thrown down to the ground
for very anguish of heart, but the virtuous they are more strongly united both
to Christ and themselus. That which is il to the wicked, is good for the godly.

The black pitch becomes white through beating; and if the good men have
gotten any spots of sin by prosperity, affliction does wash and wipe it
clean away.

Gods chastisement in this life is a fatherly correction, for God he punishes
always with great favor: but the chastisement in the life to come it shall be
with indignation and fury without al pity, and mercy, according to the saying
of the Prophet Psalm. 2. 9*
, Thou shall crush them with a septer of iron, and break them in pieces like a
potters vessel.

Choose therefore rather in this world to be troubled, that so by afflictions
which are but small and momentanie in respect, thou may attain the kingdom
of God, which is eternal.

CHAP. 32*
It is a vain thing to be careful for the things of this world.
BE not careful for your safe, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink, nor
yet for your body, what ye shall put on, says the Lord Mat. 6. 25
. For the care of these things will suffer thee to have small care of things
eternal.

God he made man to the end he should know, and by knowing should love, and by
loving should enjoy the sovereign felicity, from the enjoying whereof, the
immoderate care of things temperall does detain us back.

Had the people of Israel been careful about meat, drink, and apparel in the
wilderness, they had never doubtless set foot in the land of promise.
Circumcise therefore from thine heart all superfluous cares of transitory
things if thou mind to have entrance into the land of promise.

And of those Hebrews which left Egypt, many died in the wilderness, and
could not be suffered to go into that fruitful land so often promised, and
that because they fell a lusting after the flesh pots of Egypt.

Set not thine heart upon the good things of this life, hut let thy desire be
upon heavenly matters. covet not immoderately, these visible things, unless
thou pass not for loosing the good things which are invisible.

To many too too careful about their own, but careless altogether about the
matters of God; the Lord himself does say Hag. 1. 9. 10
, Because of mine house that is waste, and ye run every man unto his own
house, Therefore the heaven over you stated it self from dew and the earth
staieth her fruit. It is meet that they feel the smart of poverty, which
prefer the matters of this world before the maker of all things.

The Lord compares the life of the righteous unto birds, not only in respect
of the little rest and stare which they have upon the earth, but also for that
commonly they abide in the higher places. whence it was as not improbably we
may gather, that Christ when he found fa^lt with immoderate carfulness, he
said Math. 6 26
Behold the souls of the heaven for they sow not, nether reap, nor carry into
the barnes, yet your heavenly Father seedeth them. Blush therefore, and be thou
ashamed that so thou abusest thy desires, by cleaving unto the filthy dung of
the world, when thou may be refreshed with the odoriferous flowers of the
celestial paradise.

O prodigeous cruelty, to consume thy self in traveling about to get and
gain in this world, when with as little, yea less pain thou may come
unto the riches of heaven. And this thou should do at the least for thy
fathers sake which is in heaven. For the diligence and carefulnes of the child
is a blaming, though secretly, the Father of negligence. For if the child be
not sufficiently provided for of necessary things, it follows that the
Father has not performed the duty which a father is bound unto. ^ee not
therefore so careful to get temporal good, unless thou would do injury to
the heavenly father, which more than liberalie provides for his children those
things which he knows are most necessary and meet for every one of them.

The bird of the aier will no longer stay upon the earth than mere necessity
drives her so to do, but spends the greater part of her life above in the
aier, where she is best in secutitie. If thou have a desire to escape the
peril of this life, shun so much as in thee is, all unnecessary business of
this world.

It is thy part either to fly with the bird, or to swim with the fish, not
to grouell on the ground if thou would live in safety.

At such time as God created the fowls and the fishes, he gave them his
blessing, Genesis 1^ 20 22
, but the beasts and other living creatures that crept on the ground he
blessed not at al, Genesis 1, 25.
. He therefore which desires the blessing that God imparteth on the good, let
him fly, or let him swim, that he may escape all danger, and not like the
brute beasts abide and rest upon these earthly things, for such he will not
bless, but curse, saying unto them Mat. 25. 41
, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the
Devil and his Angels.

Live therefore like the flying soul, aloft in heavenly meditations and prayer,
and cast al your care upon God, as the Apostle commands saying i Pet. 5. 7
: Cast al your care upon him, for he cares for you And say with the Psalm.
mist psalm. 40. 17
, Though I be poor and needy, yet the Lord cares for me Now if the Lord have
care of thee, why serves thy carfulness, but even to extinguish in thine
heart the word of God? The desire of riches in whomsoever it be, choaketh the
good seed of the word of God, that it can take noe root and fructify Luke
8. 14
.

The Gentiles and heathen inasmuch as they are of opinion how these things are
given us of fortune, it is no marvel though they be so careful. But thou, which
do admit and believe the Doctrine concerning Gods providence, thou may
not be so careful, seeing well thou know, that doing thy duty according to
thy calling, God he will prouid that which is sufficient for thee.

If God preserve the Birds which he created for man, will he not much more
have a care for the substance of man, which he made for him self?

Remove from thee al unnecessary business, that thine heart may be lifted up
unto God.

Our nature and sensual part, being very strong, they seek themselves in the
vanities and pleasures of the world, but in the mean while the understanding
is darkened, the spirit becomes insensible and all spiritual exercise is
unsavory.

Unnecessary business; it hinders the inward prayer of the heart, it
distracteth the mind, it blinds the understanding, and finally drives away
from us the true light of the spirit.

Therefore if thou have any desire to serve God, aband from thy mind all
carfulness, and suffer not thy self to be distracted with the affairs of
this world.

CHAP. 33.
The wisdom of this world is vain and foolish.
THe foolishnes of God is wiser than man, says the Apostle 1 Cor ^1 25
.

The world esteems him for a wise man which can cloak his own vices in the
sight of men, and cunningly can attain unto honor and preferment in the
world. on the other side it holds all those for fools which despise such
vanities.

The wise man in the person of worldly men says Wis, 5, 4.
* We thought his life madness, and his end without honor, the cause was, for
that he gave not his mind to the gathering together of riches.

The men of this world take the servants of God for very fools, without all
forecast: but they are like burning lamps, and the world is only the wind
which blows and would put them out; which the godly observing, they do hide
themselves, that they may be secure; neither study they to show their
holiness in the sight of men, but to God only, which regards not the
outward parts, but the heart within Ie. 11. 20,
.

The wisdom of God is quite contrary to the wisdom of man. Good men are of
none accounte among worldly men, but they are greatly esteemed of the Lord?

The iudgemetes of God differ much from the judgments of men. For the world
looking unto those thing; which appear to the outward senses, takes him for
happy which is of power, and rich. When Samuel went to anoint one of the
sons of ^shai for King of Israel, 1 Samuel 16, 8, 6, and,
passing by him whom the father made great account of, he anointed David,
which no man would have thought. So, whom the world accounts wise men, GOD
numbreth among fools. He whom the world rejected as an abject, was elected
before all to be a king.

He which has a matter to be pleaded before a judge of learning, and
integrity, takes it not too heavily, though before he be condemned by an
unskillful Judge, inasmuch as he reposeth confidence in the sentence of that
Judge which is well seen in the laws. The men of this world, like partial
and unskillful Judges, they judged the poverty of The Apostles and the beggarly
condition of the Martyrs but very foolishnes* bnt the judgment of God touching
this matter is quite contrary.

When it was said to S. Paul, that much learning had made him mad Act. 26. ^4 25
he answered that he was not mad, but spoke the words of truth and soberness.
Hereby we may see that it is no new thing for the world blindlie to judge
that which it knows not neither understands, mere foolishness. But death
will one day come when the servants of Christ will appeal unto God the chief
and upright judge, who soundely and substantially will consider the cause, and
then will he condemn the judgment of the world as altoghether unjust, hy his
righteous and irreuocable sentence, whereby he will reprove all that which was
approved in the world.

If therefore thou be reputed for a fool in the world, be not dismayed, for
so was Christ esteemed of Herod Luke. 13* 11.
; neither weigh the vain judgments of men which shall every of them shortly
be repealed, and then true virtue, and they which be truly veruous shall
shine most gloriously in the celestial paradise.

CHAP. 34.
The true wisdom is the wisdom of Christ.
IF any man among you seem to be wise in this world let him be a fool, that
he may be wise, says the Apostle 1 Cor. 1. 18
.

It is true wisdom to become, and to be counted a fool for Christ his sake.

The wisdom of God, which consists in true mortifying and denying of a man's
self, is taken but for foolishnes among men.

The wise man says Pro. 30. 2
, I am more foolish than any man, and have not the understanding of a man in
me. The children of this world are in their generation wiser than the children
of light Luke 191
, therefore the wise man said that he had not the understanding of a man, yet
had he the wisdom of God which is reputed foolishness of the world, forasmuch
as the wit of man cannot reach unto the same.

So is the battle ordered sometime by the captain and such new stratagems he
uses that they seem foolish altogether to the barbarous soldiers, because
they know neither the ground of his devise, not yet the end whereunto it
tends. So does foolish man judge of the wisdom of God: Which even worldly
folk as it is in the book of Wisdom confessed when they said Wis. 5. 6,
. The light of righteousness has not shined unto us, and the sun of
understanding rose not upon us. For the weak eyes of our understanding they
are not able to comprehend the glorious light of heavenly wisdom.

Moses so long as he was in Egypt he was taken to be a very wise man Act. 7. 22.
but when once he was to speak before the Lord of heaven and earth he then
confessed that slow he was of speech and slow of tongue Exo 4. 10,
. For he was only wise with secular wisdom

Solomon was a very wise man 1 K. 10. 4 7. etc. Luk 11. 31,
yet when he compared his wisdom with the wisdom of God, he thought himself
more foolish than any man Pro. 30 2,


It is a point of great wisdom for Gods sake to contemn the world. In the
true knowledge of a man's own self consistteh the high and heavenly wisdom
of Jesus Christ. In comparison of this high wisdom all knowledge is but
ignorance to the servant of God Phil. 3. 8.


If thou have the perfect knowledge of all the liberal arts, what will it profit
thee, if thou know not thy self? Thou wanderest about and think that thou
know much, when in deed thou know nothing as thou should.

Happy is the soul which is replenished with heavenly wisdom: and happy is
the man whose care is to be wise in the sight of God.

To have one little drope of heaven, ly wisdom, it is better, than to have eue^
a whole vaste sea of secular knowledge.

True wisdom is nothing else but a perfect mortificatio^ of a man's own self.

The more thou know, the more ignorant show thy self, and dead unto the
world.

Righteous men which see God, as Iaacob did, because they know God they are
lame and unapt as it were unto earthly affairs, and counted fools of men,
because they are wise in Gods sight.

As that part of the moon which is toward the Sun is so glorious with light,
that the other part thereof which has respect unto the earth gives no light at
all: so when the chief and principal part of thy soul is fixed upon the
Sun of righteousness, it will be so possessed of the glorious beams
thereof, that it will have noe light to cast upon the earth and earthly things.

The fool, says Ecclesiasticu^ Eccles. 27 11
, changes as the moon; for leaving the light of God, he turns himself unto
the inferior things of the earth.

The wisdom of this world it is confounded of the heavenly wisdom. For as
the serpent of Moses devoured the serpents of Pharoas magicioners Ex. 7. 12
: so the wisdom of God deuoureth and consumes all the wisdom of man.

God in the old law he promises riches unto men, and those things which the
nature of man desires Deuteronomy. 28 23. etc
yet notwitstanding few there were that turned unto the Jewish religion, which
was the true worshipe of God. But Christ our Savior, when he came and
preached persecution and tribulation Math. 10, 24
, which men naturally do hate, Ioh 15. 20,
in all parts of the world many were converted unto the faith. John 16. 2.


The wisdom of God is of that force that by foolish things of the world the
wise are confounded, and by weak things of the world he has confounded the
mighty 1 Cor. 1. 27.
, when they professed themselves wise, they became fools. says the Apostle
Rom, 1. 22
. And what marvel, seeing all things are subject to the wisdom of God? This
wisdom Satan would pluck from thee (as would Nahash the Ammonite the right
eyes of the Israelites 1 Samuel 11, 2.
, which is the knowledge of celestial things.

The eyes of a wise man are in his head, which is Christ Ephe. 4. 15
. Neither does a wise man seek nor look upon any thing but Jesus Christ
accordine to that of the Apostle 1 Cor. 2. 2
. I esteemed not to know any thing among you save Jesus Christ, and him
crucified.

Therefore let thine whole exercise be in the meditation of the passion of
Christ to the intent that knowing him in part here on earth, thou may
afterward have a full sight of him in heaven 1 Cor. 13 12,
.

CHAP. 35
The life of man upon earth, is but both short, and vain.
MAN that is borne of a woman is of short continuance and full of trouble,
says Job Job 14, 1. 2
He shoots forth as a flouer, and is cut down he vanishes also at a
shadow, and continues not.

Our life is even a vapor that appears for a little time, and afterward
vanishes away Iam 4. 14
: and like a cloud in the aier which so soon as the Sun shines disperseth
it self.

This life so much accounted of seems among men to be very goodly, insomuch
that it rauisheth the minds of many with the glory of the same. But vain are
such persons, for who so knows not that eue^ a little sickness and
infirmity resolves even the goodliest personage into dust and allies Genesis 3.
19
? So that he becomes very vile that was so glorious but a while before.

What is the whole time of our life, but even a very instant, which runs
away more swiftly tha^ the wind? They are more swift tha^ a post: they have
fled and have seen no good thing Job. 9. 25
.

Even as lightening in the air, which in the twinkling of an eye is dissolved
so passes away both the life, and the glory of this world. For all is vanity
Eccl. 3. ^9
. Number all the days, hours months, and years of thy life, and term,
wherebe they now? They are all passed away like a shadow, and like a spiders
web, that is blown away with the wind.

There is nothing stable upon earth, whereout Adam was formed, and his
children. I here is nothing shorter tha^ life, which carries death always with
it. It is both short and miserable: good men bear it mith patience, and evil
men love it with great delight.

We must needs die, and (we are) as water spilt on the ground, which cannot
be gathered up again, says the Scripture 2. Sam. 14 14
. There is no stream that runs so fast away as the life of man does; the
water streams never turn back again, and the days that are passed, cannot
be called back. The time past is irrecouerable.

Thou may sit by the river; as Tobie did at the flood Tybris Tob. 6,
, and by tht swiftness of the same, consider how swiftly thy life it passes
away. That river Tybris had his name of his speedy runninge, and yet is not
the course thereof fo swift as is the course of thy years, after which thou
art drawn immediately unto death.

In this consideration wash the feet of thy souls affections; in this
contemplation purge thy self from the filth of earthly love, which thou have
gotten by much busying thy self in the world.

The life of man is but a dream, and deceit. The Psalmist says Psalm. 116 1^
. I said in my fear, all men are liars. The life of man is a lie, it is an
image, an image is but a figure of the t^ueth. And this life is not the true
life, but a figure of life, and the shadow of death. It is not that which it
seems to be, but a shadow of truth; it is an appearance of life, which runs
in such have, that it is impossible to be restrained or retained back.

Besides, as the life runs toward the end so together with life both the
riches, honors, and pleasures of this world do pass away. The sinful
pleasure which was taken in them then takes an end, but the torments which
they have purchased do then begin, but they shall never end. The pleasure was
but short but the pains will be everlasting Mat. 25, 41
.

I would feign understand what thing is of continuance in this world. It may
be some will say riches, and some the glory of the world, but how soon are
they gone? but Job he says Job. 9, 25 26,
. My days have bin more swift than aposte, they have fled and have seen no
good thing. They are passed as with the most swift ship, and as the Eagle
that flies to the pray.

In a word, our life passes away even in the twincklinge of an eye, so does
our youth pass away, and with that our beauty, the flower of this life it
passes away, and all things most speedily come to an end.

CHAP. 36.
God has made this life so short, to the end his servants may the sooner come
to those joys which they so desire.
MAN is borne unto travail, says Job Job. 5. 7
.

We come into the world with tears, we live in the world with labor, we go
out of the world with pain In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy
bread, said God unto Adam Genesis 3 19
.

Now forasmuch as the life of man is a continual travail upon earth, of his
infinite goodness God would needs shorten our life, to the end that the
more cherefully we might bear the pain. God of mere pity will not that
thou should labor any long time; neither does he consent that our travail
in this world should last for ever. He has determined our banishment to be
but short. And seeing he has created us to be glorified with him, and our
glory is in heaven, his care is speedily to take us to himself, because he
loves us.

It is for our great good that our life is so short, even that contemning this
present life, we should learn to love that life which is both eternal and
blessed.

Job he said unto God Job. 7. 16.
Spare me for my days are vanity. Now because Job did see that his days were
short, he determined to ask mercy of God and to repent.

Howbeit many so live, as though they should never die, occupying themselves in
the vanities of this life, whereas life is given them to the end they should
endeavor to attain that glorious and blessed life in the heavens. But he is
worthy of sharp correction which regards any thing more than that eternal,
and aye continuing life in the celestial paradise.

Do thou well consider the shortness of this life, and withal behold that
durable and eternal state, and it cannot be but thou will love that which is
to come, and easily contemn the life which is present. At such time as he saw
the wickedness of men exceedingly to increase, God purposed to cut the same
short, because they should not grow bold in sinning upon hope of their long
life. So the same God that we may not still mispe^d the time given unto us to
amend our wicked manners, he has shortened the same that we may not add
sin still unto sin.

When that men lived more innocently in the beginning of the world, God gave
them long lives: but as he saw sin to increase, and time to be abused, so he
made the life of man shorter and shorter.

The Psalmist says Psalm. 90. 8
Thou have set our iniquities before thee, and our secret sins in the light
of thy countenance. For alour dais are past in thine anger, we have spent our
years as a thought. The time of our life is threescore years and ten, and if
they be of strength fourscore years. The prophet here implies that for our
sins our life is shortened.

As the fine and delicate web which the spider cunningly has woauen is with a
small blast of wind broken and dissolved: so the life of man which so much
labor sustaineth, even by a little blaste of sickness or adversity it is
consumed and taken from us. Therefore love it not being so short and uncertain.

This is not the heavenly, but the terrestrial life; the place where we live,
it is not our native Country, but the place of banishment: this life it has an
end, but that country where God inhabiteth, together with his elect, it shall
have none end.

He that takes pain, and labors hard here in this present life, is very
foolish if he desire not to be at quiet rest for ever with Christ in that most
happy place of heaven. What bondsman but desires his native country? What
prisoner endungened, but would see the light? Surely this world is not our own
country, but a Babylonish prison. If thou desire a long life, thou desire a
long imprisonment, if thou desire an old age, thou desire a long
sickness. Where there is now hope of life, desire death. Death serves for
comfort unto us to assuage the pains arising from our labors, which be never
finished but after death.

He which is to go a journey, were better go betime, then too late.

Happy is he that lives with patience, and desires death.

Happy is that soul which God speedily will bring unto everlasting rest in the
heavens.

God which in all his works is good, to deserve well at thine hands, would
therefore have thy life to be short, even that thou should love him, and so
attain unto that life which is everlasting.

CHAP. 37
Many are the dangers which the life of man is subject unto.
THE days of man are as grass; as a flower of the field, so flourishes he,
says the prophet psalm. ^03, 15
, speaking of man's life.

To many dangers is the flower of the field open. The sun burns, the wind
dries, man treads, the beast eats, the water drowneth, and the water
consumes the same. In like sort, who is able with tongues to utter the
dangers which the life of man is subject unto? Sorrow will kill, ficknesse
will consume, the sea will drown him, and many other ways his life may be
taken from him when little he thinks of death.

Job says Job. 9. 26 25
My days are passed at the most swift ships. again, They have been more
swift then a Post. He said truly that they passed away more swiftly than a
Post. For the Post though he run much* yet sometime he must rest, to
refresh his body. But the days of man they are always going, and without
intermission they run toward death. Whether thou sleep, or whether thou
wake, all thy life long, every hour yea every moment, thou runnest with all
celeritie unto the grave.

Again, Job he likened his life unto a ship. The ship is not made to rest,
but to sail toward the haven. In like sort thou art not made to abide in
pleasure, but by labor and toil to come unto the Haven of thy salvation. And
as the ship sayleth most swiftly, and leaves no printe or sign of it self:
so our life it goes away speedily, and no memory remains of us after we be
gone. What is become of so many Kings and Princes, which lived sometime in the
world? They passed away swiftly, and left no token or sign of their being
here, Great are the dangers whereunto the ship is subject unto sailing in the
Sea. She may drink water and so be drowned, she may sink into the sands,
she may be overwhelmed by tempests, or broken into pieces with rocks, or
burned by pirates, If thou consider the dangers wherein thou live, thou
shall find how thou art open to no fewer dangers then the ship is. The
mariners now and then hoyse up the sail, and part from the haven with a
joyful wind and weather: but after they have sailed a while, they fall upon a
rock, and then turned is the mirth into mourning. So when a man is borne the
friends and parents they keep a feast with mirth and much a do, but all in
vain. For when by some mischance or infirmity he dies, then is all the mirth
tur^ed into mourning and lamentation. In the morning, says David psa. 90, 6
it flourishes and grows but in the evening it is cut down and withers.

Neither can any man how great soever he be, avoid these dangers of man's
life. Yea, the higher a man is for calling, the more painful and miserable a
life does he lead. The hearts of Princes and great men have many a thorn in
them covered from our eyes, and hid with the costly attire and with garments of
their bodies. Full of ears is their life, and with much fear do the mighty
men of this world give themselves to rest, though these lie upon never so
costly and soft beds, no taste have they in a manner of all their commodities.
Neither much delight can they take in their ordinary pleasures, they be so
cloyed with the common use of them: and when sickness and misfortunes do come,
their part is greater in them then other men's is, because they have been long
inured to pleasures and delectation, and through the continual licentiousnes
which they have lived in; they think they were not borne for any adversity at
all.

Inferior and private persons they both sustain less troubles and enjoy
greater comfort, forasmuch as they have been brought up in travel and taking
pain. Notwithstanding this life is to all men both penal and dangerous through
the pleasure of God, because he would have all men by their miseries to seek
those joys which never shall have an end.

CHAP. 38:
To put off our amendment from time to time, it is a vain thing.
MAke no tarrying to turn unto the Lord, and put not off from day to day: for
suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord break forth, and in thy security thou
shall be destroyed, and thou shall perish in time of vengeance, says
Ecclesiasticus Eccles. 5, 7
.

Thou ought speedily to amend thy life; for thou have not one hour to live
that thou art sure of.

I desire not the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way,
and live, says the Lord God Ezec. 13. 11.
. God does here promise thee pardon when thou do return, but he promises
thee not, that to morrow thou shall return. Why deferrest thou to rep^t from
day to day, when perhaps thou shall not see another day after this?

The man which has store of riches and fair inheritance of his own, need
care the less though he spend some of his moveable things: but he which has
no more than day by day he earneth, and must beside give an account to his
master for that also, for this man to lavish out his earrings unthriftily it
is a foolish thing. Thou art not sure to live one day more, and yet look
thou for an other year to turn unto the Lord? Thou which art so poor of
time that thou have not one hours life of certainty to reckon upon, will thou
so liberally promise to thy self many years to live.

Waste not the time unprofitably, which God has given thee, I pray thee.
Promise not so many things to thy self, for thou art poor, and miserable,
and it may be to morrow a strait accounte shall be exacted of thee for the
time passed given unto thee of God to amend thy wicked life in.

Thou live in continual danger like a sheep in the wolves mouth, What
remedy have thou, but to call for the help of thy shep-herde, even Christ;
Unless thou will be swallowed up of death, and that speedily.

Do not promise to thy self any long life. The wise man says, A wicked
promise has undone many a man. Know you not that the Father has put the
times and seasons in his own power Act. 1. 7.
, not in thine? The Prophet says psalm. 119. 68^
, It is time for thee Lord to work, for they have destroyed thy law.

unless thou have regard of the time, God he will shorten thy days. In the
time of Noah God granted an hundred and twenty years for the world to
repent Genesis 9. 3.
, but because they spent the time which God gave them so ill, he took from
those years twenty, and raised the flood in the hundred year Se^ the places,
Gen 5. 32 Genesis 7. v. 6 11.
If thou abuse time, time shall be taken fom thee.

The health of the body is attained after little and little, for it is not of
any necessity that health should come unto any man upon the sudden, but the
health of the soul, as a thing much for the behoof of man, therefore it may be
gotten at an instant. Thou have nothing at all of time, but the very instant,
which may serve for thy conversion, Look not for another day because it may
be, a count may be exacted of thee to day. Be dilligent in working, since thou
art so nigh unto thine ending.

This life was given to thee to the end that in the same thou s^ouldest
labor, and seek to attain everlasting life.

He that promises to do a piece of work by a certain time, it stands him
upon to free himself from all other business, that he may keep his promise.
Our Savior calls the time of this present life, the day in which we have to
work John 9. 4
for who^ the night of our death approaches, then can we work no more, we
can neither gain nor loose. This is the time which God has given thee to
seek his everlasting savor in. Have an eye unto the work which thou have now
in hand, neither suffer thy self to be drawn from the same. If the world
call, and will thee to give it over, hearken not unto it, if it bid thee to
leave this work, promising thee for so doing, riches, and promotion, say thou
can not so do, because thou wottest not when death will approach: Make haste
and be diligent in thy business, for now the time draws ^eere, wherein thy
life shall be examined, and according to thy work, such shall your wages be.

The Falcons toward night be greedy, and labor eagerly for their pray, for
it is too late for them to pray when the night once comes. Remember thou
likewise how the time of thy working in this life i^ but short, and that it is
meet that thou use all earnest painefullnesse to come unto heaven by sighing,
mourning and praying unto God.

It is a wonder that thou can be so negligent having as thou have, one foot
in the grave.

If thou be negligent in seeking the salvation of thy soul, it may be
affliction may come unto thee as came unto that Leuite, which would needs go
on his journey when the day was far spent, contrary to the mind of his
Father in law Iud, 19. 9. 10
, whereby much trouble came unto him and his Iud. 19. 22 23 etc
. But out of hand art thou to reconcile thy self unto the Lord, and whoseuer
shall hold thee back, or hinder thee, hear him not, least death happily
oppress thee, and thou be made to take up thy lodging in that obscure place of
the infernal spirits, and so can not reach at all unto thine own home,
which is heaven, toward which thou art bounding.

Rise therefore in time, and go forward to the uttermost of thy power in
reconciling thy self both to God and man, if thou purpose to rest in the house
where thou would be, least death at any time overtake thee on the sudden.

CHAP. 39.
Though repentance at al times pleases God, yet it is not good to prolong the
same until the hour of death.
BEhold now the time accepted, behold now the day of salvation, and in all
things we approve our selves as the ministers of God in much patience, in
afffictions, in necessities, in distresses, so said the Apostle unto the
Corinthians 2 Cor. 6. 2 4.
.

In the time of thine health tnrne thee unto God, for when the floudes of many
waters do compass thee about on every side, that is, when the storms of
great sorrow shall come upon thee, and the fear of death be present before
thine eyes, hardly shall thou truly turn unto the Lord.

Assuredly hardly shall thou at thy death draw near unto God, if all thy life
thou have keept thee from him.

God he says Esa. 49. 8,
, In an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of salvation, have I
helped thee.

The day of salvation is the state of the life present, therefore suffer it not
to slip, for in the same, though it be never so short, by unfeigned repentance
thou may com unto heaven.

To all things there is an appointed time, and a time to every purpose under
heaven Eccl^s. 3, 1, 4.
. There is a time to weeepe, and a time to laugh. The time that we have here
to live, is the time to weep and to repent in. Which repentance prolong not
unto the hour of death hardly then shall thou find favor, which have
contemned the same all thy life before. And who will not think that the fear of
hell torments, which justifies no man, rather than a true faith in Christ,
whereby we are saved, drives a man to weep and shed tears at that time.

The passions of melancholy do more strongly work in the mind of man, then
do those which come of any pleasant and delectable cause Now if a short
delectation does hinder the use of reason, much more will an extreme sorrow,
confound the judgment, especially the sorrow and horror of death, which is so
terrible, and so does darken reason within thee, that hardly, if at all, shall
thou turn thee unto God, having served the world all thy life before.

Add hereunto that thine understanding cannot at one time perfectly behold
two sundry and diverse obiectes; yea at the hour of death dolors will so
oppress thee, that very hardly thou shall so much as lift up thine heart unto
God.

The wise man says (d), Eccle. 8. ^
Man is not L^^douer the spirit to retain the spirit, neither has he power
in the day of death.

An habit is such a quality as hardly can be removed. Sin wherein thou have
been inured shall hale thee on the one side; and grievous tentations shall
oppose themselves against thee on the other.

Those whom Satan has given over while they were well, he will eagerly
assail when they are gree^ously sick, knowing that then ^hey be either woone
or lost for ever. Besides tentations at the hour (...) be deceived, then trust
in no creature at all.

Wherein do thou trust o mortal man? Trust not in thy strength, seeing as
valiant champions have been, whose names are not so much as thought of now
adays. The wise man says Wis. 6. 6.
The mighty shall be mightily to rmented there is no cause therefore why thou
should vaunt of thy great might.

It is great folly, our life being so short, to build stately palaces; when
our forefathers contained themselves with mean cottages. The Prophet Jeremiah
says Ier. 22. 13
, Woe unto him that builds his house by unrighteousness, and his Cha^bers
without equity. Take not pride in thine horses pompously be trapped, nor in
the vain pompes of this world, seeing God he says Amo. 6. 1
Woe to them which are at ease in Zion, and trust in the mountain of Samaria,
which were famous at the beginning of the nations; and the house of Israel came
unto them.

Set not your joy in banqueting and feasting, but mark the sentence of God
against Balshazzar the king of Babylon Dan. 50 5. 25
, and remember which God says in an other place Isa 5. 11.
, Woe unto them that rise up early to follow drunkenness, and to them that
continue until night, til the wine do inflame the^. And the harp and vi^l,
timbrel and pipe, and wine (are) in their feasts, but they regard not the work
of the Lord, nether consider the work of his hands.

Trust neither in the nobility of thy birth, no^ in the beauty of thy body,
seeing the Scripture says P^ou. 31. 30
: Favor is deceiptfull, and beauty is vanity.

Trust not in thy knowledge, for no man in this world knows more than the
very Devil does; and yet cannot al his knowledge deliver him from the pains of
hell.

Trust neither in the nimblenesse, and agilitie of thy body, not many other
such graces, for even many brut beasts, in these things do far exceed thee.
Asahel that was so light on foot as a wild Roe 2 Samuel 2. 18.
. he lost his life by following after Abner 2 Samuel 2. 23
. A miserable thing is it to set the heart upon such things. for all is
vanity, and very foolishnes.

Great rashness is it to give sentence before thou have heard both parties. If
thou judge the things of this world to be good, why do thou not think the
things pertaining unto God to be good in like wise? The men of the world they
pronounce sentence in favor of the world approving greatly the mucke of this
earth, because they never tasted the good things of the spirit. They deem the
world to be good because they never tasted the things of God. But such as
feel the sweetness of the spirit, they utterly abhor the pleasures of the
flesh.

Did thou once but taste what God is, thou would forthwith abho^re all
the pleasures and vanities of the world: but because thou relishe^ not the
things of the Spirit, thou likest better of worldly bi^ternes.

Therefore that thou may enjoy those eternal, and true riches of heaven,
repel far from thine heart the desire of all worldly vanities and deceit.

The end of the first Book,
The second Book, which sets down the perverse and erooked customs of
the world.
CHAP. 1.
The conditions of the world are naught and dangerous.
LOVE not the world, neither the things that are in the world, says S. John
1 John, 2 15
.

He that knows not the malice of anything, lives by so much the more
securely, by how much he fears not the hurt which may proceed from the
same. Therefore it is expedient that thou know the conditions of the world,
that to the better thou may take heed of them.

The deceipts thereof be manifest, and the evil customs of the same, show how
small account we should make thereof.

It is the property of the world to poison all those which come near unto it.
It deceives many, and makes many blind.

When it flies, it is nothing; when it is seen, it is but a shadow; when it
is advanced, it is fire and burns. It is to fools, sweet, but unto wise men,
sour and unsavory.

They know not what the world is which love it, but they only which hate the
same.

If thou would know the world, thou must behold it a far off, for they
which come nigh it, they neither know the world, nor themselves.

It brings forth much evil, and is the occasion of infinite miseries.

Those which love it, it hates, those which trust it, it deceives, and those
which obey it, it beats, such as favor it, it afflicts, such as honor it,
it dishonors, such as are mindful thereof, it forgets.

We have more cause to fly the world when it helps, than when it openly
persecuteth us, The more familiar, the more dangerous is the world, and worser
is it when it fawneth upon us, than when it frowneth.

He that sees not the world, shall be seen of the world. Woe to them which
repose confidence therein* but happy are they which despise the same.

The world is both to be feared, and fled from. The life thereof, is
deceitful, the labor fruitless, the fear continual, the honor, dangerous,
the beginning, without wisdom, the end without repentance, liberal is it in
promising, sparing in performing.

It is impossible thou should live in the world securely without fear,
merrily without grief, easily without labor, happily without great danger.

It intrappeth men with snares, and never cease till they are brought unto
their graves To love the world and not to run headlong into many mi^eries, it
is impossible.

Think thou ever to see the world clean and pure in every respect? Why man
it changes every moment, and by the often turning thereof about, it tends
utterly unto corruption.

It promises ample commodities which notwithstanding it never performs; it
reaches goodly fruit in show to the friends thereof, but with in it is full
of worms, and intolerable stinch. The glory of the same is so fickle, that it
both forsakes many, while they be alive, and will not follow any after they be
dead.

Of the world in the promises, there is falsehood; in the mirth, grief, in the
pleasures pain, in the comforts vexation, in the prosperity continual
doubting that the state will change. There is nothing stable, nothing of
continuance in the world, only it has a show of good things, whereby it
deceives simple folks that cannot discern the same, who being once entered
into the gulf of those bitter things which erst they thought full sweet,
they are plunged and drowned in the bottomless gulf of everlasting perdition,
through the mighty storms which it has raised.

It is like a crafty merchant which will show a cloth which is fair and fine
at the first unfolding, and sell that for good which after it be laid abroad
to the eye, is but very course, and not worth any thing. Such slippery parts
does the world play, under the show of pleasure, it thrusts upon us
everlasting pains.

But stop thine ears when it begins to speak unto thee, think that her
voice is like the Mermaides music, which with her sweetsonges does allure
unto her self, that in the end she may drown thee for ever in the
bottomless pit of hell.

CHAP. 2.
The snares and deceipts of the world are to be taken head of.
BEware least there be any man that spoil^ you through Philosophy, and vain
deceit, says the Apostle Col. 2. 8
.

The world it blinds many by the outward show thereof, concealing the
inward evils, which it does comprehend. He that lives in the world so
deceitful, he had need to be wary, lest he be deceived.

It presents pleasure to voluptuous persons, but under that vanity there
lurketh filthiness and sorrow. It offers the glorious gold to the covetous
eye, but not the cares and troubles which riches do bring. It entiseth unto
honor and preferment, but it tells not the weighty burdens annexed unto
prelacy.

The Devil he led our Savior not unto the sanctuary or inner part, but unto
the pinnacle of the temple, Mat. 4. 5
which served more for an ornament, than for necessity. So the devil and the
world they allure not a man unto the fight, and searching of the inward
conscience, and of their sins, but unto bewtifull shows of vain terror and
superfluous things

God he gave in commandment that the beasts which should be sacrificed unto
him should first be flead, and have their skins taken from them Leuit. ^1. 6
: but contrariwise the world will that all the service which thou offerest unto
it, should be covered with the skin of pleasure, honor, and commodity, to
the intent that the entrals of wickedness may not be seen at all. Therefore
thou shall do well as God commands, to take off the outward skin of
voluptuousness, and so shall thou perceive the deceites, the scruples, and the
filthiness, which lies hid and covered under those exterior things. Thou must
take away the bark of wickedness, flea and divide the entrals of sins,
which are full of deceit, so shall thou behold and that sensibly the vaniry
and naughtines of that which thou have loved.

Behold the fraud of the world. Great things they seem to thee small things
and vile. God himself which is incomprehensiblie great, he seems but small
in thine eyes, because thou art far estranged from him: and the small things
of this world, they appear great unto thee, for thou love them, which the
Apostle judged no better then dung Phil. 3
* The friends of God replenished with the light of heaven. they have known
and made known the deceiptfulnes of the world.

Would thou somewhat consider both of what small continuance the things are
of this life, and with what toil they be gotten, and with what care preserved,
it cannot be but thou would take another trade of life than thou do.

Look not so earnestly upon these worldly pleasures and vanities, least thou
be taken by the snares of them, and least their goodly she was so dazell
thine eyes that thou rush headlong into the pit of hell.

There is nothing in the understanding, but first it was in the senses. After
that the understanding has once drunk out of the channels of the senses, the
world playing Jacobs part Genesis 30 3^ 38
sticks there down white rods of green poplar, and hasell, and of the
chestnut of fair delights to beguile thee withal, and to infect by thy
senses, thy understanding.

The honors and pleasures of the world they are but as flowers that soon
fall, and fade away. The world offers to thy senses flowers and vanities:
and albeit thine understanding be pure, yet the senses labor by these outward
things to dull and darken the same. And as a menstruous woman does pollute
the glass which she looks in: so a naughty imagination infecteth the
understanding with error. And when the understanding has once tasted the water
which sensual imaginations have offered thereunto, it conceaueth like Iakobs
sheep, lambs of party color, and with small and great spots Genesis 30. 39
, even worldly desires, and brings forth afterward sin and ill works Iam. 1.
25
.

Fix not therefore thine eyes upon the green rods which the world
presents to thy consideration, for it is but a bare show without substance.
It deceives worldly men, as the burning candle does children. Children many
times when they see the candle, they cannot be content, but they must needs
touch it with their finger also, and they have no sooner so done, but they
pluck it back again and cry. So the children of this world, even like
infants without discretion, deceived with the apparent show of worldly bewty,
they cast themselves into the flames of wickedness, but after they find that
both their hands be empty without substance, and their conscience feared by
the fire of sin.

CHAP. 3
The world is false, and seeks to deceive.
THere be some that being about wicked purposes, d^ bow down themselves and
are sad, whose inward parts burn altogether with deceit, says the wise man
Eccles. 19 25
.

Give no credit to the world, neither enter into any league of friendship
with the same, for if thou do, it will play with thee, as Ioab did with Amasa,
who took Amasa by the heard with the right hand to kiss him 2 Samuel 20 ^, 10
, and with the left stabde him with a sword.

Whatsoever it says and counsaileth it is but falsehood and flattery:
whatsoever thine appetite shall entice thee unto, it is but deceit to abuse
thee withal, for though it promise life, yet leads it unto death, so that if
thou believe the same, thou shall perish with Ahab. which believed the four
hundred false Prophets, that flattered and promised him both life and victory
1. K. 22. 6. 17 26
. But Michaiah even the remorse of conscience it is, which tells truth, and
discovers the manifold deceites of thy flattering affections. Yet for all
this thou pursuest it with hatred, as Ahab did Michaiah for telling him the
truth: thy conscience it seeks thy profit and yet thou can not abide the
counsel of the same, but choosest rather to go out of the way with lying
spirits to the loss of thy life, than to do well with the Prophet of God,
and so live without danger. The worldly man following his affections, does
even hasten unto the battle of death, where he does loose his life.

These be like the false witnesses of lezebel 1 K. 2^* 50. 13
, which being once heard, do even quench the spirit, and kill the soul. Give
none heed unto their lying words, unless thou would be taken captive by
the nets of their false deceiptes.

All the loving countenance of the world it is but fained to entrap thee before
thou art aware. Therefore

CHAP. 4.
The promises of the world are false and deceitful.
RAsh promises says Ecclesiasticus in effect Eccles. 29 20.
, has destroyed many a man.

Who in this world has found either joy without sorrow, or peace without
troubles, or health without weakness, or mirth without grief?

The world it promises all good things, but it gives nothing but evil, it
promises joy, it brings pain, it promises to continue, but it stays not,
it promises rest, and brings troubles, it promises estimation, but it
causes shame, it promises long life, but by experience we find that our life
is both shore, and subject to manifold perils and miseries. And the life which
it shows it may not be called the true life.

The life of some it prolongeth, to deceive, of some it shorteneth, that they
may have no space to repent, of some it prolongeth, to make them proud, of
some it shorteneth, that they may do no good at all, but live as them list.
All these it deceives, depriving them of the true knowledge both of God, of
the world, and of themselves.

Seven years did Jacob serve Laban for his daughter Rahel Genesis 29 20 23
, whereby he deserved to have her for his wife: but his father in law gave him
Leah in stead of Rahel, by deceit. Such parts plays the world, it promises
one thing, and intends another. The men of the world they perceive not the^
anitie of the world until the day appear, and the darkness of this present
life be departed away by death: when the eyes of their understanding be
opened. then like Iaacob they perceive the subteltie of crafty Laban the world.

Many although they see welenough the deceitfulness of the world: yet are
they content to be deceived thereby, and to fall at noone day when their eyes
be open.

The three friends of Job agreed together to come to lament with him and to
comfort him Job. 2. 11.
. but afterward (...) the world, as they did* And experience does, did nothing
else, teach us, that by desiring to get, we loose honor; and while we covet
to be great, we become small; that which we think shall be the means to
uphold us, shall throw us down; and then we loose, when we think to gain.
O foolish we, and blind in deed, that would be deemed great, when God will
have none to be great, but such as first were small Math. ^1. 29.
: we hunt after fame, and yet shall never be remembered.

No man is more honorable than he which shunneth honor; Math. 18, 3
None richer than he which is content with a little, none shall sooner be
forgotten, than he which most ambitiously hunteth after glory.

Mattathias unto his sons said on this wise 1 Mac. 2, 50
; Now therefore, my sons, be ye zealous of the law, and give your lives for the
covenant of our fathers Call to remembrance what acts our fathers did in their
time, 51.
so shall ye receau great honor and an everlasting name. The providence of God
has so appointed that there should be a perpetual memory of the enemies of the
world, and that the friends of the same should quickly be forgotten.

God utterly put out the remembrance of wicked Amalek from under heaven Exo.
17, 14
. The memory of the just shall remain with their Lord for ever: but the name
of wordly men it shall perish and that long before the end of this

It is a foul vanity for the leauiug of a short memory behind thee in this
world, to offend thy God. And forasmuch as the world is so forgetful of his
friends, repose thou al thy trust in God, as in a most true and assured friend.

CHAP. 6
The righteous, and not the wicked, shall be had in remembrance.
YOur memories may be compared unto Ashes, says Job* of worldely men Job. 1^.
^2
.

In this life the wind never cease to blow and so disperse the ashes, I mean
the fame and memory which the worldling so seeks. The Psalmist does say
pas. 1. 4.
, The wicked are as the chafe which the wind drives away.

Great is the vanity of men, which knowing that they shall be turned into
ashes which the wind blows to and fro, do yet for all that, surmise how
their memory shall endure.

And were it so that thy name should continue for ever among men in this world,
what the better were thou if thou should by Gods displeasure be thrown
hedlong into the pit^e of hell? would thy great name either deliver thee from
thence, or diminish thy pains?

Covet not therefore a remembrance of thy self in this world, if thy
conscience be spotted and polluted with sin: neither desire thou vainly to
fly abroad in the mouths of men, for such desires are crossed and have their
end.

They which love the world, are loved of the world again for a while, which
yet is but very short. For soon I say very soon are they forgot* (...) though
they had never been.

The memorial of the just shall* blessed, but the name of the wicked shall rot,
says the wise man Pro. 10* 7
.

Soon comes to an end the remembrance of this world. Tell, if you can, I
beseech you, of the great dignities, riches, and beauty of so many men of this
world before our days? Is not the very names of them even buried with the
bodies? Thire proud palaces are ouerthrone, thire vain glorious tombs are
destroyed, and of all their ways not one step is known.

The life of man it passes away like a flower* and that the worldlings b^y,
they pay full d^^re for the same. The pleasures were but momentanie, but the
pain shall be not transitory, but eternal: Their glory was but in the
instant; but their labor and torments in the life to come, are infinite.
These evils many do not so much as think of, til they fall into them They
purchase with great labor and swet, small honor and a little pleasure, which
while they think to enjoy they are deprived of before they are aware.

Many have much labored to attain the ^ame and praise of (...) yet al in
vain. How many have there been, whose learning was much commended while they
were alive, who are not so much as spoken of they being now asleep. Together
with their bodies* their memories are extinguished.

Again, where be those great kings, and princes with all their pomp, riches,
and delights? Go^ is their memory like a shadow, as if they had never been.

Again, our pot and cup companions, whose bodies we trample upon with our
feet, where be they now? They shall not return unto us, but we shall go after
them.

O, how do al things pass away? How are the mighty ouerthrown 2 Samuel 1. 26
. Al things together with time do consume, God ^e alone is everlasting Ier. 10.
10
the pleasures of the world they continue not.

Al things do fail, and soon shall we be separated one from another, soon
shall the worms eat and devour the carcases of us al; shortly we shall
return into dust and ashes, yea the hour it even (...) when flesh and blood
shall be meet (...) and ashes.

Never let it come into our thoughts that we shall speed better than such as
lived before us have done, but as they are forgotten: so shall we be.

To conclude, al things make haste to their end, all things are merely vain,
save only to love God, which shall last for ever 1. Cor. 13 13.
, and what glory soever the world has, it passes and is gone in a moment.

CHAP. 7.
Soonest are they forgotten, which favored the world most of all
AN unwise man knows it not, and a fool does not understand this, says the
psalmist Psalm. 92* 6,
.

Much do men of this world labor and contend for promotion in the world, who^
afterward the world will never know nor acknowledge.

Great was the friendship Nabal 1 Samuel 25, 6 7
found at the hands of David, no^withstanding when David was in necessity he
could receive no relief from Nabal, for thus he answered the servants of
David 1 Samuel 25. 10.
, Who is David? and who is the the son of ^shai? There be many servants now
adies that break away every man from his master. Shall I the^ take my bread and
my water, and my flesh that I have killed for my shearers and give it unto men,
1^,
whom I know not whence they be? Nabal by interpretation is a fool 1 Samuel 25
25.
a notable figure of the mutable world, which leaves such in adversity, as
have served the same greatly in the days before.

This ungrateful world is like unto an Inkeeper, who will take none acquaintance
of his guest, neither know him, as one that can keep no reckoning of so many
as use his house, notwithstanding the guest do tell how long while he lodged in
his house, and spent many a fair shilling there. So the world it will take no
knowledge, when it should, of such as have used it most.

If thou desire to be had in remembrance of the world, then handle it hardly,
and make not of the same.

This is the cause why the world forgets not good and holy men which lived
here in this world, even because they set nothing by it, nor cared for the
same. So an host will sooner have that ghest in remembrance of whom he
received damage, than him which has not hurt but brought gain to his purse.

O how many have lived in this world in great authority, dignity, and riches,
who now are no more thought upon, then if they had never been.

If thou be wise therefore renounce the world, and addict thy self unto the
serving of Christ, who does know his sheep, and will feed them for ever, in
the most goodly pastures of eternal glory.

CHAP. 8.
Many are the dangers which the men of this world are subject unto.
THey that sail over the sea, tell of the perils there of, says the wise man
Eccles. 43 24
, and when we hear it with our ears, we marvel thereat.

The navigations which we make through the troublesome waves of this world, is
by so much more dangerous than the other, by how much it turns us more from
the rest of the soul which we expect in the heavens.

The waters of the sea are bitter, so are the pleasures of the world* In the
sea the great fishes do eat up the small, so in the world, great men do
even devour and eat up the poor, the waves of the sea be never at rest,
but always are moving and working, so the hearts of worldlinges they are never
quiet, but are continually beaten up and down with the heavy thoghts and cares
of the world. This made the Prophet Isaiah to say Isa. 57 20
, The wicked are like the raging sea that cannot rest, whose waters cast up
mire and dirt. Daniel he saw the four winds of the heaven strive upon the
sea.

The companion of honor is care and with riches go carfulness. and among the
dignities and ^anitie^* of the world is mixed pride and arrogance for the most
part.

You shall see few rich men but they have store of sins: few men of great
calling, but they are proud: few that follow the trades in the world, that
love God from their heart, yea a wonder were it, that a man wrapped among the
business of this world, should put his confidenc in the invisible God.

Happy is that man which sets not his heart upon the vain things of this
world, which are so full of dangers, and trappes, and draw hedlong unto hell.
If thou would be delivered from them, fly with Eliah into the wilderness
of true repentance 1. K. 19. 4
. Much trouble in the world thou might avoid, if diligently thou did
think thereof: but he that does not so much as fear them falls into them ere
he be aware.

When there is a calm in the sea, the Sailers be in good safety? but when
such a storm does arise that does hazard the ship, and all therein, then is
it their manner for the saving of their lives to throw their goods over
boorde. If then for the safety of the body men will even throw away their
temporal riches, how much the rather should we do the same if they be an
impediment to the spiritual proceeding. Prefer not therefore I pray you
these momenta^y and transitory things, to those true riches and eternal.

And seeing the world is like in many respects to a tempestuous sea, where
danger is present, look well to thy self, that with Pharao the King of Egypt
thou be not drowned therein Exodus 14 27 28
.

CHAP. 9
Men are not to be without care of their salvation, living in this dangerous
world.
ELiah lay and slept under the juniper tree, says the Scripture 1 K. 19. 5
.

Way fairing men do use to rest them, and to sleep under the shadow of a
tree, as they journey by the way: and when the shadow is gone, and they begin
to awake they find themselves all in a sweat by reason of the parching heat
of the Sun.

Are not all the things of this world as a shadow, in which the servants of
this world do lie and rest themselves, while being forgetful of their own
salvation, they repose confidence in the vain honors of this world?

If thou trust in the favor of princes, thou sleep under a shadow which
soon is gone: for their favor continues not, and quickly may thou come
into disgrace with them if they do live, but if they die, being honored before
of some, thou shall then be forsaken of all.

Cursed be the man that trusts in man, says the scripture Ier. 17. 5
, Put not your trust in princes, nor in the son of man, for there is none
help in him. psalm. 146, ^
. You can promise to your self nothing certain from these men, for if they
favor you to day, they may abhor you to morrow. Sleep not under the buckler
of strange friendship, or of riches, for these last not. Trust not in beauty,
for as a vapor it vanishes soon away. Put no confidence in the glory of this
world, For as the wind it is quickly gone. As for honors, alas they pass
away even as a smoke, and as a shadow. Whatsoever things are in this world
they slide away, and are transitory: even thy self man, shortly shall be
carried to the grave.

Saul he put his trust in the strength of his men and weapons which he had
about him, and therefore betook himself to sleep to the ^azarding of his
person 1* Sam. 26 7 8
. Even so many men reposing trust in the strength of their bodies, and youth,
put off the amendment of their lives securely from time to time, whereby they
fall into the danger of leesing the life of their souls for ever and ever.

The Son of Saul Ishbosheth he slept at noone day on his bed in a
troublesome time, where he was smote slain and beheaded 2. Sam. 4. 5 7
. Take heed that the like come not unto thee, as it can hardly be avoided, if
thou sleep securely in the vanities of this world. Death it will come at the
length, and being awaked out of thy slumber of sin, thou shall find thy self
^ast headlong into that unquenchable fire of hell

At the point of death how will thou be troubled in mind, when all the
things wherein thou tr^stedst, thou shall see converted into a smoke and
shadow.

Sleep not therefore in the shadow of worldly vanity, least in death thou
find thy self environed with sundry afflictions and torments.

CHAP. 10.
It is a miserable slavery to serve the world.
BEcause your fathers have forsaken me, says the Lord, etc. ye shall serve
other Gods day and night Ier. 16. 11. 13
.

They which give themselves to the satisfying of their own desires, they shall
suffer such torments as be intolerable.

The fained love of Delilah it was the cause why Sampson did leese both his
eyes and his liberty, being made a slave to grind in the prison house Iud.
16. 18 19. etc.
. Thou art like unto blind Sampson, whosoever thou art, which (...) sub duing
the unruly passions of his heart through the discipline of the word.

Does it not argue great folly in that man which being free, to the prejudice
of his own liberty, will enter into matrimony with a woman that is bond? And
is it not as great foolishnes, despising the fear of God, for the will to
submit it self to the servitude of creatures, and the bondage of the world?

Did not Sampson declare a great oversight, in that knowing himself often to
be deceived by Delilah, and that she meant nothing more then to deliver him into
the hands of the Philistines his enemies, yet had rather with the danger of
bondage to serve and obey her, as it fell out to his utter overthrow, than to
cross her desire, or to bridle his own affections? Into the same reproach
think not but thou shall fall, if thou believe the enticements and falsehood
of this flattering world. Take heed least the world do make a sale of thee,
as Delilah did of Sampson. If it do, with Sampsons, thine eyes shall be
plucked out, so that thou shall* not behold the deceipts, the cares, and
troubles of the world, nor taste any whit how sweet the yoke of thy Savior
Christ is Mat. 11. 30
.

Oh how much better is it to serve God, and so to reign, than by serving the
world to feel that intolerable hunger and thirst in the pit of hell Luke 16.
24
.

Being warned therefore by the danger of other men, casting off that most
grievous yoke of the world, put thou upon thy shoulders the most comfortable
yoke of Jesus Christ.

CHAP. 11.
Grievous is the yoke which worldly men do bear.
COme unto me all ye that are weary and laden, and I will ease you, take my
yoke on you, and learn of me, that I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye
shall find rest for your souls, says the Lord Mat. 11. 28 29
.

The men of this world as men laden, yea* broken with labors they (...); for
what the world loves, it gets with toil, it keeps with fear and leaves
with grief.

It is written in the Revelation, that they shall have no rest day nor night
which worship the beast and his image Reue^. 11. 11
: so shall it be done to them which follow the beastly appetites of their mind.

Little children and fools are the more to be borne withal, if by running up
and down all the day after a reed or feather, they take a fall in the end. But
for thee, a man that should have reason, to labor so eagerly for so short
pleasures, which afterward will draw thee headlong into the pit of utter
destruction, it is a foul shame.

Thou see not whether thou go; thou know not the danger wherein thou
live; thou markest not the labor which thou endurest; nor that it is of no
value, which thou seek, nor that vain is all thy labor, nor that any reward
shall be given thee in the end, but that which is full of sorrow, and all manner of
molestation.

He that will siege a town will take heed, if he be wise, that his ch^^ge be
not greater, than the commodity which he looks for by the winning of the
same. Mark how dearly thou payest for thy service done to the world. The
pleasures thereof be full of sorrow, they are like bitter apples that will set
thy teeth on edge.

The Lord says Hos. 2. 6
, I will stop thy way with thorns, and make an hedge that she shall not find
her paths. The cares both of getting and keeping of riches, has the Lord laid
as thorns in the ways of men, that perceiving the trouble without profit,
which they bring, thou should take heed of them.

In pleasure thou shall find pain, and grief of conscience; in prosperity
gall and bitterness, and sin it self is the torment of the sinner. Thus you
shall still find that pain and prosperity go (...) together.

If thou love the goods of this world, will you nil you, the troubles and
travails are many which you must endure. If you be in prosperity, you shall
still fear a day of change: if in adversity, then live you in continual
pain. And this God he suffers to the end thou should only serve and
stick unto him.

Some are so given unto the voluptuousnes of the flesh, Math. 4. 10
that they fear not to seek fruit from the pricks of thorns* such are
those men which dread not even to wound their conscience, and to hazard their
salvation, so they may satisfy the corrupt affections of their wicked flesh.
Yet when they have labored all that they can, they reap not the end of their
hearts desire, howsoever they give themselves to please the senses.

O, if thou did weigh with what damage to thy conscience, thou do
purchase this short delectation, surely thou could not me thinks be so
mad, as with such loss to give thy self to the world.

Therefore seeing hitherto thou have felt enough the hard^^s of the worldly
yoke, turn thee unto Christ that so lovingly calls thee, so at the length
thou shall know, that of the world the yoke is intolerable, but of Jesus
Christ the yoke is easy and sweet.

CHAP. 12.
The yoke of Christ is sweet and pleasant.
MY yoke is easy, and my burden light, says the Lord Mat. 11 30
.

The yoke of Christ is to them which love it: easy to them which are neither
hot nor cold, heavy: to the proud, bitter, to the meek, light and lovely to
the humble, Jesus that is so sweet, makes all things sweet: and every virtue
has some thing that is good joined thereunto, which does recreate and comfort
the exerciser of the same.

It is a comfort to the afflicted in punishments to have a companion. Thou have
Jesus a partaker of thy afflictions, so that thou may bear this burden the
more easily.

He that takes upon him the yoke of Christ, he cannot continue long without
some comfort.

The holy law of God is called a yoke, which is wont to be borne upon the
shoulders of two beasts. If thou submit thy self to the yoke of Christ, thou
shall not go alone, For the Lord himself will be yoaked with thee and be are
part of thy burden.

In all the pains taken of thee for the love of GOD, thou shall find Christ
always a companion therein.

The lesser ox bears the heavier part of the yoke? Christ of all men is
the most humble, he takes vpon^ himself therefore the greatest part of the
yoke, that thou may have the lighter. To Christ the yoke was heavy but to
us it became through him, light. What can thou do for him, which he has
not done first for thee?

It much eases the burden of the servant of God, when he considers the
great burden which his maiste^ Christ has borne.

As much as the mercy of God is better than man, so much is the yoke of
Christ sweeter than all other burdens.

He that bears not this burden, is burdened: but he that bears the same,
becomes light. The yoke of Christ it does not burden but lighten a man.

Is the bird for the burden of al her feathers the more burdened, or not
rather the more light to fly thorough that burden, than if she were without
the same? The burden of Gods holy yoke it makes a man not d^ousie, but
diligent; not sad, dull, and heavy, but iocande and prompt unto the business of
God. Such as are subject unto the Lord and his y^ake, they are not bondslaues,
for thereby they get the true liberty and dominion of the spirit. That
laborious way of Christian repentance it is made sweet and comfortable
thorough the company of Christ Jesus.

In the troubles which for Christ his sake thou do suffer, thou shall be
refreshed with most sweet consolation.

The Psalmist does say Psalm. 12^. 2.
when thou (...) the labors of thine hands, he says not, The fruit of the
labors, for the servant of Christ shall joy not only in happiness it self,
which is the fruit of labors, but even in the labors themselves he shall
comfort himself in this life, through the taste which the soul perceives in
tribulations sustained for the name of Christ.

O gracious is the Lord which in this banishment, and time of troubles does
give rest unto his chosen servants.

Sweeter be the tears of the^ which pray, than is the laughter of worldly
persons: more delectable is one drop of spiritual comfort, than all the
comfortes and pleasures of the world.

The joys of Christ his servants are unspeakable even in the sharpness of
their aflictions, and as the flowers are among thorns, such are they.

Little know the men of this world what they say when they judge the yoke of
Christ sharp and sour, and their words are so much to be waide as the words
either of a blind man that will judge of colors, or of him that will condemn
a way a^^l which he never went, not yet knows. But seeing all the Saints of
God have carried upon their shoulders the yoke of Christ, and have by
experience found the same to be light, more credit is unto them to be given,
than to those men, whosoever they are, which never did undergo the same.

No man ever has taken upon him this yoke of Christ, but he has confessed
that the same was light; again no man will say it is bitter and intolerable,
but he that knows not what it means. This will they testisie to be true,
who laying aside the burden of sin by humble confessing them unto the Lord,
have found themselves so lightened as they seemed forthwith to be rapt up into
the heavens.

If such comfort comes unto us by forsaking of sin, how much greater will
the consolation be in proceeding forward in the holy exercises o^ most
Christian virtues. For of one good deed thou shall not be called good, but of
many actions. The habit of virtue it comes after thou have first severed thy
self from evil, and exercised thy self in godly virtues. And by proof thou
shall sin^e that well it will go with thee when thou feel the true comfort
of the soul by going forward in the way of the spirit. The natural man
perceives not the things of the spirit of God 1 Cor. 2.
, and of many good things is he deprived

O that but even a little thou hadest tasted the joy of the holi^ Ghost, thou
would soon take the things which seem so sweet here in the world, for
very sour and bitter.

Seeing the yoke of Christ is so sweet, and the yoke of the world so
burdensome, take upon thee, and that cheerfully the yoke of the Lord so at
the length thou will say that both now it does, and hereafter it will go well
with thee.

CHAP. 13
In all our troubles we must make recourse unto the Lord
COme unto me, al ye that are weary, and laden, and I will ease you, says the
Lord Mat. 11. 28
.

If thou forsake God and runnest back unto the world look not for any
comfort in thy troubles. So long as thou obeiest the desires of thy mind, and
the world, so long assure thy self no consolation will come unto thee.

That good woman Mary Magdalene Ioh. 11, 2,
, when she was comfort^^sse she came unto our Savior Christ into the
Pharisees house Luke 7, 37, 38. etc.
and had her sins forgiven her Luk 7, 48
: but desperate Judas flying unto men Math. 27. 3, 5,
, hanged himself afterward in desperatio^. Here you may see that wiser wa^
that woman, than Judas the Traitor: they had both offended, and both confessed
their sins; but better did she for her self in flying unto the fountain of
comfort, than the foolish Disciple, which leaving his life sought his own death.

If a picture that sometime was fair and perfect, afterward becomes soul
and spotted, who better can restore the same to the former integrity, than
the painter which first made the same? So if thy soul be defiled with the
spots of sin, who better can reform it than God himself, which created
the same after his own likeness Genesis 1. 27
? Be take not therefore the reformation of thy soul to the world, for it
cannot mende, but empaire, yea utterly destroy the same. Believe not lies, but
turn thee unto God the fountain of all mercy. He that will ask an alms of a
poor man when a rich man that is both able and willing also to give, is
present, is a very fool. No creature is so rich that it can comfort thee; but
God only herein is most liberal. Turn therefore thy prayers unto him, and
cast thy heart upon his kindness, who is the true quietness and consolation.

Seek unto thy Savior Christ, as the dove sought unto the Arc of Noah Genesis
8. 9. 7.
. But hang not upon this world, as the raven hanged upon carrion. The dove
found no rest until she returned unto the Arc again.

If thou would inwardly be comforted in thy soul, fly the outward
consolation of the body. If thou hungrest after Christ, he will fill thee with
the bread of heaven.

Happy is he that setteh not his heart upon any creature, but dedicateth
himself, and al his works unto the Lord.

One thing is needful unto thee Luke. 10, 42.
. Is it not better to join thy self to one than to many? Let others seek if
they will, variety of things external, seek thou that one thing which is
spiritual, and with that be content. Of one al things proceed, and not that
one thing of many.

By seeking these visible things, while thou think to find rest in them,
thou forgoest the things which are truly good; and if thou turn thy self
unto transitory goods thou shall leese, trust unto it, the good things in
deed, and find thy self incombred in many troubles: but if unto God the
sovereign good thou turn thy self, then shall thou in him find quietness,
and a plentiful heap of all good things.

Seek the water of life to refresh thy soul whithall at the fountain which
by no possibe means can be dried up. For better is one dropp of heavenly
consolation, than all the floudes, and streams of worldly pleasures.

The men of this world they seek for quietness in things that be out of
quiet; and for continuance in things transitory. Let them therefore take to
themselves the dignities of the world; but let it be as a shield unto thee to
make recourse unto God and in him to repose al thy trust and confidence.

CHAP. 34.
The comfort of this world, as they are not true, so neither be they of
continuance.
I Have seen the wicked strong and spreading him self like a green bay tree.
Yet he passes away, and lo he was gone, and I sought him, but he could not
be found, says David Psalm. 37, 35. 36


The righteous have been counted for dead in this world, like the tree^ in
winter, whose virtue remains hidden in the roots. Therefore in the sight of
the world they seemed fruitelesse, and good for nothing. but the summer being
come, their virtue flourishes, and then will they show themselves in their
glorious array, The flowers appear in the earth, so shall the just say, when
gloriously shining as the Sun, they shall be presented before the God of
heaven.

Trust not the green and goodly hew of this worldly vanity, which soon
vanishes away Iam 4, 1, 4
, love not the world, which thou see to pass away so swiftly.

Solomon says Pro. 10 25
As the whirl wind passes so is the wicked no more.

As a thunderclap which makes a great noise in the air, and as a sudden
shower of rain which soon passes away, and by and by the day is clear
again: such is all the pomp and show of this world, it no sooner comes, but
it is gone again.

Love the life which is eternal, which enjoying thou shall never taste death.

If thou art in love with this life open to so many troubles, me thinks thou
should much more desire that life where all manner of rest, and felicity is
in most abundant wise.

In this world thou art a pilgrim; therefore labor with might and main to come
unto the possession of the celestial country.

All things that are seen in this world, they fade away like the shadow. A
foolish part then thou shall play, if rather thou had to perish with the
transitory world, than to flourish for evermore with joy in the world to come.

The pain which thou take here to defer death, and to prolong this life of
thine, thou may do well to bestow, though it were to the loss of this
present life, for the attainement of that happy life in the other world.

CHAP. 15
The disquietnes which the men of this world do feel it is great and
wonderful.
BEcause your fathers have forsaken me, says the Lord, etc ye shall serve
either Gods day and night Ier. 1^ 11 13.
.

He that serves the world he goes continually with a troubled mind, and is
like the wheel of a clock, which never stands quiet, being distracted with
continual cares, and anguish of the heart.

The world will never suffer thee to be quiet a whit, if thou follow thine
appetite being depressed with the weight of worldly love, depending on thine
own will This it is which turns those wheels, this is it which does vex
thee inwardly so much, this is it which takes all sleep from thine eyes, and
causes thee to turn still in a perpetual motion. For what is more
troublesome, than for a man to be subject to his own affections. Who can
promise himself any rest at all in the affairs of this world, which are so
s^biect ^o continual alteration? Great st^^^e was there between the heardmen
of Lot, and the heardmen of Abraham, which debate arose through the riches
which they had, Genesis 13 6
it was so great that they could not dwell together.

One of the great plagues wherewith Egypt was afflicted, was the little busy
flies Exodus 8. 24
whose properties are (...) and of God, which willingly refused the land of
promise for the liking they took of Gilead, because it was an apt place for
cattle Number. 32. 1 2. etc.
.

Last of all, nener think to find quietness in that place where all things
are full of confusion and alteration. The worldly men themselves they rest all
amazed, and know not what they do, nor whether they intend to go, no more then
did the builders of the tower of Babell Gen (...). 3. 4. etc,
.

CHAP. 16.
There is more sorrow than comfort in the pleasures of this world.
HE will not suffer me to take my breath, but fills me with bitterness,
says Job Job 9, ^^
.

You cannot in the world have any perfect joy, and comfort where all things be
replenished with bitterness and sorrow.

Mark I pray you under the goodly show of sweetness, what gall of pleasure,
what pain does lurk. Consider the pain and vexation that does accompany
sin.

Vices do adorn and set out themselves after the brauest manner, being in
deed most filthy: but virtue though ragged and torn, is marvelous lovely.

Let not the pleasures of this world deceive thee, seeing within they are so
full of gal and bitterness.

In that great glory of his transfiguration, Christ he spoke of his death and
passion Mat. 17 9
; whereby thou may observe that even the chiefest comfort of this world
has some affliction.

If the world being al full of bitterness, be yet so loved and made of; how
would men esteem of the same, were it all sweet, and void ^f troubles; But
God he has so tempered sorrow with pleasure of the world, to the end that
man with all possible speed might aspire unto the ioies of heaven.

Haman, that so hunted after the glory of this world, he was joyful and had
a merry heart, because he was invited unto the banquet which Ester had
prepared for the king Esther 5 9 10
:

MIne heart pants, my strength fails me and the light of mine eyes even
they are not mine own, says the Prophet of himself psalm: 38, 20
.

Surely I may say thou art blind, if thou see not the miseries that thou art
in, which seruest the world.

As the Hawk could never be kept quiet upon the perch, except his eyes were
covered with an hoode* so thou could never endure the miserable bondage of
the world, except thine eyes were blinded that thou could not see.

How were it possible that thine heart should be so fixed upon earthly
things, but that thou see not the vanity of them? But for that thou art
blind, thou art a bond man: open thine eyes therefore, I pray thee, that thou
may perceive the miserable condition which thou do endure.

The dung of the sparowes which fell upon the eyes of Tobit, as he was a sleep,
bereft him of his eye sight Tob. 2 10
The Apostle does judge all things of the world, to be but dung Phil 3. 8
: and experience teaches us, that they have the quality to make men blind, as
had the dung of Tobits Sparrowes.

The property of the swallow is to sing sweetly in the beginning of summer, but
suddenly afterward she becomes both blind, and mute. The property of the
world also is first with a short and sweet harmony to bring men a sleep, and
after to make them blind, that they may not see the vanities of the same.

Men of this world they lack eyes to see the light of God. and of those good
things which they forgo. They are like unto Eli the Priest, whose eyes were
so dim that he could not see the Lamp of God 1 Samuel, 3 2
, which hung continually burning in the Temple.

And though worldly men do seem wise, and of sound judgment, yet is it not
so in truth, but toward worldly matters, otherwise as touching things of the
spirit, they have no sight at all, but are as blind as Moles.

Fall not from sin unto sin, as a blind man. The Prophet Zephaniah
speaking of worldly men does say Zeph. 1 27
, They shall walk like blind men, because they have sinned against the Lord*
And our Savior Christ John 12. 25
walk while ye have light, least the darkness come upon you. For when sinners
do walk in the darkness of their ignorance what marvel though miserably
they stumble, and take a fall? The eyes of worldly men they are taken easily
with certain imaginary profits and affections of their own toward the world,
and they are made blind therewith, even as the Egyptians upon whom God
brought such a darkness, that no man saw another, neither rose up from the
place where he was for three days together Exodus 20 23
. If thou could have a sight of the miseries thou artin, questionles thou
could not stand still so securely after that Egyptian manner, as thou do.
But blindness has overtaken thee, blinded thou art with the love of this
glittering vaine^ glorious world, like the Bear which becomes blind if it
behold the brightness of a burning basin.

Had not the world been blind, S. John had not said John 1 10
, The world knew him not meaning Jesus Christ. And no marvel having their eyes
so full of earth. They have wandered as blind men in the stre^tes* says the
prophet Jeremiah L^men, ^ 14
, of worldly minded men, which are so blind that they suffer themselves to be
led about even of the blind unto the example of wickedness.

They which are bodily blind in deed, they know yet that they are blind, but
none are so wretchedly blind as the men of this world, while they have them in
derision which use the sight of their eyes.

The Lord said unto the sinful Pharisees John 9 41
, Now ye say, we s^e therefore your sin remains: and being so blind, that
they think all others blind saving themselves, and such as they be, therefore
their impiety is the greater, as was that of the seventy Ancients, of whom
Ezechiel speaks from the mouth of the Lord Ezekiel. ^ 1^ 12
.

Beware therefore of such a blindness, that thou fall into absurd and
intolerable errors to the dishonor of God.

CHAP. 18*
Great is the sorrow which worldlings do feel, when they must either leave
this world, or go unto hell torments.
THE labor of the foolish does weary him, says Solomon Eccles. 10 15
.

When death once approaches then will it grieve a worldling to leave this
world, for no man can leave that he loves, without much grief.

That which the world loves, it gets with great labor, it keeps with
great fear, it leaves with great sorrow.

In the Revelation it is written that They shall have no rest day nor night,
which worship the beast and his image, Revel. 14 15
no more shall they that worship their beastly appetites and affections.

Terrible will that hour be, when the body of a worldly man brought up
deliciously, shall be separated from the soul, to be devoured speedily
afterward of worms. It will be a greiuous thing for the rich man to depart
from his riches and estimation in the world, which so inordinately he loved.

The horses of great men go trapped richly all the day, with many serving
men attending upon them, but when they come unto the stable at night, or to the
end of their journey, all their glorious furniture is taken from them, and
nothing there continues with them but spurgals, bruzes, and weariness. In
like sort the rich, and great men of the world they are woondered at so long
as they are iourneying in this life, but when they come unto their grave, even
the end of their journey, their glory leaves them, and nothing else do they
bear away but wounds, vices, and wickedness.

Kings and Princes also are not like to carry away their go^de, or their
silver from hence, but only the faults which they have committed while they
were of authority*

Consider therefore how irksome it will be for a worldly minded man to leave
this life which he loves. (...) world which is so forgetful, and unthankful.

Unless thou judge of the world as it is, thou art not meet for to meet
Christ. Therefore our Savior he calls such unto him not as think the yoke
of this world to be sweet, but which deem it grievous and burdensome.

The world uses to give after a short pleasure everlasting torments: but God
for a little pains for his sake gives joys that shall have no end.

Marie Magdalene that holy woman she in her troubles resorted unto Christ in
the house of the Pharisei, and obtained remission of her sins Luke 7 37. etc.
43.
; but desperate Judas in troubles flying unto the comfort of the world, did
hang himself Matt. 27, 3. 5
, and so ^el he headlong into hell, insomuch that she truly repenting showed
her self wise, but he despairing of Gods mercy proved extreemely foolish.

Is it not better then to serve God, and so to enjoy eternal bliss, than to
serve this corruptible world, and after to be tormented for ever with the
Devil and his Angels Mat. 25. 41
? Surely it is better in this life to want a little short pleasure than with
the same to be tumbled hedlong into hell: better is it to live obediently
according to the law of God, than wickedly to serve the world, which by
certain colored things, which it calls good snarleth and seeks thine
utter overthrow.

At that same rigorous passage of thine out of this world by death, when al
things wherein thou put thy trust shall see ^e in thine ^ies to be but
dirt and dung, how then will thy former folly, think thou, grieve thee at
thine heart? Mark I pray you, what a notable reward the world, the Devil, and
the flesh do promise unto you, even such a reward, as if thou have it thou
can not have the reward of heaven.

What shall thou reap of the flesh but corrupti^^, as S. Paul does say Gal. 6.
8
? What shall thou receive of the devil, but intolerable torm^^tes Mat. 25, 41^
* What of the world, but speedy forgetfulness? They promise largely these
tyrants, but they perform slowly.

No man did ever yet serve the world, but he was sorry for so doing at one
time or other. It would continually be served, and yet for all the service
done, it makes his servants either for hunger to starve, or else with strips
to be thrust naked out of doors Luke 15, 13, 14.
. In a word look for no recompense of the world, besides grief and anguish of
heart.

No man that wise is, will enter into service with an other man except first he
do know what wages he shall have for his pains: but with these tyrants,
whom I have named, no covenant is to be entered into because they will promise
much, and perform nothing that good is. But if thou will serve Christ though
thou suffer troubles, yet in the midst of them thou shall be sure to find
consolation both inward and aeternall.

Man that is borne of a woman, is but of short continuance Job. 14. 1.
. The pains of good men are quickly gone; but the sorrows of the wicked shall
evermore endure.

Better were it for thee by obedience, to go into the fire of affliction, than
after thy pleasures of the world to be damned for ever. Let not thy labors
dismay thee, which have an end with thy life Revel. 14 13.
; but fear those troubles which when thy life has an end, do beg^n^e, and
shall never come to an end. From those pains neither friends shall deliver,
neither riches nor any friendship of man shall save thee.

The world it shall have an end 1. pet 4. 7 2 Pet 3, 12. 13
, but God 1 Timothy 1 17
and his servants shall endure for ever Revel, 21, 4,
.

Trust not in the world, for it plaieth the hangman with thee, which first
conducteth thee by the fair green way of his false consolations, and after
with all possible speed thrusts thee down to hell. Do you not see what a
good recompense you receive for all your service?

CHAP. 6
Soon are they forgotten, and overthrow which give themselves to serve the
world.
I Have seen the wicked strong, and spreding himself like a baie tree, yet he
passed away, and lo he was gone, and I sought him, but he could not be found
Psalm ^37, 35 39


The world does highly now and the^ advance them which serve it, s Genesis 1. 27
but they have no sooner tasted the pleasures of the same, but it leaves them
comfortless.

This knew the Prophet Baruch right well, when crying out, he said Bar. 3, 16
Where are the Princes of the heathen and such at ruled the beasts upon the
earth? They that had their pastime with the fouls of the heaven, 17.
that hoarded up silver and gold, wherein men trust, 18
and make none end of their gathering? For they that coined silver, and were so
careful of their work and whose invention had none end are come to naught, 19.
and gone down to h^l and other men are come up in their steades.

Soon passed the glory of this world from them, even as in a moment. What
brought their great promotion in the world unto them, but a miserable death,
and infamous ruin?

The glory of the world it passes soon away, the goods thereof are like
flowers that soon do vade, to which small trust is to be given, for they will
sooner be gone, than you would think.

If thou be exalted one high, take heed thou be not thrown down again, as
the hangma^ uses to deal with condemned persons. Know you not how the world
deals so with such as it does advance?

That great whore af Babylon, spoken of in the Revelation of S. John, vaunted
her self exceedingly of her sovereign prosperity in the world, but when
she thought her self most sane, she took a shamefnll fa^ Revel 18. 2. 3. etc.
.

That covetous rich man also, as we read in the Gospel after S Luke Luke 12. 17
18. etc.
, he gloried immoderatly in his riches; but straight away God said unto him, O
fool, this night will they fetch away thy soul from thee: 20.
then whose shall those things be which thou have provided?

The children of Israel were scattered abroad throughout all the land of Egypt,
for to gather stubble in the stee^e of straw Ex. 5. 1^
. (Al men do seek for riches, al men are obedient to money and in this respect
no friend is known), 14.
and after they had sought about they were well dribasted for their labor
(...) so done they might be thrown out of that joyful paradise Genesis 311 2,
etc
, even as the prophet Jeremy does say Lamen, 3 52
, Mine enemies chased me sore like a bird without cause.

Worldly pleasures, great promotions what are they, but a bait many times
laid by the Devil, or his instruments, to bring us into his snares?

When the world does make much of thee, then does it hunt after thy soul,
unless thou take the better heed, thou will soon be taken with the deceipts
of the same.

Contrarily, God when he inuiteth us, he seeks our welfare. And although his
call is very sweet and kind, yet heard is it not many times, because the love
of the word shuts the gates against him. And seeing that great is the sture
and noise in the soul of a sinner, marvel it is not if the knock of the Lord
be not heard within. The spiritual crying is the earnest desire of the soul,
and the godly pra^^r uttered with zeal, and strength of the mind.

Moses prayed and though his lips went not at all, yet the Lord said unto him
Exodus 14 15
, Wherefore criest thou unto me Hannah the mother of Samuel, she prayed unto the
Lord, yet did her lips only move, her voice, was not heard 1 Samuel 1 13
Lord thou have heard the desire of the poor, thou preparest their heart thou
ben^est t^ine ear to them, says David psalm. 10 17
.

Great is the noise and cry among them that give themselves to the matters of
this world; the desires of promotion they always make a foul stir: and
therefore no marvel if the noise of God be not heard in an house so full, and
so oppres^ed with disordered appetites. which can never be satisfied, according
to that of Horace. The more they drink, the drier they are. For the thirst of
covetousness is never quenched.

Content thy self with that thou have, considering both the shortness of this
present life, and the poor estate of Jesus Christ, this will cause thee to keep
all the unquiet appetites of thy mind in peace and tranquillity.

Drive from thine heart the love of this world, and so with I^b thou may say
Job 14 15
Thou shall call me, and I will answer thee.

CHAP. 22.
The wicked are made of, but the godly are persecuted in the world.
IF ye were of the world, the world would love his own, but because ye are
not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world
hates you, says the Lord Job. 15 19
.

It is no new thing that the wicked do persecute the good, and worldly men the
servants of Christ. For so persecuted was Abel of Caine Gen 4. 8
, Isaac of Ismael Genesis 21 9 G^l. 4. 29
, Iakob of Esau Geu. 27^ 41
, Joseph of his brethren Genesis 37. 4. 5. etc.
, Anna of Peninnah 1. Sam. 1. 6 7
David of Saul 1. Sam. 18. 9. 11. etc. 1 Samuel 18. 2 10 11. etc.
, Helias of Iezabel 1 K. 19. 2
.

The virtuous life of the children of God, being a secret reprehension of the
wicked behauior of ungodly persons, what marvel if the wicked through ^atted
do pursue the good?

The saints in this world may not vnfithe be compared unto babes dead borne,
who be ready to be borne away, and buried so soon as they are borne: but the
ungodly are like those children which come into the world alive, and therefore
it is a place for them to live and deal in.

The thieves which break by night into a house to rob, they will first before
other things put out the light, that they be not discried; so deal wicked men
with the godly, who are the light of the world Mat. 5. 14
. For eu^ry man that evil does, hates the light Ioh. 3. 20
.

David through spiritual joy leaped and danced before the Ark of God, and
Michal Saules daughter despised him in her heart for so doing 2 Samuel 6 16
. It is the custom of naughty persons to scorn at the actions of well
disposed men.

So wickedly were the people, inhabiting within the land of Judah, given that
they were so far from building the temple of the Lord according to the
express commandment of King Darius, that they hindered that good work, and
discouraged such as set their hands thereunto Ezra 4. 4
. Even so do the men of the world at this day, they will neither do that
which good is themselves, nor further them that would* but so much as in them
lies, hinder all good actions and enterprises* But the true and godly
Israelites were not discouraged for all this, but went forward in the business
of the Lord, They did the work with one hand, and with the other held the
sword N^hem 4 17
. This example may teach thee not to give over a good work for the malice of
il men, but to pr^ceede in the race of true religion, and in the exercise of
virtue: defend thy self in patience against thine adversaries whosoever they
be.

It is an argument that thou art not good, if thou can not quietly put up il;
patience, my friend, it will do thee no hurt, but it makes greatly for thy
commendati^n. For as it redoun^eth to thy discredit, when thou art extolled of
the wicked, so it is to thy great praise when the ungodly, and none else,
cannot abide thee.

Then is our life commendable, when it is discommended of ill men; and they are
to be praised, which vile persons dispraise.

It is no reproach at al unto the light that the Battes and Owls cannot away
therewith. Ye are the children of the light, says the Apostle to all good
christians 1. These. 5 5
What communion has light with darkness 2 Cor. 6* 14
, knowledge is contemned of the ignorant* and fools despise wisdom and
instruction Pro. 1. 7
. Therefore let not the children of the light be grieved, though they be hated
and persecuted of the sons of darkness.

If blind men judge amiss of colors, the blame is not to be laid upon the
colors which may be good and beautiful, but upon the censurer which lacks
judgment. To be praised of the ungodly, is to be dispraised and to be
dispraised of them it is hie commendation. So then to despise injuries and
reproaches, it is a sign of a mind that is rightly noble.

He that is slow to anger, is better than the mighty man, and he that rules
his own mind, is better than him that wins a city, says Salome^ Pro. 16 32
.

Virtue it withers without an adversary.

True love it is fixed in the bottom of virtue, and is tried by affliction. The
patient man is the Lord of himself.

He that knew of what love to vs^ward God sends tribulation, doutlesse he
would receive it with a grateful heart.

Adversity it is the good gift of God, sent of his majesty to such as he
likes and loves well for the setting out of their soul.

A sick man impatient, causes a Physician to be rigorous, If thou chafe at
the bitterness of the medicine, thou do but augment thy pain, but that
which is taken with a willing minsd* it hurts not.

The chiefest part of wisdom is patience, And yet marvel it is, that rather
thou had to abide without God, than to suffer somewhat. If thou desire
health, never wrest the rasor out of the Chyrurgions hand. Fly not the
troubles which make for the welfare of thy soul, abide adversity, if thou
desire health.

The Apostle says Romans 12. 14
, Bless them which persecute you Bless (^say) and curse not, And again 1 Cor.
^ 13 12
* We are evil spoken of and we pray, we are persecuted, and we suffer it.

Sail thou with a contrary wind, as Christ sailed upon the cross, when he
prayed for his enemies Luke 23. 34
, and did good to his very persecutors.

As for the wicked they suffer also much persecution and troubles, because the
pleasure of God is, that of the torments of hell, they should have some taste
in this present world.

If thou see a man to be grievously offended for the affliction that is laid
upon him, assure thy self, it is a sign of his farther troubles in the time
to come. But if he thank God for the same, then know again that his defects
shall be put away, and his reward shall be very great. The chosen and elect
people of God, they are patient in troubles.

A most acceptable sacrifice unto God is patience in adversity and tribulation.
Be therefore of a patient mind: if thou be sad to day, thou shall be glad to
morrow, if troubled to day, thou shall be comforted the next day.

Bridle thine anger, and lay a bitte upon thy tongue, for breaking o^^ into
intemperate speech.

Take not adversity too grievously, and drown not thy self in a little water.

When thou have humbled thy body with fasting, releiued the poors by thy
liberality, and showen other fruits of a penitent soul, little shall all
this profit thee before God, (...) thou be carried away with the vain praises
of men.

Patience is like a treasure hid in the field, where patience is, there is
silence, but the impatient man troubles many with his words.

He that can bridle his tongue is a prudent man, and worthy all praise, and the
more thou do sacrifice thine heart unto God, the more acceptable shall thou
be in his sight.

Have thou patience therefore, and assure thy self that all things shall be
remedied in time*

To conclude, Be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give thee the crown
of life, says the Lord Reave 2. 10.
.

CHAP. 24.
The world is not to be accounted of.
Fly out of the midst of Babel, says God Ier. 51. 6.
,

The world is ^ul of confusion; there little order is, but exceeding horror,
there gold is more esteemed than virtue, and transitory things preferred
before spiritual riches.

So full of confusion is the world that it exalts the wicked and casts
down the good.

The world promoteth Judas, but keeps back the virtuous from preferment.

He that well considers the confusion and disorder of the world, will never
set his heart thereupon.

The pleasures and comfortes of the world they be more noisome than the
waters of Ierico 2 K. 2* 19.
, and more changeable than the moon. Hardly shall thou go forward in the way
of godliness living in the same.

Abraham looking toward Sodom, and Gomorah, and toward all the land of the
plain, saw the smoke of the land mounting up as the smoke of a furnace Genesis
19^ ^8
And he that looks into the world advisedly, shall find from thence the
smoke of pride and vanity, and the flame of disordinate concupiscence to arise.

Holy and good men the nearer that they draw unto death, the more earnest they
be about al good works.

They which were to eat the Passover did first circumcise themselves,
according to the commandment of the Lord Exodus 12. 48
. If thou circumcise not thine heart from the inordinate love of this world,
and the delights of the same, look not to have any taste of the spiritual
comforts of the soul.

If thou had come lying upon a low and moist flower, and one should tell
thee, if thou remove it not, it will ^ot and putrify, would thou not, for
the preservation of the same* remove it into some higher room? But God
himself in his word has warned thee not to lay ^hine heart upon the low
and base things of this earth, but to place the same upon hie and heavenly
matters Math 6 20 ^. Tim. 6. 19 Col. 3, 1. 2
, and yet will thou not harken unto his wholesome counsel.

CHAP. 25.
The world never keeps at a stay.
THou have made the land to tremble, and have made it to gape, heal the
breaches thereof, for it is shaken, says the Prophet psalm. 60, 2
.

The very change of the world were there nothing besides, we^e sufficient to
cause the same to break into splintes and pieces.

God himself, the master workman of al Genesis 1. 1 2. etc,
does tell thee how heaven and earth shall pass away Luke. 21. 33
. And S. John says 1. Ioh. 2 17
The world passes away, and the last thereof, ^onors and vanities do fall, and
alter every moment. Consider how great the change is: The monarchy of the
world began first with the Assyrians, from thence it came unto the Persians,
from the Persians unto the Grecians, and from the Grecians unto the Romaues,
and from the Romans it is now come unto the Almans. Now if the Empire, which
is the chiefest place of honor, has so often been changed from one people to
another nation, where can you find in this world any thing that is of
durance, and Perpetuetie?

As for riches, sensuality, and such like, they are much more subject to
mutabilitie, and alteration.

Seeing therefore that the very pillars of the world be so frail, and
totter, is it not a very dangerous thing to live in the world, subject to
such alteration and mutabilitie.

If the world, which in this sort does threaten a destruction, be so loved;
how would it be liked were it stable, and of continuance; How were it
possible for thee to fly therefrom if it were lovely, when thou do embrace
the same being so loathsome? How could thou but gather the flowers, seeing
with thy fingers thou do handle the thorns of the same.

Thou will still love the world, which will and does leave thee, whether thou
forsake it, or no.

Look for no quietness here, where* every moment there is alteration;
neither love a thing moveable seeing thy self desire to continue, and not
change at all.

The sailer whether he will or no, must needs move when the ship moves: al
things in this world be moveable, and change; to day they be, to morrow they
be not, and as they change, so do thou with them. What comfort therefore
can thou have in such unstable things?

The name whereby most fitly almighty God is expressed, is, I am, Moses
speaking of God says Exodus 14.
, I am has sent me unto you.

God contiunally Is, but man altogether is changeable, and has no certain
being. And so are you to think of the world, of which you make so great an
account.

Love those things that be and continue, and not the things which by reason
of their often change do come unto nothing.

It is an il dwelling in the country which is subject to often earth quakes:
bestow not cost upon that ground which is not firm, but upon that
foundation which will continue. Let all thy care be to have a mansion place in
heaven, which is a place of safety, and blessed quietness.

The wind of flattery which is included within the bowels of the earth (which
be the palaces of princes, and houses of great men) when it seeks to break
out, and to ascend to honor and hye promotion, it is the cause of great
earthquakes in the world. Seek not to dwell in so dangerous a place, neither
make friends, to serve in the palaces of great men, where continual
earthquakes be, by reason of the great winds of ambition that be there kept
under, and hid with the cloak of hypocrysie, which breaking out at the last,
do cause great disorders, and troubles in a land, and country.

Daily, if thou mark, thou shall hear of innouations in the world.

Daily some of rich, become poor; and of poor, be made rich. If fortune to
day do smile, she will frown to morrow.

In the morning the sun shines most comfortably, and within an hour or two
comes a storm and tempest. This shows that in the world nothing is of long
continuance. Pleasure is no sooner come, but straightway enters sorrow and
disquietnesse.

The mutabilitie that is in the world, is by nothing better expressed than by
the usage, and handling of our Savior Christ, who was honored with all joy of
the Jews at one time Ioh. 6. 15.
, at another forsaken of the^ Ioh. 6. 66
, at one time was welcomed in the way with gree^e bows Matt. 21. 8. Mar. ^1.
18
, at another was scourged with dry rodes Mat. 27. 26.
, at one time they strewed their garments before him in the way Mat. 2^. Man.
11. 8.
, at another by and by they spoiled him of his raiment Mat. 27 28.
, whipped Matt. 27. 26*
, and crucified him Matt. 27* 25. Luke 23. 21 23
, at one time they cried Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord
Mat. 21. 9 Mar. 11. 9
, at another they called upon p^late to hang him Matt. 27. 22.
, at one time he entered into Jerusalem with great glory Mar. 11. 11^*
, at another he came out of the same Jerusalem with great shame Man. 15. 20*
.

Perceive you not hereby the sudden change, whereto the honors of the world
are subject? If now you laugh, look by and by to weep.

Put therefore thy trust and confidence in God alone, which is thy true friend,
and will not fail thee.

CHAP. 26*
The smallest sins must be avoided.
Fly from sin, as from a serpent, says Ecclesiasticus Eccles. 21. 2.


The friendship of the world does so wound the conscience, that not in a
small thing are you to conform your self after the same.

Whatsoever is in the world, it is full of wickedness and sin, which though it
be but small yet is it to be shunned.

Ecclesiasticus he likeneth sin unto a serpent, which though it be but a
little one, yet will not man abid it.

The Prophet Isaiah does say Isa. 14. 29.
, Out of the Serpents root does come a cockatrise. That fearful cockatrise
does proceed from the small serpent, which is always verified when the great
sin does arise out of a little offense.

Assuredly if thou take not heed of small, thou will fall into great and
grievous sins. Unless thou fly the serpent thou shall light upon the
Cockatrise.

If thou stop not a small cliffe in a ship, where throug the water comes, so
much by little and little will enter as in the end will ouerwhelme and drown both
the ship and thee. So small inco^ueniences are to be fled, least great perils
do ensue.

Sever thy self from all unnecessary business of the world, from toying and
idleness, least thou leese thy zeal and fall into greater discommodities,
which though they seem but small, yet being multiplied may overthrow thee.

Kill thine enemy, sin I mean, when he is yet but little, for when he is
grown up to his full biggenesse, for sparing him, he will murder thee.

It is the part of a wise man to fear his enemy, be he never so weak. Take
example here of from Kaine* who because he shunned not the grief of mind
conceived from the good of his brother, he joined afterward to his envy,
malice, whereby he committed murder; after that fell into heresy, supposing
that God saw not what he had done; and after that utterly despaired of all
mercy from Gods hand Cen. 4. 5. etc.
.

One deep calls another deep, and one sin draws easily another sin that
is greater. Be not therefore negligent in looking well to avoid even the
smalest offense.

Thou have need to be very circumspect and vigilant living in such a
dangerous world. Men unprovided, be easily overcome.

Thou must fly from every evil custom, as from the pestilence, for death is
at the doors, and will enter straight if thou let open to his messenger.

One of the plagues of Egypt was of small ye Ex. ^. 17.
, which suck the blood; and after them followed great swarms of flies which
cruelly vexed both Pharao and all his people Ex. 8* 24.
. After the less plague came still the greater, and after a small a greater
te^tation follows.

Ecclesiasticus does say Eccle, 19. 1*
, He that co^temneth small things shall fall by little and little. Yea the
lesser thou take them to be, the greater they are.

Listen to the Apostle Paul Cor. 10. 7
Be ye not idolaters as were some of them, as it is written, The people sat
down to eat and drink, and rose-vp to play. Because they did not avoid
bibbing and pleasure they fell to adore idols in steed of the living God.

To be short therefore, shun all whatsoever it be, that may draw thee on
unto the evil way, I mean of perdition; and remember that he which regards
not his enemy may quickly be destroyed.

CHAP. 27.
Evil company must be taken heed of.
HE that tucheth pitch shall be defiled with it; and he that is familiar with
the proud, shall be like unto him, says a wise man Ecce. 13. 1
.

Of il company, il behavior is gotten.

If thou will be the good servant of Jesus Christ, fly the society of wicked
men.

Many are the ministers of Satan, sent by him into the world, for the
destruction of the good.

More hurt do men by naughty examples of life, than do theeeues and murderers
by their cursed actions. For thieves do spoil men of their earthly rich; and
murderers do but kill the body, which is mortal: but il examples take away the
spiritual treasure, and slay the soul, the most precious part of man.

By how much the soul is more noble than the body, by so much the more
pestilent are they which are ill mannered, than they which are infected with
the plague.

The company of naughty packs is to be shunned, even as the pestilence: for
easily will one imitate that evil which he sees done immediately before his
face.

God he gave the Israelites a straight commandment that they should make no
marriages with the Gentiles whom they had cast out, lea^t they learned and
followed their wicked trades of life Deuteronomy. 7. 3. 4. Exodus 34. 16.
.

The sons of Seth, which represented the children of God, because they took
unto them the daughters of me they proved so il, that God by a huge water
drowned all the world ^en. 6. 2.
, saving but a very few.

The holy Prophet whom GOD sent into Samaria, was slain of a Lion, by the way
as he rode 1. K. 1^. 2
, because he did eat and drink with a lying Prophet contrary to the
commandment of God.

Iohoshaphat that good king of Israel, being in company with wicked Ahab, was
well near slain for his labor 1. K. 22. ^2. 2 Chro. 18 ^1.
, and was greatly rebuked for the same by the prophet of God Ch^o^. 19
. Vices be sooner learned than virtues, and therefore take heed of wicked
company, for it is infectious.

The Jews, which were the chosen people of God, because they companied with
the Gentiles, they were reproved by Isaiah the prophet when he said Isa. 1. 22*
The silver is become dross, their wine is mixed with water. Now as wine
mingled with water does leese much of the force: so a good man through using
wicked company does leese much of his goodness, and waxes cold in matters of
God.

And as wine delayed, though it leese not all it strength, yet loses his
color: so if thou delight in wicked company, thou shall loose the good opinion
that men conceived of thee. For such as a man's companion is, such is himself
taken to be.

If thou would know thi'nclination of a man, mark the men with whom he is
familiar. For like will to like, as the saying is. This made Elihu to reprehend
Job, even for that he went in the company of them that wrought iniquity, and
walked with wicked men. Job. 34. 8.


It is a great sign that he is naught, which keeps company continually with
such as be naught. To be good among wicked persons is as easy a matter as to
swim against the stream. Yea it is very hard among sinners to live without
committing sin.

There be few that lived as Lot did in the midst of Sodom, whom God by his
Angel plucked-out of that city, that he might not perish with the wicked.
Genesis 19. 16


S. Paul magnified the Philippians, because in the midst of a naughty and
crooked nation, they shined as lights in the world. Phil. 2. 15
The Church is commended which flourishes, as the lilly among thorns. Sal.
5. 2. 2.
It is a very hard matter for the tender and delicate lilly to save her self
whole among the sharp and piercing thorns.

God says to his Prophet Ezekiel Ezekiel. ^. 6
And thou son of man, fear them not, neither be afraid of their words,
although rebels and thorns be with thee, and thou remainest with Scorpions.

If it be so hard a thing to lead a good life among evil men, it follows
that to enter into friendship with them it is very dangerous.

CHAP. 28.
The company of good men is to be frequented.
WIth the godly thou will show thy self godly, and with the upright man,
thou will show thy self upright, says the Prophet psalm, 18, 25
.

If thou use the company of good men, though thou wot not either how, or how
much thou profitest in virtue, yet thou shall well perceive in the end that
thou have gonne forward.

Saul being among the Prophets became himself a Prophet and did Prophecy 1.
Sam. 10 10
.

S. Peter when he was among the rest of the Godly Disciples confessed Christ to
be the son of God Mat. 19* 19.
, but having left them, and being joined to the wicked in the house of Caiphas
he denied him Matt. 26. 69, 70 etc.
, whom he confessed before.

If thou put dead coals among the coals that burn, they will soon be
on fire. If thou resortest to men that be godly zealous, thy zeal will be
inflamed, though otherwise thou be cold.

It was well for Laban that Iaakob ^oiorned in his house, for he could say
Genesis 30. ^0
, The little that thou had bee^fore I came, is increased into a multitude,
and the Lord has blessed thee by my coming.

The Lord blessed the Egyptians house for Joseph's sake; and the blessing of
the Lord was upon all that he had in the house, and in the field Genesis 39. 5.
.

For Iehosh^phats sake the Lord by Elisha, his prophet, sent rain upon the
host of wicked men 2. K. ^. 14. 15. etc.
. More examples there be in the Scriptures which teach how that wicked men are
blessed many times for the sake of good men which live among them.

Thomas the Apostle, being absent from the rest of his sellow Apostles, beheld
not Christ with them being new ^sen from the dead Joan. 20. 24. 26. etc.
. But afterward in company of the faithful, himself come unto faith.

On the day of Penticost where the Disciples were all with one acc^r^e in one
place, the holy Ghost de^cended upon them al to their exceeding comfort Act.
2. 1. 2. etc.
If thou abid with good men, thou shall with them have a part of the spiritual
blessings of the holy Ghost which with wholesome admonitions will with-drawe
thee from evil works, and adhort unto a godly conversation.

For So Much as ill words corrupt good ma^ners, 1. Co. 15. 33.
have a regard unto what company thou do resort.

As necessary and as profitable as a good air and wholesome situation is for
the body: so necessary for the health of the soul is the company of the
servants of Christ. If then for the health of the body, thou shunnest
contagious places, why for the good of thy soul do thou not fly the
fellowship of the wicked, and join thy self to the godly?

Fly therefore all wicked company, as from the fire of hell, and use the
familiarity of good people, of whom more profit shall you receive at the
length, than at the first you would imagine.

CHAP. 29.
The world must be despised in no worldly respects.
Whosoever shall forsake houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother,
or wife or children or lands, for my Names sake, he shall receive an hundred
fold more, and shall inherit everlasting life, says the Lord Mat. 19. 29


Many do forsake great possessions, which yet receive no reward because they
forsake not these things for Christ his sake, but seek themselves, love their
own glory, and covet the praise of men.

The more thou love God, the more acceptable is that whatsoever thou do.

Though I feed the poor with all my goods and though I give my body, that I
be burned, and have not love, it profits me nothing, says the Apostle ^. Co.
13. ^


Study thou only to please God, and let his love only move thee to serve
him: contemn this world not hoping for any temporal commodity.

God he praised Job, 1. Job. 2. ^^.
and the Devil replied again, Does Job fear God for naught? The Devil he
denied not the works of Job, but he argued up-

In every work therefore let God be the cause, and end of the same, if thou
have no purpose to work in vain.

CHAP. 30.
Death is to be had in continunual remembrance.
Whatsoever thou take in hand remember the end, and thou shall never do
amiss, says a wise man Eccl. 7. 36


The remembrance of death, it avails much to make us to contemn this world.

He will easily* despise all, which has in mind that he shall die.

Unto Adam and his wife did the Lord God make coats of skins and clothed
them Genesis 3. 2^
that thereby they might have in remembrance the sentence of death whereinto
they were fallen through sin.

Seeing thou with all mortal creatures art condemned to die the death, and art
still going the right way unto the grave, thou ought to give thy self unto
continual mortifying of thy self.

It is a sovereign medicine for to refrain thy sensual and wicked appetites,
to have death in remembrance, whereby the body shall be turned into duste and
ashes, and eaten up of worms.

The cogitation of death it throws water as it were into the furnace of our
burning desires to quench them.

Death is the clock, by which we set our life in order, and the memory
thereof does choke up much of that love that we do bear unto the world.

As Daniel, by strawing of ashes in the flore, discovered by the print of the
feet the deceit of the false Priests of Babylon Bell. and dra. verse. 14*
so do thou cast in thy memory the ashes, whereinto thou shall one day be
converted, and thou shall perceive the deceiptes of the world, the subtilty of
the Devil, and the secret tentations whereby the wicked spirits do impugn
thy soul.

O that these things were in thy mind, how purely should the life (...)
believe the things which daily thou see to happen before thy face.

Think that every moment thou hear that terrible trumpet resounding in
thine ears, Arise ye dead and come unto judgment.

The memory of death in a good man it cleanses and purifieth all that passes
through it, as a strainer cleanses all that liquor that is powered into it.

Drive not from thy mind the remembrance of death, for it will detain thee
greatly from revenging injuries, and from following the vanities of this world,
which as yet abide in thy mind: and study to get the Christian virtues, which
highly do please God, and are profitable to man.

CHAP. 31.
The hour of death is uncertain.
WAtch for ye know neither the day, nor the hour, when the son of man will
come, says our Savior Mat. 25. ^3.


Seeing death is so certain, and the time thereof so uncertain, we are
continually to watch, and to think that every day shall be the last.

Many do build houses, yet wot they not whether they shall inhabit them, or
no* Many do make provision against the year to come, which it may be they
shall never see. They give themselves to this life, which is uncertain; and
ouerpasse the ca^e of death, which is most certain.

Seeing then with such an earnest study thou prouidest for uncertain things,
why prouidest thou not against death, which is of all most certain? It is not
good to leave the certain for the uncertain.

Man kn^weth no^ his time, says the preacher Eccl. 9. 2^
but as the fishes which are taken in an evil net, and as the birds that are
caught in the snare, so are the children of men snared in the evil time, when
it falls upon them suddenly.

Why tariest thou longer upon present things?

If a King of special favor should give thee one of the cities of his
stingdome, and should assign thee a certain hour to confirm his grant,
would thou not with all study and diligence endeavor that that hour
should not be ouerslipt? But now a far more excellent and glorious city than
any is in this world, even the celestial Jerusalem is promised unto thee by the
unspeakable magnificence of the King of Kings. The time of this life is given
thee to attain therein this blessed city. Leese not thy time therefore, omit
not a good opportunity, least thou leese that happiness which thou so longest
for. The night comes when no man can work. Iohu. 9. 4.


No man has an hour sure of his life. Therefore the time being so short, and
the promises so ample, what a wonder is it that many can so idly pass the
time away in vanities and pastimes, as though they had yet an hundred years
more assured them to live, and looked for none other world after this life?

If for the getting of some temporal good thing, thou art willing to break thy
sleep, to refrain from meat, to absent thy self from many meetinges of
pleasure, and that only to finish which is in thine hands, least the occasion
do slip, and thou wottest not when to have the like again: why do thou not
take the like occasion now given thee of God for the attaining of that life
which shall endure for ever?

Those five foolish virgins, that suf^ered the time prae^ent unprofitably to
passe-away, and presumed of the time to come, were deceived of their vain
expectation Mat. 25. 10.
.

Disire not a long, but a good life; nor many, but good years. Endeavor rather
to live well than long; and seek not only to have a good will, but add
thereunto good works Many contenting themselves with a good intentes have
descended into the torments of hell.

Uncertain is the hour of death, which is a thing that should stir us up
unto more watchfulness in our calling

It were extreme foolishness for thee to live in that state in which thou
would not that death should find thee. And see^ing this may fall out every
hour, even in reason it stands thee upon to live well, for little do you
know the hour when death will summon you to answer for your life before the
judgment seat of God.

CHAP. 32.
The hour of death is unknow en because we should continually prepare our
selves to dye.
MAN that is borne of a woman is but of short continuance, and full of trouble
Are not his dates determined? The number of his months are with thee (O
Lord): thou have appointed his bounds which he cannot ouerpasse, says Job
Job. 14 1. 5
.

The hour of death is uncertain. neither know you what hour your master will
call you unto account Mat. 25 16
.

Because the hour of death is uncertain we should presume that our life may
soon be ended, and that the last hour is still at hand. And herein, as, in all other things the Lord God has dealt most mercifully with us, in keeping
from our knowledge the hour of death, to the end we should live with more
purity of heart and soul.

As we are sound at the hour of death, so shall we be judged; and for so much
as every moment we may dye, let us live in all innocence, that when we are
to give up our account we may be found good servants.

The more zealous should you be in doing well, the more uncertain you are
when you shall forsake this world, whereunto continually you ought to be
prepared.

If many now offend God having the hour of death hidden from their eyes, what
wicked ^^reches would they prove, if they knew of a certain that their days
were many.

The uncertainty of the hour of death, it bridleth many from committing
sin. who if they knew that they should live many years, would wrap and
defile themselves with most loathsome wickedness. Again, though the
uncertainty of death reclame not all men from their sins: yet makes it many
not to continue still, and persevere in ungodliness.

If a man might know assuredly the hour of his death, yet is it plain that
he could not know it, but under one of these two conditions, to wit, either
that he should dye suddenly, or else have some certain time after appointed
and praefixed him to die in. Now if he knew that his death were sudden, and so
defer his repentance until then, it were a dangerous thing. For hardly can
he truly repent, which repents suddenly. Again, if he knew his time of
life to be long, then it may be thought he would take more liberty to sin,
putting-off the reformation of his wicked life unto the last day. Both which
are very dangerous and inconvenient for the salvation of man.

Therefore to deliver thee from both these dangers, the all wise God has so
ordained that the hour of death should be always kept from thy knowledge,
that suspecting death always to be nigh at hand, thou would always live
in the fear of God; and be thankful to his Majesty for this so singular
benefit of concealing the hour of death, whereby as with a spurte he pricketh
thee on to follow and practice the works of godliness,

Besides, God would not have thee to know the hour of death, because thou
should learn to live for the benefit of others, and not to thy self, For
a public benefit is always to be prefered before a private.

Did thou know that quickly thou should die many good works thou
would leave undone, which might be profitable to the commonweal; and thy
study would be of thine own salvation, neglecting, without the more grace of
God, the profit of thy neighbor.

And what more? If many did know being sick that their sickness were not
unto death, surely neither would they heartily turn unto the Lord by
repentance, nor do those works which Christians are to do. But now many
lying grievously in pain upon their bed, they turn unto the Lord God knowing
themselves near unto death, which questionless they would not do, if they
knew they should live still, and not die.

Last of all, even for the preservation of Christian peace and concord among
men, God would not have us aforehande to know the time of our departure out of
this world. For did we know that yet many years we should continue hear,
there would follow, or be nourished still in us, hatred, desire of revenge, and
such like sins; again, did we know that very speedely we should die, we
should be evermore sad, and full of melancholy passions, and so be
uncomfortable to our selves, and to all such as are about us. All which do
violate the common peace, and fellowshippe of man.

Seeing therefore by this uncertainty of our life, God has provided so well
for the benefit both of our selves, and of others, there is great cause why
for the same, we should thank him, love him, worshipe and adore him, and that
only and evermore.

CHAP. 33.
The remembrance of death, is a goodly medicine against the fear of death.
THough a man live many years, and in them all he reioyee, yet he shall
remember tbe days of darkness, says the Preacher Eccl. (...). 8
.

Death would be vanquished as he does approach, if it were well thought upon
before: neither is there any thing that from death better may defend thee, than
after God the continual memory of the same.

A wise man's life is the meditation of death, and unworthy is he all comfort
at the hour of death, which has been forgetful of death in the days of his
life.

Death, though it seem contrary to life, yet has God appointed the same to
be a mean whereby to attain unto life. And Christ has made death so sweet
for us, that laying aside the name of death, it is become the iustrument of
life, ina^^ much as thereby we attain unto the true life in heaven, in such
wise as that which before his glorious resurrect on was very death, is now
life, life, I say to the good, but a gate of eternal death unto the wicked.

Death it is the end when the valieant soulders receive their pay, and the
cowards are dimissed with shame, According to the diverse lives of men a
diverse reward is given to men by death. If thou forget death, then will death
forget thee.

It is the chiefest point of Philosophy to be still occupied in the meditation
of death.

The Ninevites hearing the sentence of death pronounced against them by Jonas
the prophet, straight did humble themselves before the Lord with hearty
repentance Ion. 3. 4. 5.
. Seeing therefore the consideration of death did so change the minds of those
sinners, thou may percease the great profit that comes to man by the
same. If thou think of death as thou should, tentatation cannot overcome
thee.

Beware thou love not life so immoderately, that in the mean while thou put
death out of thy mind: For then look especially for to die, when thou
desire chiefly for to live.

The remembrance of death makes a man not to wax proud in prosperity.

It is good to be ready to die before death come, and to expect with patience
the time that insueth after death.

When thou see other men to die before thy face, think thy self also to
hasten toward the grave, though thou may seem to have sure footing on the
earth.

When two ships meet upon the sea together, they that be in the one ship
think the other do sail exceeding fast, and that themselves do go but fa^re
and easily, or rather stand still, although in truth one ship saileth so fast
as the other.

Even in like sort many that see other men daily to die before their face, do
think themselves notwithstanding to be immortal, and that they do abide
stock still, while others do go on apace toward death.

If death do come upon a sudden and do carry any man away with him, never
say that he betrayeth any man, since long before he has proclaimed himself
to be an open enemy of us all. And it is an evident argument that he means
not to be at truce with men, when every day he kills one or other.

It is thy part therefore to prepare thy self, and every moment to look for
death, and to live in the fear of God.

They which go through the fields that be ^cuered with snow, they know not
their way, and while they think to enter into their lodging, they fall into
some dangerous pit or place: Even so the men which enjoy all manner of
prosperity (which as snow takes away a great part of the sight of men) while
they think how still they shall live, they rush headlong upon death, and come
unto destruction. No marvel then that of rich they become poor; and from
pleasure and pron^otion they come unto anguish and plain, For good reason is
it, (...) at his death he should forget himself, which in his life would not
remember God. And then can he hardly think of his salvation being occupied
with the deceiptful light of the world, unless he lay aside first all
hurtful sticking about visible things.

So ought a man to behold death, despising all the vanity, glory, and worship
of the world.

CHAP. 34.
Pride is horrible in the sight of God.
ALL that is in the world, (as the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and
the pride of lift) is not of the Father, but of the world, says S. John 1.
Ioh. 2. ^6,


By these three troops of enemies does the world oppugn thee. But of these
the mightiest of all is pride; which is the original of all sin Eccl. 10. 14.


If thou purpose to approach near unto God, fly from pride, because God
resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble Iam. 4. 6.
.

The waters of Gods grace they do^ runneaway from the hie mountains of the
vain and hie minded people, and goes into the valleys of them that be humble
and meek hearted

Consider who thou art, and thou shall see how little cause thou have to be
proud Thou shall fi^de that in thy conception there was sin; in thy birth,
misery; in thy life, troubles; and in thy death, anguish and vexation.

To bring down thine hie stomach withal, Almighty God has ordained that
thou should be vexed here in this life with the most vile and simple
creatures, as gnattes, frogs, and such like vermin as he plagued the proud
Egyptians withal^ Exo. ^. 5. 6. etc.
.

Boast not arrogantly of thine own virtues, neither lay open the faults of
other men, but humbly consider thine own defects, and thy neighbors virtues
and confess thy self to be a sinner, and thy neighbor to be an holy man.
Do not thou imitate the poude Pharisie that made mention of his own good
works, and of the Publicans wickedness Luke ^^. 11. 12.
. Be not arrogant, least thou fall into the rigorous judgment of the
almighty God.

Be not proud, man, for thou art worthy all shame and confusion. Thy casting
down shall be in the midst of thee, says Micheas mich. 6, 14.
. Thou art a vile worm of the earth, and a de^ne full of filth and abomination.

Remember that thou art but dust Genesis 3. 19.
, and shall return again into ashes.

Moses he sprinkled ashes toward the heaven, and there came a scab breaking out
into blisters upon man, and upon beast Exo. 9. 10.
If thou being but ashes Eccl. 10. 9.
, do lift up and exa^t thy self by pride, thou shall be punished as the
Egyptians were, and as was Nebuchadnezzar Dan. 4. 27 28. etc.
.

There is no sinnner that so resembles Satan, as the proud man.

To remove this sin of pride, God he descended upon the earth in great
humility phil* 2. 5. 6. etc.
.

Pride is the original of al sin Eccl. 10. 14.
Other sinners be separated from God either by some commodity or pleasure: but
the cursed proud man is so past all shame, that voluntarily he renounceth
even God himself. Other sins are known to proceed from certain inordinate
desires: but the proud man in all that he does makes show of pride.

He shows his pride in his pompous tables, in his costly bedding, and in many
other things.

It is a continual ague, that continues still, and follows a man often, yea
even to the grave, and after he is dead. Whereof are witnesses the stately
monuments and toumbes, which they cause to be set up, and erected for them,
after they be laid full low in the grave.

For the avoiding of this pride, God he suffers man to fall into other
sins. An argument that of all it is the greatest.

Every proud man is an abomination to the Lord, For he has stretched out his
hand against God, and made himself strong against the Almighty, says Job Job.
15. 25
.

Only by pride does man make contention, says Solomon prou. 13 10.
.

With other sinners man may have some society, but the proud man will admit
no peer.

When Saul was little in his own fight, he was made the head of the tribes of
Israel 1. Sam. 15. 17. 23.
: but after he became proud, he lost his kingdom.

Pride it is the root of all vice, and the destruction of all virtue.

The trees that be planted upon hie places, do soonest loose their leaves
thorough the vehemency of the winds.

Study therefore to be little, and make account of humility, for therein
shall thou find most safety.

CHAP. 35.
God gives grace to the humble.
HE that humbles himself shall be exalted, says the Lord Luke 14. 11.
.

As much as pride is hateful, Luke. 18. 14.
so much is humility acceptable in Gods sight.

This humility is so liked of Jesus Christ, that therein he would be borne,
and therewith, as with a most dear friend, he spent the time all the the days
of his life.

Enter in at the straight gate: for it is the wide gate and broad way that
leads unto destruction, and many there be which go in thereat. Because the
gate is straight and the way narrow, that leads unto life, says the Lord
Mat. 7. 13. 14.
.

He that will go in at a low door, had need stou^e and bow down himself.
if thou do not ^umble thy self, thou shall never enter into heaven.

Except ye be converted and become as little children, ye shall not enter into
the kingdom of heaven mat. 18. 3.
.

Learn of me, that am meek and lowly in heart, says our ^auiour mat. 11.
(...).
.

Many there be which know themselves to be weak, and offenders, yet will they
not be taken to be such: but be thou humble in will, and be content to be as
slenderly accounted of by other men, as thou know thy self to be worthy of
the same: and this is to be humble in very deed.

Jesus Christ our blessed redeemer, did manifest his glorious transfiguration
but only unto three o^ his Disciples mat. 17. 1. 2. etc.
* but the shame of his reproch^ull death he made open to all the world, dying
upon a cross publicly in the great city of Jerusalem, and that in the time
of the solemn ^east of Easter. ^ut the guise of man is not so, which desires
that his virtues and fame, but not his imperfections, and shame should be
known of any.

Often did our Savior preach of humility, because he would have that lesson
to be well remembered. And greatly was he touched with compassion toward the
humble. After the Centurion had said mat. 8. 8, 10.
, I am not worthy that thou should come under my roof, he was preferred before
all Israel.

S. Paul that said, ^. Cor. 15. 9. 10.
He was not meet to be called an Apostle, was the chief preacher of all the
Apos^les, and labored more aboundan^ly than the^ all.

S. Peter that fell down at Jesus knees saying, Lord go from me for I am a
sinful man(h,) was straightway made a fisher of men.

S John Baptist, that humble man that said, he was not worthy to bear the
sh^^s of our Savior Christ mat. ^. ^1 13.
was not withstanding the chosen friend of the bridegroom, and baptized Christ.

God always from the beginning has chosen for himfelfe the least and the
simplest things in show. Of the first two brethren that were borne in the
world, Kaine and Habel, he choase Habel that was the younger Genesis 41. 4
Of the sons of Abraham, Ismael, and Isaak, he choase Isaak that was the
younger Genesis 17. 19 20. 21.
Of the sons of Isaak, Esau and Iaakob, he choase Iaakob, which was the
younger Genesis 25. 23. Mal. 1. 2, 3. Romans 9. 12. 13.
. Of the 12. sons of Iaakob, he choase Joseph one of the youngest, and made
him ruler over the land of Egypt Genesis 3^. 7.
. Of the sons of Ishai he choase the least and youngest, David that kept his
fathers sheep ^ Sam. 16 ^1. 13.
. He made Saul King of Israel being of the least tribe, and the meanest famil^e
of all the Jews 1, Sam. 9. ^6.
.

Again, when Christ himself came into the world, to show that he ^^ned
humility, he choase, not the great and mighty men to be his disciples, but
poor men that used the trade of fishing Mat. 4. 18 19. etc.


Amongst all his unreasonable creatures, he has planted in the very meanest,
and in the least in a manner of them all, as the Pismire p^ou. 6. 6, etc.
, the co^ies the grasshoppers, the spiders p^ou. 30. 26. etc.
, such a wisdom at the wisest men in the world cannot but wonder at the same.

In the creation of the world, has not God of materia prima, as the
Philosophers do term it, the vilest matter made all things, yea of nothing.
as the Scripture teaches Genesis ^, ^.
?

Furthermore, the son of God Christ made himself of no reputation, and took
on him the form of a servant, and was made like unto man, and was found in
shape as a man, He humbled himself and became obedient unto the death, even
the death of the cross phil. 2. ^. ^
.

To commend humility unto man, Suffer little children, and forbid them not to
come unto me* for of such is the kingdom of heaven, says Christ Mat. 19. 1
. At an other time to make pride odious unto us, he brake out into these words
against Capernaum Mat. 11. 23
, And thou Capernaum* which are lifted up unto heaven, shall be brought down
to hell.

The glory of a proud man shall soon turn into confusion, and as pride is
hateful to God, and men, so contrariwise humility purchases favor.

As ashes do keep and preserve the fire: so does humility preserve the grace
of the holy Ghost. Abraham said unto God, I have begun (...) speak unto my
Lord, being but dust and ashes Ge. 1^. 27
.

The deeper the well is, the sweeter is the water thereof; and the more lowly
thou art, the more lovely art thou in the sight of God.

Seek not ambitiously after promotion, and dignity in the world, for all these
things full speedily shall come unto an end.

If thou knew to what a miserable end the proud shall come, thou could
not choose, I think, but contemn pride.

When corn is cut in the field, all lies alike on the ground together, and no
man can discern which were the hiest ears, although that in the growing, one
ear did much ouergrowe another: so likewise in the field of this world,
although that some be higher than others, and that a few do exceed the
residue in learning, honor, wealth, and dignities of the world; yet when death
comes with his hook, and cutteth us all down, and bereaueth us of our
lives, then shall we be all equal and no difference made between one, and
another of us.

If thou openest the graves, thou can not tell which was the rich man, and
which was the poor, which was the King, and which was the subject; which was
the noble, and which was an abject in the world.

So then if all men of power and honor in the world, shall be brought to one
and the same misery with the poor men, and of no reputation; ^urely it is
vanity to desire to mount aloft in this present world.

^hinke therefore humbly of thy self, so shall thou find grace with God;
covet to be low and little, so God will promote and exalt thee.

CHAP. 36.
The covetous man is good for none, no not to himself.
NO covetous person, which is an ^^olater, has any inheritance in the kingdom
of Christ, and of God, says S. Paul Ephesians. 5, 5*
.

Under covetousness are comprised another troup of enemies which do set upon
man for his destruction.

Easily in this battle may thou overcome, if thou would bear in mind
wherefore thou came into the world, and that all the riches of the same are
to be accounted but as dung Phil. 3. 8.
, and must be left by death Job. 1. 21.
.

There is no man more barbarous and cruel than the covetous man. The covetous
man is void of love* he knows neither mother, no^ brother, neither his
own, nor strangers.

Ecclesiasticus does say Eccl. 14. 5.
, He that is wicked to himself, to whom will he be good? What good can a man
look for at a covetous man's hand, seeing he is cruel against himself? He
does no good, but when he dies.

He that is covetous and sparing of his goods, is of his honor and credit
over lavish and prodigal.

It is a wonderful thing that man, created for to love God, should so be
addicted to the inordinate love of the vile things of this life.

There is nothing worse than a covetous man, says Ecclesiasticus Eccl. 10. 9
.

Other sinners though they hurt themselves, yet they do good to other men in
some sort: but the covetous man hurts all men as well privately, as
publicly, for while he hides the good things of the earth, he causes a
grievous and miserable dearth to arise in the land.

A covetous man, is a poor man, yea so poor as none is poorer. He is the
cause of his own misery.

There can be no greater poverty, than to have nothing. A covetous man lacks
as well that which he possesses, as that which he has not. The things which
he has, he uses not, yea he makes himself. a slave unto them.

The least thing that is, suffices a poor man: but nothing can satisfy the
greedy mind of a covetous churl.

Other sinners though they have no portion of joy in the other world yet they
enjoy the present state: but the covetous man has no joy in neither, and
therefore the most miserable.

He that puts his confidence in riches, is a fool.

The covetous man is never without some excuse when he should give to him that
needs.

It is greater honor, than to win a kingdom, to conquer a man's inordinate
desires.

The Devil being asked of God, from whence he came, answered, from compassing
the earth to and fro, and from walking in it Job. 1. 7.
So do the covetous men, they compass the earth about, as the Devil did, and
does 1. Pet. 5. 8.
but toward heaven they never look.

The covetous rich man is a pray for his Prince; a mark for thieves to shoot
at; and a cause of quarrel among his kinsfolk and friends.

The covetous man is unworthy to have a place either with the Angels above in
heaven, or with men below in earth; and therefore he would be buried with ^udas
the traitor, that for the love of m^nie^old his master even the S^uiour of the
world mat. 27, 3. 4 etc.


The covetous man before he wi^neth any thing, is first won* himself; and
before he takes ought, is taken himself, ^ee burns here in this world
with the fire of inordinate desire; and afterward shall burn in the fire of
hell.

Dives being in hell, desired that with the t^p of Lazarus finger his thirst
might be quenched Luke 16 34.
. Would so little water, think thou, aswage the heat of the fire of hell?
No doutlesse. For if that had beenne granted, he would have desired more still
without ceasing. Such as the state of this man was in hell, such is the state
of all covetous persons in this world they desire a drop of riches, when all
the waters and seas of worldly substance will not quench their thirst.

Every thing that is heavy, does naturally incline toward his ^entre. But
nothing does so pe^se down the heart of man as covetousness. They sanke down
to the bottom, as a stone, says the Scripture of Pharao, and all his host
Exo. 15. 5
.

Covetousness of all other sins reuiueth and waxes young again when a man
is old.

If thou do lie upon the earth with thy breast, and drink of the running
waters of these worldly riches, thou shall be discharged from the service of
God, as Gedeon discharged the like men that went out to fight against the
Medianites Iud. 7* 7.
.

Was not Achan stoned Josh. 7 25.
; Gehazi plagued with a leprosy 2 K. 5. 27
; Judas hanged Mat. 27. 5.
; Ananias and Sapphira punished with sudden death Act* 5 510
; and all for covetousness? Beware therefore of it.

He that overcomes this vice of avarice is a stronger man, than he that
vanquished his bodily enemy.

If thou heapest up riches together, thou make a heap of wood, wherewith thou
shall be burned in hell, as the Phoenix is in this world.

As the Physicion forbids a sick man that which he knows to be hurtful
for him, to the end he may recover his health: so God, as a good physicion,
forbids man covetousness* as hurtful to the soul: whom if he harken not
unto, he is like Adam, who not obeying God, which did prohibit him to eat of
the tree in the midst of the garden Gen 13. 3.
, fell into infinite troubles, and affliction^ Ge. 3. 16 17. etc.
.

Obey therefore the commandment of God, whose will it is that thou should
fly from covetousness, if thou would have any part in the kingdom of
heaven.

CHAP. 37.
God he blesses the liberal man.
Give, and it shall be given you, says the Lord Luke 6. 38
.

Christ compares riches unto thorns Luke 8. 14.
, which laid upon a man's bare hand they will not hurt him, but if he close
his hand together, they will draw blod; and the faster the hand is shute, so
much the more is the harm that he shall take thereby, Riches do not hurt
the open, but the hand that is shut. Blessed is that man of whom it may be
said, as it was of that good woman pro. ^1. 3^
She stretches out her hand to the poor, and puts forth her hand to the
needy.

If thou give to a poor man thou shall receive good money for Copder. If thou
impartest of thine abundance thou shall increase in virtue like unto the tree
whose superfluous bows be cropped of.

He shall never want any thing, that for Christ his sake gives his goods
liberally, no more than meal and oil was wanting in the widows house,
though she were very poor, which ministered sustenance to the Prophet Heliah
1. k. 17. 1^
. Many do say, if I saw such a poor man as Helyah was I would do him good:
but they are deceived, for in not giving to the Lord of Heliah, how would they*
give to Heliah himself? He that gives to the poor, gives to Christ.
Inasmuch at ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye
have don it unto me, says Christ himself Mat. 25. 40
. Therefore if you help not the Lord of Heliah, how should you releue Heliah
himself?

Blessed is he that judges wisely of the poor, the Lord shall deliver him in
the time of trouble psalm. 41. 1.
.

In the day of judgment thou shall be examined touching the works of mercy.

Many do spend their goods and their wealth upon their houses, upon
tapestry, and horses, thinking there by to get a name and fame among men; When
more commendation they should purchase if they bestowed their wealth upon the
poor, that can give them good words, than upon any other creatures which have
no reason at all. Neither the beds, nor the walls of thine house have any ^ong
at all, to praise thee as the poor have, that will blaze abroad thy goodness.

Be thou liberal, and so both God will like, and man will love thee. The
liberal man has many frindes, though many of them be very vngratful.

Never can he want friends which is liberal toward other men: and never can he
have any friends which is a covetous man. The poor do him curse, and his
kindred do wish him dead.

If the covetous man do fall thorough some vice which he has, every one does
blow abroad his defamation. but if the liberal man do sin, al do excuse,
and purge him the best they can.

Many benefits does he receive, which knows well how to give; and he may
take himself for an happy man on the earth.

Better is it to give, than to take; as better is it to love* than to he
loved. For to love is an action of the mind: but to be loved is not so, and
many sometime are loved which deserve it not.

God for his part he gives unto all but receives of none: the more therefore a
man gives, the more he resembles God, his maker.

The Sun excels the other planets* because it ministers light unto the
stars.

The more vile and odious that a covetous man is; the more noble and renowned
is the liberal man.

Riches to wise men, are as fetters; to fools, as papers of infamy.

Though prodigality be a vice, yet covetousness is worse, because a prodigal
man does good to many, but the covetous person does profit none.

CHAP. 38.
Unlawful lust is loathsome in God his sight.
Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God, and that the spirit of God
dwells in you? If any man destroy the Temple of God, him shall God destroy
^saith the Apostle 1 Cor 3. 16. 17
.

Now comes the third band of enemies to be spoken of, comprised in the lust
of the flesh,

Other vices do defile but on part of man only, namely the soul: but this
vice polluteth the whole man,

Look not to escape the terible judgment of God, if thou handle the Temple of
the holy spirit dishonestly.

For unlawful lust the Lord destroyed the old world with water ^ Genesis 6 2. 3
, Sodom and Gomora with the five cities next adjoining Genesis 19. 5
, Hamor and the Sichimites Ge* 34. 2^ 26.
, Onan Ge. 38. ^. 10 Iud. ^0. 4^.
, and the whole tribe of Benjamin in a manner with the sword.

For this vice was Amon murdered Sam. ^. 5. 2
* Solomon bereaved of the Spirit of God 1 K. 11 4 5 etc.
, Samson blinded In^ 16. 11
, David many ways afflicted 1 Sa, 12. ^0 (...) etc.
* the two Elders that accused Susanna vnrustly stoned Sus. ve 62
, three and twenty thousand in one day put unto the sword 1 C^r. 10. 8.
; and most grievous plagues for this vice has the Lord sent among his people

Fly from this infection, and God his spirit will comfort thee: have death in
mind, and lust will soon be quenched. Avoid idleness, and repel the
tentation of the flesh from thee. Remember the fire of hell, where fleshly men
shall burn for ever, and the lust of the flesh will not so inflame thee.

It seems to thee hard to resist tentations, but much harder will it be to
suffer the pains of hell. He that is not delivered from the first, shall not
escape the second fire. One heat euercommeth another. The remembrance of the
infernal fire will extinguish the flame of the internal fi^e.

If thou art held with the love of God, al other vanities will vanish from thine
heart.

He is the servant of Satan, which serves the lust, and wicked affections of
the mind.

Of this sin did the Apostle speak when he said Gal. 5. 21
, They that do such things shall not inherit the kingdom God.

The sin of the flesh, is a fire of hell; and the maintainer thereof is
riotousnesse, and gluttony. The flame thereof, is filthiness; the ashes,
uncleanness; the smoke, infamy; the end, vexation of the mind, destruction
of the body, shipwreck of a good conscience, and an horrible contempt of the
holy commandments of God.

Many of them be utterly cast away through the wrath of GOD, which give
themselves to this vice. If thou would overcome, thou must fly from this
sin, according to the commandment of the Apostle from God himself 1. Cor.
6. 18.
. This victory is gotten by flying, and not by violence.

Dainty fare provoke lust, but a sober diet, with godly exercise keeps
chaste.

A wonder it is that ever thou can avoid this persecution of the flesh,
faring deliciously, and living in idleness.

The water of tears quenches the flame of concupiscence: and unless thou
avoid occasions hereunto, it is almost impossible but at one time or other thou will yield unto his sin.

Few there be but either in youth, or in age do humble themselves before this
idol, and give themselves to the flesh. Many there be which commend the
unspotted life, but few retain the chastity of the body, much less of the
mind: they would seem honest, and praise honesty, but yet they avoid not, as
they ought, the occasions which cause them either to be, or to be thought
dishonest. Their meaning is good, but their knowledge is but small, and not
sufficient.

Happy is that soul which in a pure body serves her spouse Jesus Christ: and
happy is that man which prepares in his heart an habitation for the holy
spirit.

Remember still the death, the corruption, and the filthynesse whereinto our
bodies shall be resolved, and doing so much will thou be moved to serve God
in all holiness of conuersasion, whereby thou shall enjoy him blessedly in the
heavens, being delivered from the fire of hell, where they continue boiling in
torments which like beasts in this world did give themselves to al inordinate
desires of the flesh.

CHAP. 39.
The chaste Christian God delights in.
Wisdom cannot enter into a wicked heart, nor dwell in the body that is
subject unto sin, says the wise man Wis. 1. 4.
.

Gather thy senses together, and refreine thine appetites. Death is come up
into our windows, and is entered into our palaces, says Jeremy Ier. 9. 21.
. Unless thou set a watch over thy senses, thy soul is in danger to die
of an evil death. Because Ishbosheth looked not well unto his doors, he lost
his life even in his own house lying upon his bed 2. Sam. 4. 6. 7.
.

Consider in thy mind what mischief came into the world through Euahs
casting her eye upon the forbidden fruit Genesis 3. 6.
. It is not lawful for thee inordinately to behold that, which is not lawful
for thee in heart to desire.

Had not David cast an unchaste eye upon ^athsheba 2. Sam. 11. 2. 3.
, he had neither lost so many good things, neither fallen into so many evils 2.
Sam. 12. 10. 11. etc.
, as he did.

Look warely unto thy senses: the want hereof brought destruction unto
Olofernes Iud. 12. 11. 12.
.

No vice so troubles th'understanding, Judith. 13. 8.
nor overthrows the reason of man, as does the sin of the flesh.

God, who is all simple and pure, He fedeth among the lillies, as the Spouse
does say Sal. S. 2. 16.
, signifying thereby how he is delighted altogether in cleanness, Sal. S. 62.
2.
and chastity.

The purity of the creature* is most grateful before God, and therein does he
most gladly rest himself. It is written Revel. 21. 27.
, that, There shall not enter into it (the heavenly city) any unclean thing.

The principal beauty of the soul is principally ascribed unto chastity,
through bringing the flesh in subjection to the spirit.

The memory of the chaste persons is before God immortal, and renowned of men.

Chastity is compared unto the roase, not only for the beauty and sweetness
thereof, but also for that it springs, increases, and continues as the rose
does among thorns. For chastity never grows nor continues but where there
is sharpness and austeritie of life, and mortification of the flesh: it is
always in danger where pleasure is.

Chastity cannot live where no fasting is used, nor temperance appears. And
a wonder it were that such as are not sober should be chaste.

If thou will continue chaste, be still doing of some good work or other;
fly the company of dissolute persons; and prepare a place in a pure body for
the holy Ghost.

The Dove which Noah sent out of the Arc, could have no footing at all but
upon carrion, which she liked not, and therefore returned unto the Arc again
Ge. 8. 8. 9
, The holy Ghost, which sometime was resembled to a Dove, Man* 3. 16.
it cannot abide in bodies that be unclean, but in the pure and holy.

Fly the vices of the flesh, as thou would the plague or pestilence, that
thy soul may remain pure, and so be fit, as a chaste spouse, to welcome the
bridgrome Christ.

CHAP. 40.
Unspeakable is the happiness, which the men of this world shall forgo.
THey contemned that pleasant land, said the Prophet, of worldly men Psalm.
106, 24.
.

It is a wonderful thing that with all diligence and study we seek not for
glory which of all things exceedingly is to be desired.

There is nothing which naturally we so desire nor sooner may loose, nor for
which men will spend so much, as for the glory of this world, whereby many
are deprived in this life of spiritual consolation, and in the other world of
eternal life.

Many good things do they want, and great joys do they go without, which
give themselves to serve the world. And because they set their minds upon
corruptible things, they are deprived of that heavenly society of Jesus Christ,
and the divine contemplation of spiritual things.

It is much to be lamented that men can find sweetness in the unsavory and
sour things of this world, and yet have no taste at all of the matters of God,
the pleasure whereof is sovereign.

The taste of the divine love is so delicate, that worldly pleasures give no
relish at all, where that has a place.

Happy is that man which is only refreshed with the love of God, and ravished
with the pleasures of holy virtues.

Fly from henceforth from the vanity of this world, for the more thou
estrangest thy self from the same, the greater comfort shall thou perceive in
thy soul; and the less dealing thou have in the world, the more favor shall
thou have with God.

Why therefore do thou not approach near unto the Lord? why lingerest thou?

It is a lamentable thing that the love of such vile trash, should keep thee
back. Shall the shadow of good things in this world so prevail with thee,
that thou will forgo those all sweet, and delectable joys in the life to
come? For whatsoever in this world thou love, it is nothing in comparison of
the treasure of delights in the kingdom of heaven.

Give thy self wholly therefore to love God, and the unvisible good things: buy
for small, great; for transitory, eternal; for vile, precious; for base,
glorious* for miserable, comfortable; for sour, sweet; and to speak in a
word, for nothing all things.

Let not the appearance of these corruptible things deceive thee, neither
suffer the vanity and pleasure of this present life, to darken thy knowledge
and understanding of heavenly matters.

If thou contemn the vanity of this world, thou shall enjoy the love of God.

Consider how little it is that God would have thee to do, and how much he
promises. Renounce therefore the vile things of this world, that thou may
attain that precious pearl of inestimable price.

Seeing in comparison of the life to come which is perpetual, this present
life is but a moment as it were, delight not in this short and corruptible, to
the end thou may have joy in the everlasting life.

A fool were he that having many fair Lordships, and palaces of his own,
would yet for all that continue in a stable* even such a base thing is this
miserable world in respect of the glorious and celestial city Jerusalem which
is above.

Seeing therefore God himself of his most holy love does inuit thee, and open
the gates of paradise against thou come, be not so carried away with the love
of the shadow of good things, that for them thou can be content to go
without those true, and most sweet goods of the other life, for the enjoying
whereof thou were created.

Live so in this world as in the way, as in the world to come thou may
reign for ever as in thy proper country.

The end of the second Book.
THE Third Book declaring how the vanity of this world being renounced, we
should give our selves to the service of Jesus Christ.
CHAP. 1.
The whole world cannot satisfy the desire of mortal man.
THE Lions do lack, and suffer hunger, psalm. 34. 11.
but they, which seek the Lord, shall want nothing that is good says the
Psalmist. He that has God, has all that good is, but he that has him not is
very poor.

Without God all pleasure, is pain; all joy, is sorrow; all abundance, is
penury, and scarsitie.

God alone, the creator of our soul^ does satisfy the desire, they are a^
vain that seek consolation in the things of this world.

There is nothing in this life which is not full of bitterness, nothing so
precious, so good, and delectable, besides God himself, that it can either
deliver from all evil, or bring unto felicity.

The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want, says the prophet psalm. 23. 1
. The Princes of the world themselves, the more mighty they seem, the more
they do need now and then for th^^ maintenance of their honor, and his
estate. Only the servant of God can say, I shall not want.

He whom God rules, lives: quiet and mer^ie life.

The beasts of the world are fed with dry herbs among thorns and briers,
the waters thereof are poisoned, and the herbs have a secre^ poison in them.

The devil to our first parents reached out pleasant meat, and they had no
sooner tasted of the same, but they were poisoned ^^n. 3. 7.
. The child of ^his world eats the herb of plea^^re, but the eating
thereof is unto his ^estruction: he is allured wiith the ^aite of honor, and
riches, and ^raight-way is taken in the snare ^e he be aware.

It is written by the Psalmist psalm. 7^. 26. psalm. 142. 5.
: God the strength of mine heart, and my ^rtion for ever. He is happy whom ^od
feeds, and puts no trust in ^an. Happy is he which seeks ^OD with his
whole heart, and from ^m seeks consolation.

Taste thou never so much of the ^ters of these worldly honors, and ^nities,
yet thy thirst shall never be ^enched, but thou shall still be like ^e that
has a dropsy, who the more ^e drinks, the more he thirst^^.

The eyes of al wait upon thee, and thou ^est them meat in due season psalm.
145. 15.
.

The prodigal child had no soo^^ separated himself from God, but ^ight he
confessed that he was ^^d well near for hunger Luke 15. 14
. Vice (...) wickedness do always bring af^tion to the will; whereas virtue
on (...) other side, brings joy, and con^tion.

Eat thou not the bread of him that has an evil eye, neither desire his
dainty meats. For as though he thought it in his heart so will he say unto
thee, Eat and drink, but his heart is not with thee, says the wise man prou.
23. 6.
.

He that says that in vice there i^ nourishment, 7.
and satietie, beleeu^ him not; for thou shall find it clea^ contrary.

The Nigromancers and inchaunters will make a show to thine eyes of pleasant
gardens, and fruitful trees, but if thou once gather, and taste of them, thou
shall perceive them to b^ nothing such, as they seem to be: (...) the world it
laboreth to perswad wo^ly men that the things it propounde^ are such as they
seem to the view^ but in very deed they are nothi^^ so.

Our soul is no Chamelion the it should live only with wind. T^^ world it
opens his desire, it ^^cheth out and vnfouldeth his will, (...) labors to
nourish such as love (...) world with the mere wind of v^nitie.

Ephraim is fedd with the wind, sai^ Hosea Hor. 12. 1.
. Vain we term that which fills not the place where it is. The things of
this world they fill not, but only puff up our soul, and make it for to swell.

Would thou not take him for a very fool, that being an hungered should open
his mouth, and only take in the aier to appease his hunger withal? Surely
thou art no wiser than he, which think to satisfy thy mind with the wind
of wordly vanity.

Of the men of this world did the kingly Prophet say 1. Psalm. 17, 14.
, Whose bellies thou fillest with thine hid treasures. Lords and great men
they use to lay ^broad the most precious things of their house, adorning their
haules and great chambers with silk and arras, but the things of less price
and account ^hey fling into corners: Even so God ^ath publicly set abroad the
ri^hes of this glory, and holy love, but ^he duste of gold and silver, as vile
^hinges, he hides under the earth. ^et a wonderful thing it is to ob^erue
how the men of this world co^et to satisfy their bellies with the ^asest
things.

The things of this world are like unto sharp liquor, which does not satisfy
but provoke the appetite to covet after meat. They shall go to and fro, and
bark like dogs, and go about the city. They shall run here and there for
meat, and shall not be satisfied though they tarry all night, says the
Psalmist psalm. 59. 14. 15.
. They shall go too and fro and compass about to get honors and riches, and
yet for all that shall not they be satisfied.

Thus says the Lord by the prophet Haggai unto such fellows Hag. 1. 6.
, Yet have sown much, and bring in little, ye eat, but ye have not enough;
ye drink, bull ye are not filled; ye cloth ye, but ye be not warm. The more
thou drinkest of these worldly things, the dryer thou shall be, and thou
shall show thy self like unto that man who to quench his thirst will eat
salt, and to quench the fire will power oil upon the same. The desire of
worldly things is infinite, and will not be satisfied.

CHAP. 2*
God alone is to be desired, and sought after.
OPen thy mouth wide, and I willfill it, says the Lord psalm 18. 10
.

When God had commended the observation of his commandments unto his people,
he then said, Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it* He speaks not of the
opening the corporal mouth, but of the desire, which is the mouth of the soul.

It is not the world that can fulfill the desire of the soul, but God alone,
our creator, which says: Enlarge thy desire, because I only, and none other
can satisfy the same.

The reasonable soul, which is created after the image and likeness of God,
may well be occupied about many things, but it shall never be satisfied nor
replenished, but with God himself. In him it rests securely and rejoices

Happy is that soul to which God is all things, and to whom besi^e God
nothing is sweet and precious but all is bitter and unsavory.

If our souls seek comfort in these earthly things, let it never look for
rest and quietness

The vessel so long as it abides in the water, it seems not heavy, but as
soon as it is taken out of the water, the heaviness and weight of the same
appears. The reason is, for that, being altogether earth, or consisting of
that thing which comes nearest unto earth, it has most agreement and
conuenience with the element of water, so long as it swimmeth upon the water,
and of earth being upon the earth. So when thou art with God in heart by
unfeigned love, thou art in the element as it were that, that is most proper and
proportionate unto thee, and there continuing with him thou go away merrely,
and with a contented mind: but going to the love of the world, thou leauest
thy proper element, and therefore every thing seems painful and heavy unto
thee.

The wicked men do find even in their greatest dignities, much trouble: the
godly on the other side, in reproaches, quietness. This shows that in God
only there is joy of heart, but without God there is no comfort at all.

As thy body can take no rest so long as it lies upon a narrow piece of wood,
not answering to the proportion of thy body* so shall thy soul never find any
rest and security in the base things of this world. If thou would enjoy
life, turn thee unto God.

It is God, that satisfies thy mouth with good things, as the prophet says
psa. 10. 3. 5
.

Our appetite will never rest, until it come unto the end it seeks.

Our soul is of that noble nature, that nothing can satisfy it, but the
sovereign good of all, which is God himself. This moved David to cry Psa. 42*
1^* 23
As the heart brayeth for the rivers of water, so pants my soul after thee O
God My soul thirsts for God even for the living Gods when shall I come and
appear before the presence of God? My tears have been my meat day and night,
while they daily say unto me, where is thy God.

While the holy prophet was without God he thirsted greatly, and longed, that
he might perfectly be satisfied of him, according to that of our Savior.
Christ Ioh. 7. 1.
, If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink. Give not thy mind to the
vanities of this world, unless you had rather to live in continual affliction
of the soul, than at quietness

Covet not temporal, that thou may est have eternal glory.

If thou would attain thine hearts desire, follow the counsel of the
Prophet psalm 3^. 4.
, Delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give thee thine hearts desire.

Love God above all, and thou shall live a merry life not only in this world,
but also in the other to come.

CHAP. 3.
It is impossible that any thing, besides God alone, should satisfy the soul
of man.
WHen I awake, I shall be satisfied with thine image, said the Prophet to God
Psa. 17. 15
.

Whatsoever is in the world it is very little in respect of our soul.

The vessel which is made to receive God himself, can never be filled with
any thing until God do fill it. And the cause why they cannot so do, is
because they are vain.

The things of this world, do so occupy the place wherein they be, that for
all their being there, the place yet remains empty still; and gold does no
more satisfy the soul, than the wind does suffice the body: So smally can
these earthly things sati^fie the mind, the desire thereof being infinite.

Would thou not judge him a very fool that would presume to fly up into
the skies without wings? As impossible is it for thy soul to be satiate with
these eathly things.

Temporal goods, they are but as meats to inflame thy desire. As it were
folly to heap wood more and more for the quenching of a fire: so as great
folly should it be to go about with the dry wood of worldly things to quench
the fire of our desires The reason is, Nothing in this world has any
resemblance with the soul of man.

God has made us for himself, and therefore our heart abides unquiet until
it rest in him that made it.

All things be ordained of God according to the proportion of the nature it
has. The horse is not satiate with flesh, nor the Lion with grass, because it
agrees not with their nature. Our soul therefore, being a spirit, how can it
be satisfied with corporal things? What fellowshipe has gold with the
spirit? Nothing of this world is any whit conformable to the soul of man.

Before the Chameleon the world sets wind, wherewith the proud person
delights: yet is the soul no Chameleon. Unto some it gives iron to live
with all, as unto the Oyteriges, and also unto covetous men: unto others clay,
as unto carnal beasts: unto others venime as unto the envious: but because
all these be earthly, and have none agreement with the soul, it cannot be
sustained with earthly things? only grace, and the gifts of the holy Ghost,
as spiritual things, do minister sustenance unto the soul: And although
pride, envy, and the like are things spiritual, yet they yield not food to
our spirit, as neither do many corporal things satiate the body. For God
alone is the nourishment of our soul, and nothing beesides, because it has no
proportion at all with our soul.

If thou should demand why bread does nourish our bodies, and not poys^n;
what reason else may be given, but that bread agrees well with the nature of
man, and poison does not? Even so, because God alone agrees with the nature of
our soul; he alone can satisfy our desire. And his filling neither
quenches, nor hinders our desire.

This spiritual food has also this advantage, which our bodily nourishment
has not for that our bodily sustenance engenders* still a satiety and
loathing in them that do take of it, which the meat of the soul does not,
but the more it is eaten the more it is desired.

Covet thou in the world neither to be great, for that is a vexation of the
spirit, nor to be rich, and renowned for that is a burden and an intolerable
care.

Turn therefore unto the Lord thy God, who is thy food, and the sustenance of
thy soul, to thine exceeding comfort.

CHAP, 4.
There is no tranquillity of mind but in God alone.
Return unto they rest, O my soul, says the Psalmist psalm. 116. 7.
.

The sick man though he change his beds never so often, yet shall he never
find ease, until his pain be taken away, wherewith he was so troubled.
Thou do carry about with thee the sickness of worldly love, but until thou
cast the same clean away from thee, look never to find any case in the
delicate beds of honors, riches, or delights.

Love God only, and above all, and thou shall have rest; turn thee unto him,
and he will give thee quietness.

Jonas seuering himself from God could never be quiet. and when he fled into
the ship, he fell upon a storm Ion 1. 4. etc
. For where God is not, there be the storms and tempsts. But when Jonas gave
himself in the belly of the whale to pray, he was delivered from the devouring
fish, and danger of the sea Ion. 2, 1. 10.
.

Seek not for any rest in the things of this life. There is no perfect joy in
this world, for battle there is without on every side, and within thee fears
and terror.

Thou bear about with thee a continua^l affliction. In vain is it therefore
to change thy place, except thou alter thy mind from vice unto virtue. For
thou must turn thee unto God, if ever thou would enjoy any quietness of
mind or body: This is a short and ready way for thee to come unto that
safety, and peace of mind, which thy soul desires.

Only things spiritual, and not temporal do bring the quietness that is of
continuance.

So long as Iaakob lived with Laban he was in continual trouble, and
affliction; but he was no sooner gone from him, but he was comforted even by
the Angels of God Genesis 31. 1
. So, if thou serve the world look for nothing but labor and troubles.

If we would be delivered from evil, then must we go out by the way we came
in; again, if we would attain unto any good and perfect thing we are to enter
the way we came out Every thing by nature desires to return unto that from
whence it had his beginning: for that is the perfection of the same.

The Bull when he is well baited, returns out the same way that he came into
the baiting place, and that by the ^ustinct of nature. So thou when thou art
well baited up and down here in the world, endeavor thou to go out again,
the same way thou cammest in. For it is the only remedy to atchieue
perfection, thither to return, from whence thou came. And because God is the
only fountain from which all good things do proceed, (for every good
giving, and every perfect gift is from above Iam. 1. 17.
* if thou desire quietness and joy indeed, it is needful that thou turn
the unto the Lord thy God. Nothing comes unto his perfection until it be
reduced unto the general original of the same. Seeing therefore God is our
author, and fountain of all the good whatsoever we have, no marvel though
the soul so vehemen^ly do desire God, to the end that of him she may attain
al manner of good things. For whatsoever good there is, either it is God
himself, or it comes from God.

The coming of a King into a barren country causes a plenty to be in that
land so long as he is there; but when he departs, it becomes barren
again: So when God is in our soul by grace, there is no want of any good
thing: but if God be absent from the same, the soul it must needs be without
fruit barren, and withered. Through God his presence thou shall have abundance
of all good things, with all manner of quietness, but if thou have not God
with thee, what peace or comfort can thou have?

As God sent among the Egyptians busy and unquiet flies to annoy them Exo. 8.
24.
, so he sends superfluous cares to disquiet the men of this world; whereas
Israel, which is the true people of God, shall have the sweet Sabbath of the
blessed ^est.

It is a great torment of mind to burn with the desire of earthly things:
but the greatest comfort that we can have, is, to fix the mind upon God,
and not upon the world.

He which has God, has a merry heart; but they which hunt after worldly
things, live in a perpetual affliction of the spirit.

CHAP. 5*
No trust is to be reposed in any thing of this world.
TRust thou in the Lord, and do good, says the ^salmist phil. 37. 3.
.

All creatures when thou have most need will fail thee; and therefore it is a
vain thing, to repose any confidence in the things of this world.

If thou trust in men, look often to be deceived; for their wont is after a
long and great service to make but a simple recompense.

Cursed be the man that trusts in man and makes flesh his arm, and
withdraws his heart from the Lord Ier. 17. 5.
.

Put not your trust in Princes, nor in the son of man, for there is none
help in them, says the Psalmist psalm. 1, 6 3.
. Haman trusted much in the favor of King Ahashuerosh, of which he was soon
deprived, and brought to a most infamous, and miserable end Ester 7. ^. etc.
.

To be in favor with great men of this world, it does us little good, and
surely it vanishes as nothing, if not before, yet at the point of death.

What stabilitie can thou promise thy self, I pray you in a broken staff of
reed? (Even such is man 2. Kin. 18. 21.
.

O Lord of hosts, blessed is the man that trusts in thee, says the Psalmist
psalm. 84. 12
.

Happy is he which loves God with his whole heart, and puts his trust in
him, the Lord will deliver that man from all trouble. But forasmuch as true
hope is founded upon a good conscience, the Psalmist does say, that is not
enough in God to trust, but besides a man must work that which good is,
according to that psalm. 41. 1*
, Blessed is he that judges wisely of the poor: again says the wise man
prou. 110. 28.
, The hope of the wicked shall perish, because it is not grounded (...) on a
good foundation. To trust in the Lord, as some say they do, and yet daily to
sin, what is it but rash, and indiscreet presumption?

^ut thy confidence in God, for if thou for thy part do that which thou
ought; doubt thou not, but God of his infinite goodness will give thee
glory, for he never for saketh them which trust in him.

It is a vain thing living ill, to presume upon ho^e to repent thee
hereafter, whereas thou art ignorant whether thou shall live any longer than
to day or no. Thou ought by and by to reform thy life* and to have good
hope that God will give thee of his glory, since it is most sure that he never
denied it to any which fulfill that which he commands.

Hope still in thy God, says the Scripture Hos. 12. 6.
so will he deliver thee from al thy troubles, For he is a shield to them
which put their trust in him psalm. 91. 4* 5. etc.
. David put his trust in the Lord, and he was helped psalm. 28. 7.
*

Blessed is the man which fears the Lord Psalm. 112* 1. 7.
, he will not be afraid of evil tydinges.

Happy is the man which falls not from his hope: happy is the man, whose
force, and strength; and refuge God is Ier. 16. 19 Isa. 25. 4.
, such an hope shall never be in vain in the days of trouble.

Consider the old generations of men, ye children, says Ecclesiasticus Eccl.
2. 1^.
* and mark them well, was there ever any confounded that put his trust in the
Lord or who has continued in his fear, and was forsaken* or whom did he ever
despise, that called upon him?

Is it not good reason that the sick man should put his trust in the Physician
that heals all diseases?

It is the Lord, says the Prophet psa. 10^, ^
, which heals all thine infirmities, The Lord is near to all that call upon
him, yea to all that call upon him in truth psa. 145. 18.
.

CHAP. 6.
God is to be loved above all.
THou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, Ma. 2^. ^7
with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, says the Lord.

If so thou would do, then is it not sufficient for thee to leave the evil
way, unless thou walk by the good way through the detestation of worldly
vanities.

Love God above all, Thou can not live without love; seeing therefore of
force thou must love, then lou^ that which of all is most sweet and pleasant.

Thou may not so love the world, that thou offend God. For what proportion
is there of God his excellency, unto the profit of the world? For as God
infinitely surpasteth his creatures, so the holy love of God without all
comparison is more excellent than all other love.

Who should reap the fruit, but he which planted the tree? The Apostle says
1. Cor. 9. 7
* W^o planteth a vineyard and eats not of the fruit thereof? Who^ should
thou love but him, that has given thee power to love? He only* is to be
loved, of whom thou receiuest ability to love. Fly therefore the corruption
of the world, and embrace the love of GOD with all thine heart. Run unto the
love of God, as unto a refuge and defense.

Nothing so soon will make thee to despise the vanity of earthly things, as
the love of God: but because thine heart was never touched thoroughly with the
fire of his love, thereof it grows that thou art so in love with the
corruptible goods of this wretched world.

Hence is it that thou art so troubled with cares and grief of mind; and
hence thou set not thine heart upon the love of God.

O that thou had but some small taste of Gods spirit to begin withal?

It is the nature and property of love to make his account of that which it
loves. That is well verified here in this worldly love, where we see many
times that for the attaining of that which they love, they make no reckoning
either of goods, honor, or name: they forget themselves through musing upon the
thing beloved. After their example therefore, thou which say thou love
God, give thy self wholly to love him, and casting aside all other matters of
the world, occupy thy self wholly and altogether in his service.

So did the holy Fathers in times passed show themselves, they were
transformed into a heavenly nature, they thought not of themselves, nor of the
world: for which cause they were judged of the world to be very fools, not to
have so much as common sense 1. Co. 4. 10* 1. Co. 3. 18.
.

Let it be thy chiefest exercise that God and thy soul may agree well
together, as though there were nothing besides under heaven to be done, and as
though thy self besides were nothing, so that thou might truly say, as the
Apostle did Gal. 2. 20
, I live, yet not I now, but Christ li^eth in me.

Be not so taken with the things of this world, as to make them the end of
thy love; since all that thou can love in this world is more perfectly a
great deal in God, than in the world.

If thou love any thing because it is beautiful, why love thou not God, the
fountain of all beauty? If goodness be the thing whereupon thine heart is
fixed, what is better than God? None is good, save one, even God Lu. 18. 19
.

God is purely good in his essence, and substance. The goodness of a creature
is so far good, as it receives some little drop from that infinite sea, I
mean, from the incomprehensible goodness of God the creator thereof.

If thou do so much love any creature, for some show of goodness that thou
perceiuest therein, although it have besides many imperfections why love thou
not God, who is essentially good of himself, and the perfection of all
goodness?

The less material substance there is in a body, the lighter it is, and so
much the more apt to ascend upward: so again, the more thou art laden with
the love of earthly things, the more hardly shall thou ascend in heart unto God.

The fewer thine inordinate passions be, the greater is thy love. And if thou
love God perfectly, thou will make none account of earthly things.

CHAP. 7.
We are necessarily to love our neighbor.
THou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, says God Mat. 22. 39.
.

The honest love of thy neighbor is so linked to the love of God, that as thou
art commanded to love, so art thou enioined also to love thy neighbor. They
both proceed out of one and the same root, and be inseperable.

The Apostle says Romans 13. ^
, He that loves another, has fulfilled the law. Thou can not separate thy
self from thy neighbor, unless thou separate thy self from God.

All the lines that be made from the uttermost part of a circle unto the
Center, which is the middle point, do all meet together in the Center* and
the further any of those lines is drawn from the Center, the further is it
divided from the other lines; and the further one line is drawn from an other,
the further does it go from the Center it self* Thou can not by any means
divide thy self from thy neighbor, but withal thou do divide thy self
from God; thou art so made that of necessity thou must mourn when thy
neighbor mourns, and take a part of his troubles upon thy self by a
Christian compassion.

Job he neither tare his clothes, nor complained grievously for the loss of
his goods, but for the death of his children Job. ^. 20.
. But for the most part many they are more grieved at the loss of temporal
riches, than at the hurt of their neighbors.

Let it not grieve thee to forgo these corruptible things, which God does
suffer to be taken from thee, for the good of thy soul; but let thy neighbors
harms pearce thine heart, and let his hurt be thine own.

After God had created al things, I mean the trees, plants, beasts, and such
like, which were to multiply and increase every one after his kind, he created
man male and female Genesis 1. 27. 28.
, of whom all men that were to live in the world, should descend, that they
seeing themselves to proceed from one root, should by so much love one
another the more.

Think it not an hard commandment to love thy neighbor, though he have
offended thee: but acknowledge that much harder it had been, if God had
commanded thee to hate thine enemy. For to love, it agrees with the nature of
us all, but to hate, it is contrary to man's natures now God has willed those
things, whereunto naturally we are inclined, and as much against the nature of
man it is to hate, as it is against the nature of water to ascend upward*

If it seem an hard thing for thee to love thy neighbor, it will be much more
hard in hell fire to burn.

Choose therefore one of the twain, I say not if thou hate, but if thou love
not thy neighbor, look out of question to burn in hell. And worthy is he
the curse of God, which had rather to burn in the bottomless pit, than to
love his neighbor, and so have the favor of the Lord.

Love thy neighbor, yea though he be thine enemy Ma 4. 4. 45. etc.
, so shall thou be the child of God: if the child, than also the heir, even
the heir of God, and an heir annexed with Christ Romans 8. 16. 17.
, of that celestial kingdom whih has none end.

CHAP. 8.
We must love our enemies.
Love your enemies: bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you,
and pray from them which hurt you, and persecute you, that ye may be the
children of your father that is in heaven, says the Lord Mat. 5. 44 45.
.

A Kings son will abide his schoolmaster both to teach, and reprehend him.
There is no better schoolmaster than an enemy, who has a singular ^are of
thy life, and can no sooner ^ee thee to slip, and take a fall, but forthwith
he rebukes thee for ^he same.

If thou would be wary in lea^ing of thy self, than pray God to ^end thee
an enemy, whom if thou ^^nce have* thou need none other ^aister, whose
pains thou may ^argely recompense.

Before thine enemy thou pon^erest advisedly what thou art to ^peake, for thou
know how thou shall no sooner tr^p in thy speech, but thou shall be taken:
but if thou have none en^my thou carest almost neither what thou say, nor
what thou do.

An enemy is a bridle as it were, to keep thee from sin; but a friend
covers, and concealeth thine offenses, By thy friend thou offendest God, and
through thy foe, thou do thy duty.

Thine enemy is to thee a clock, whereby thou may order thy steps aright.
More good, a great deal, thou reapest from thy ^oe, than from thy friend, and
therefore good cause have thou to honor him, by whose means thou prouest more
circumspect, wise, and good than otherwise thou would be.

If thou do set by and esteem a a little staff or wande, for that it
se^ueth thee to beat off the dust from garments; why will thou not esteem of
thine enemies, and set much by them, that drive away the dust of thy defects,
by sharp reprehending of thee?

O Ashur the rod of my wrath, and the staff in their hands is mine indignati^^
says the Lord by his Prophet Isaiah. Isa. 10, 5.
Cast not such a rod into the fire, neither make more account of riches, than
of thy soul.

When our friends do extol and magnify us, our enemies do humble and bring
us down, that we wax not proud.

If prosperity do blind us, our enemies by persecution will cause us to see;
now seeing the enemy does make us better, let us esteem of him greatly, as
reason does require.

Friends, many times will not say the truth, when enemies will tell all that
they know.

As much good as thine enemy does unto thee, so much harm does he unto
himself: for he kills his own soul, and wounds his conscience:
therefore seeing him in so evil a plight, that did thee so much good, thou
ought greatly to pity his estate.

The Psalmist does say psalm. 59. 26
, They persecute him, whom thou have smitten; and they add unto the sorrow of
them, whom thou have wounded* He adds sorrow unto sorrow which does
recompense one hurt with another; and he takes life from the man that is
dying, which hates his enemy.

If ye love them, which love you, what reward shall ye have? Do not the
Publicans even the same Mat. 5 46
? To love an enemy, is the very property of a true Christian, and Gospeller.

The malice of thine enemy is very poison: but yet of poison is the wholesome
triacle made, so may thou make of the malice of thine enemy a good medicine
for thy soul.

Give to thine enemies being hungry, food; being naked and needy clothes and
alms; and so shall thou make of this poison compounded with these good
receiptes a wholesome medicine against many noisome diseases.

CHAP. 9.
Self-love is the bane of many Christian virtues.
GEt thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy fathers house,
says the Lord unto the Patriarch Abraham Genesis 1 2* ^.
.

All earthly affections must be renounced, least thou begin to like more
thine own, than the things of Jesus Christ.

For the desire of things invisible and heavenly, renounce the love of visible
things. Pluck ill weedees by the roots, that they spring not again.

Self-love it peruerteth judgment, dimeth the light of reason: darkneth the
understanding; corrupts the will; and shutteh the door of salvation against
us: it knows not God, and forgets the neighbor; it banisheth virtues,
affects honor, and loves the world. He that so loves his life, shall loose
it Mat. 1039 John 12. 25
.

The root of all iniquity is selfeloue*

Esau He. 12: 617
, Saul 1 Sa^ ^5 24 26 etc.
, and ^ntiochus Match 9. 13
* they found no place to unfeigned repentance, though they sought the favor of
God with tears, the reason is, because they more esteemed their own loss,
than the offending of God.

Seek therefore GOD in all thy works, and put thy trust in God only.

Self-love is as the heart in the body, which rules and guides the flesh,
the fynewes, and the veins of man,

Why give thou thy self so to the immoderate desiring of honor, riches, and
delights, but because thou laborest of self-love.

To contemn a man's own self, is a grateful thing both to God and man.

He that loves himself more than God his maker, or Christ his Savior is like
a traitor that deserves to loose both life and goods.

If self love have the dominion over thy soul, thou do what thou will, but
not what thou should, and is for thy behoof; thou art blind, and unworthy
to have any credit given unto thy words.

Renounce thine own will. If that would beequiet, and keep her place thou
should be quiet, and not be so torment in mind. Follow not thine own
will, and there will be nothing to torment thee, but until thy will be
utterly consumed look to be tormented by the fire of Gods wrath.

Why halt ye between two opinions 1. K 18. 21
? you cannot love God, unless you forsake your self Mat. ^6. 24.
,

There be certain precious stones, Mar. 8. 34.
which if they touch some kind of metal, Luke. 9. 23.
do loose their virtue, and by some other again they increase the same. Love
is such a precious jewel; for being fastened upon thy self it loses his
virtue, but fixed upon God, it is most glorious, and of infinite virtue.

Because thou show thy self so familiar to thy self, thou love thy self
so much; but would thou be more familiar with God by faithful prayer and
meditation, thou would love God more, and thy self less than thou do a
great deal.

A man bread and brought up altogether in a simple cottage, is so blinded in
judgment, that he will praeferre his rude home before the most princely
palace in the world: so for that thou acquaintest not thy self, as thou
should, with the house of God, thou more esteemest a present trifle, than
the infinite treasures laid up in heaven for such as love God Cor. 2. 9.
.

If the Apostle did so love Christ that he could say, that nothing should
separate him from the Love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord To. 8. 39.
, marvel not that the same Apostle did say phil. 3. 20.
, Our conversation is in heaven.

Greatly familiar was the Apostle with God, and little with himself, and
therefore he loved God much, and himself but little.

Let thy mind run still upon God, evermore think upon him by some devout
prayer, or meditation, and this if thou do use from time to time, it is
impossible but thou should love God, seeing thou art come unto the knowledge
of him.

Two loves do build two Cities, the one is the love of God, which brings
the contempt of thy self; the other is the love of thy self, which causes
the contempt of God. Between both these, that is betwixt God and thy self
stands thy will, whereby the nearer thou art unto thy self, the farther thou
art from God, and the nearer unto God the farther thou art from thy self.

Had not these two pronownes Meum and Tuum, Mine and Thine, so much been used
in our mouths, so much discord, as there is, had never been in the world. But
because the most part do more love their own, than the public commodity,
there be so many defectes in every commonweal.

The Apostle says 2 Timothy 3^. 2
, In the last days shall come perilous times, For men shall be lovers of their
own selves, covetous boasters, proud, cursed speakers, disobedient to
parents, unthankful, unholy, etc. And of all these euiles here mentioned,
self love is set in the forefront as the cause, and original of them all.

Nothing so hurts a man, as the having of his own will. Take away this
foundation, and the walls of worldly vanities whereunto thou art given, will
fall down flat unto the ground.

CHAP. 10*
It is the part of the servants of God to deny themselves.
I^ any man will come after me, let him deny him self, and take up his cross
dately and follow me, says the Lord Lik. 9. 23
.

The way to come unto Christ is to conquer thine own will; to suffer
tribulation with patience, and not to seek thine own profit and commodity.

The true servant of God hun^eth not after his own commodity, but for the
glory and honor of God him self.

In all thy works study to please God, and from his hand thou shall receive
the greater blessing. Let him be the beginning and end of all thine actions,
least thou loose the fruit of thy labors.

Self love is a most deadly plague: He that seeks himself spoyleth
himself.

Good works done in the Lord they rejoice the conscience, enlighten the
understanding, and be recompensed with new blessings from God above.

Many do despise outward things, which they possess, and yet for all that,
attain not unto that perfection which the Gospel requires, which consists
in the denial of a man's own self, and of his will.

The servant of Jesus Christ, ought not only to make light account of temporal
goods, but also to contemn himself, least he be hindered in the way that he
walks.

Let him learn by the grace of the holy spirit, to overcome himself, that
has learned before to despise the things of the world.

This is the perfect denial, even for a man to deny himself from the bottom
of his heart, and not to seek consolation in any creature.

If thou seek any private, or temporal commodity, surely thou art not
thoroughly motified, neither shall receive any spiritual comfort from the Lord.

Many that have had some zeal, and joy of the spirit at the first, have
continued in that good course but a little while; they have begun with heat,
but they have gone forward but coldly.

They sought in their prayers their own consolation, which when they saw they
were deprived of, they gave their mind unto the world again, which they
renounced before; and the cause was, they subdued not their own affections as
they should, neither were truly mortified, because they forsook not
themselves.

Be it always in thy mind to serve God; and then though thou find no comfort
in thy self: yet think that thou art occupied in his service, and that it is
his will that thou should have no further comfort thereby, than he should
think it convenient.

If thou will profit in the service of God, learn to deny thy self even in
every thing. Many deny themselves in some, but not in all things. They are
obedient in all things which do like them; but in the things which are
contrary to their humors, they find themselves. But thou must in all things
be ready to yield unto Gods will, and utterly forsake thy self for his sake.

The careful Merchant sold all that he had to buy the pearl. Mat. 13. 46.


Ananias and his wife Sapphira were killed with present death, for that they
gave part of their money unto God, and reserved part for themselves. Act. 5.
1. 2. etc.


If thou will serve God, thou must as occasion is offered, forgo all, and
reserve nothing for thy self.

Through renouncing of thine own will, the will of God gets the dominion
over us, and so man's will is transformed into the will of God, when man for
Christ's sake is ready to endure all manner of adversity.

Had thou once gotten a full victory over thy self, in a small time thou
should greatly profit in the school of Christ.

Our Savior Christ he sought not his own glory, John ^. 50.
but thine, the Lord of heaven descended not into the earth for his own
profit, but for thy commodity, John 10, 11.
Why then seeking thy self do thou forget him, which for thy sake so forgot
himself, that he gave himself unto the death to save thee Romans 5, 8.
?

A good wife, and an honest is she, that will please none but her husband; and
happy is that soul which only seeks to please, and delight her spouse Jesus
Christ.

Blessed is that soul whose only desire is to have the favor of God, and
utterly contemns all other love, Christ is a good husband, and worthy solely,
and sincerely to be loved.

Therefore thou should forsake all, and deny thy self, to the end thou
may enjoy the sweet friendship of Jesus Christ.

CHAP. 11.
A good Christian will take it patiently, when he is despised.
LET us cast away every thing that pressed down and the sin that hangs so
fast on: let us run with patience the race that is set before us, looking unto
Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith who for the joy that was set before
him, endured the cross, and despised the shame, and is set at the right hand
of the throne of God, says the Apostle Heb. 12. 1
.

It is thy duty to be dead, and estranged from all the inordinate affection
of human praises, honors, and favor; and to desire of all men to be
contemned, and put to shame. Alas, few there be which seek to be adorned
with such virtues.

If any be found which hunt not after dignities; yet are there almost none
that love to be contemned, and put to rebuke. It thou desire these things with
all thine heart, God will grant them unto thee.

If God do not send thee adversity, it is not because it is not good for
thee, but because thou art so weak that thou art not fit for the same, being
yet smally mortified. For God is unto nothing more ready than to lay
afflictions and tribulations upon him, which is truly mortified in some good
measure, knowing that they that overcome shall be crowned with glory Revel. 2.
10, ^1. etc.
, whereof he would have his friends to be partakers.

All things which either thou would, or can desire of God, which belong
not unto the due mortification and despifing of thy self for Gods sake, have
somewhat within them sauouring of thy corrupt nature, and self love: and
although in part thou have put away from thee the love of thy self, yet
secretly returns it unto thee again, by seeking somewhat of thy self, and
thine own commodity, which thou were not aware of; and so many times when we
think that we are far from our selves we are not so.

Hence it is, that thou, which before thou had it, desiredst some great
adversity, but once falling into a little trouble, thou did ^ainte forth
with, because thoroughly thou had not contemned thy self; for self love
did still lurk in thy mind, and it was no sooner touched, but it rose again.
Though thou sleep now and then, yet art thou not altogether dead.

Happy is that man which is so dead to himself, that he desires to be
contemned of all men.

Our Lord gave us a most perfect example of mortification, when upon the
cross he said Matt. 2^. 46
, My God, my God why have thou forsaken me. So the servant of God, ought so to
content himself when he is forsaken, that yet he faint not therein, albeit
he be deprived of all sensible perceauing the comfort of the spirit for a
time, as our Savior was upon the cross.

It is not again the property of Gods children to place the last end of
their prayers in the sensible uttering of them by the mouth to be heard of men.
But seeing that an eye is always to be cast unto that which God would have us
to do, ascend once unto this perfection which consists in the essential
love of God: so that in all things thou may do his will through contempt, and
mortification of thy self, and that only for Gods sake, not for thine own
either glory, or commodity.

Happy is he, which is so mortified that he is ready to endure even
extreme (...) for the love of God, and (...) still his favor.

Happy is that man, which inflamed with the love of God, is content with all
his heart to be destitue of all sensible, so he may enjoy the essential love of
the holy Spirit.

Happy is he, which coueteth to imitate Christ Jesus in the cross, abandoning
all consolation of earthly and corporal things.

Happy is that soul that is so dead to it self, that it lives without these
strange affections, such a soul is pure without sin, quiet without
disturbance, free without molestation, deprived of worldly honor, but adorned
with virtues, clarified in understanding, lifted up in spirit, united unto
God, and blessed for evermore.

CHAP. 12.
That body shall be blessed, which is subdued of the soul.
PVt on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the
assaults of the devil, says S. P. u. Ephesians. 6. 11.
.

Thou can not live without warfare; for wheresoever thou art thou shall have
a battle, because in thy bosom thou bear him, that evermore will gain say
thee.

In one and the same man the Apostle sets down unto us two men so joined
together, and so compact that the one cannot be without the other 2. Co. 4. 16
, and yet are they so divided, that the life of the one, is the death of the
other. They be so linked together, that being two, they are yet but one, and
being one are nevertheless two.

Between these twain passes the whole course of the life. And therefore
sundry names and titles are given them by the Apostle, when he calls the one
Spirit Gal. 5, 16.
, the other flesh Gal. 5. 17. etc.
, the one the soul 1. pet. 2. 1^
, the other the body Rom 8. 13
, the one the law of the mind To. 7. 23.
, the other the law of the members Romans 7. 23
, the one the inner man 2. Cor. 4. 16
the other the outward man. Walk in the Spirit, says the Apostle Gal. 5. 16
, If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die, but if ye mortify the deeds of
the body, ye shall live Romans 8. 13
. The flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh Gal.
5. 13


A wonderful war is this questionless wherein peace is sought: and in
peace, war; in death, life; and in life, death; in bondage, liberty; and in
ouercomming a man's own self, and bringing under the inordinate passions of
the mind, the whole force of a Christian man is declared.

To bridle thy desires, is very fortitude of the mind: and contrariwise in
following them, the weakness of the heart is declared. More valiant is that man
which overcomes the passions of his mind, then he which subdueth his
outward enemies.

Would thou atchieue a great dominion? Then overcome thy self. He that
rules his own mind, is better then him that wins a city, says Solomon
Prou. 16, 23.
, There be many that sack cities, but few that conquer themselves.

He that is Lord over himself is a mighty Lord. If thou once subdue thy
self, thou shall easelie subdue all other things.

He is to be taken for a good and valiant soldier that can master him self.

And that is the true servant of Jesus Christ which brings the flesh in
subjection to the spirit, and the sensual part under the obedience of reason.

If thou be overcome, ascribe the same to thine own default. If thou pamper
thy body in ease, with dainty meats and drink, then shall thy soul be
vanquished of the body.

The Apostle says 1. Cor. 10. 13*
, God is faithful, which will not suffer you to be tempted above that you be
able, but will even give the issue with the tentation, that ye may be able to
bear it.

It is the manner of those which be judges in combats, to measure the weapons
of those that are to fight together in the listes. This does God, the most
righteous judge, for he suffers none of us to be tempted above that we are
able to endure.

When two in all things equal enter into the combat, needs must he
prevail which has another to assist him.

If thou cheerish thy body with ease', drink, good fare, and sleep, thy
body it will overcome, and thy soul of the body shall be subdued; but if
thou assist thy soul with watching and prayer, the flesh by the grace of God
shall easily be brought under, and the soul shall overcome.

It is better that the soul should overcome that soul and body may be saved,
than that the body should prevail, to the utter destruction both of body and
soul.

If thou love the flesh, make it obedient unto reason, and never pamper the
same too-much.

He that loves, hates, and he that hates, loves, Christ Jesus does say,
Ioh. 12. 25.
, He that loves his life, shall loose it and he that hates his life in this
world, shall keep it unto eternal life

Thus you see how much the victory which the soul atchieueth, is better than
the victory of the body, and what gain is gotten by bringing thine affections
under the yoke of reason.

If thou be wise, thou will help the soul to subdue the sensual part of man,
the conflict thereof is but short, the victory will be glorious, and the reward
most blessed.

Shun no labor, if thou look for a reward, which is not given but to him
that strives. Be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give thee a crown
of life says the Lord ^eue. 2. 10
.

CHAP. 13.
The knowledge of our selves brings us unto the knowledge of God.
THE invisible things of him, that is, his eternal power, and Godhead, are
seen by the creation of the world, says the Apostle romans ^1. 20
.

If any creature in the world does by the creation thereof declare unto us the
great wisdom and omnipotency of God, surely man does the same, which is
made according to the image, or likeness of God himself Ge. 1. 27
.

Many there be which know much and yet they know not themselves, they see
others but they pass by themselves, they seek God in outward neglecting
inward things, where chiefly he may be found.

The more thou know thy self, the more perfectly shall thou know God.

And although by the knowledge of the noble condition of the mind, the true
and perfect knowledge of Gods greatness is best seen and perceived yet to
abase thy pride withal, thou have always before thine eyes the misery of the
body, and the shortness of thy life, that thou may come by that way unto
some knowledge of God.

In knowing of thy self thou will humble thy self: and in humbling thy self
thou will fear God, and because the fear of God is the beginning of wisdom
Prou. 1. 7.
, thou art first to begin at the knowledge of thy self.

If thou have a desire to know who thou art, take a glass, and behold thy
self in it. The glass that a man may best behold himself in, is another
man. Now if another man which thou beholdest, is but earth, ashes, and a very
worm, surely even such art thou, how rich soever and of great estimation thou
seem to be in the world:

And that thou may not be deceived, behold not thy self in a glass that
is hollow, which makes a show of the thing represented therein, clean
contrary to that which it is indeed, but take unto thee a glass that is
plain, which sets out a man according as he is in truth. If thou behold
thy self in the inside of a silver spoone that is bright and clear, thou
shall see thy face with the wrong end turned upward, thy bearde above, and thy
forehead beneath.

So in man there be two glasses, and states, one is of life, the other of
death. Life is the hollow glass, which makes us to seem otherwise than we
be. It shows thee forth to be sound, lusty, strong, and long-liued, all
which is vanity, and lies. If thou behold therein fresh and lusty youth, do
not trust therein, for it will deceive thee. Favor is deceitful, and beauty
is vanity pro. 31. 30
.

This false life of ours it seems some great thing unto men, when it is
nothing so. But the state of death, or of a dead man is the plain and true
glass, which does manifest things even as they be without fraud and
deceit. Therefore if thou would see what thou art in deed, then look not
upon thy self alive, but upon another man that is dead. So thou shall perceive
that thou art earth, ashes, a very sink of all filthiness, a little set out
and beautified on the out side by a lively hew that life has lent thee, there
thou shall see the foundation of your stock, and the largeness of thy
dominion. That which thou now art, thine ancestors were, and as they are, such
shall thou be.

If thou look well into thy self, thou shall find great matter why to
contemn thy self. For what art thou, as touching the body, but a vessel of
corruption? And in respect of thy soul, setting the grace of God apart, what
art thou but an enemy unto righteousness, the child of wrath, a friend of
vanity, a worker of iniquity, a despiser of God, even a creature proane unto
all wickedness, unapt to do well? What art thou, but a miserable creature, in
thy counsels, blind, in thy ways, ignorant, in thy words, vain, in thy
deeds, faulty; in thy destres^ filthy; to conclud, in all things vile; great
only art thou in thine own opinion.

Therefore if thou seek to know thy self, it will cause thee neither to be
proud, nor ambitious, nor disdainefull; it will make thee to bear injuries
with a quiet mind, in as much as thou shall find thy self to be a miserable
sinner, and worthy of all me^ to be hated and contemned.

Know thy self, as admonished from heaven. What booteth it to know the seven
liberal sciences, and to be a great Doctor in all the arts, if thou art yet
ignorant of thy self? It is better to know thy self, than to have all the
Scripture at thy fingers end.

Consider who thou art, whence thou came, where thou art, and whether thou
art going. Thou art a mortal man, a little earth, a vessel of corruption,
full of misery, standing in need of many things; thou were conceived in
sin; thou came into the world with pain to thy mother, and grief to thy
self, environed thou remainest with all manner of dangers, and thou art
bounding toward the grave of putrefaction.

Job says Job. 30. 19.
, I am become like ashes and dust. Let the light of God teach thee who thou art.

Thou say, thou art rich and increased with goods, and have need of
nothing, and know not how thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and
blind, and naked Reu. 30. 17
.

CHAP. 14,
Miserable is the condition of man in this world.
MAN that is borne of a woman, is of short continuanc, and full of troble,
says Job Job. 14. 1.
.

What thing is so miserable as man? Must not the body which thou so make of,
die at the length, and rot in the grave? And what is more horrible than a dead
man?

How much so ever thou were made of being alive, none, no not thy very
friends will abide thee after thou art dead.

Is not the state wherein thou live a certain unhappy bondage? It is a
miserable thing to be borne a slave, to live a slave, and to die a slave.

Behold I was borne in iniquity, and in sin has my mother conceived me,
says David psa. 5^. 5
.

O miserable life, environed about with so many dangers and periles. For one
pleasure we receive a thousand sorrows, so that this life may justly be
termed a death, and not a life.

There is no creature more needy than a man; for he is driven to beg his
meat and raiment of the beasts; and earne his bread with the sweat of his
brows Genesis 3. 19
, al which for the most part the birds and the brute beasts have of
themselves, and have no need to beg, or to ask of any other,

Some living creatures have wings to fly withal; others have claws and teeth
both to defend themselves, and to hurt others: others are light of foot to
run from dangers: Al which, man has not, and those which he has, be not
in such measure in him as in them, so that he is fain to borrow help from
those base creatures. Whereby he may learn to bring down himself in the
eyes of God by humility, and to lay-away the pride of his mind.

Man has no peace in this world, for he can neither rest himself always,
nor always watch. When he seems best in health, then has he sundry
infirmities to disquiet him, as hunger, thirst, wearisomnesse, and diverse other
necessities, heat, cold, storms, tempests, lightninges, thunder, plagues,
poison, periles by sea, perils by land, griefs, and diverse infirmities, and
last of all death it self.

Eli, the priest of the Lord, when little he thought of death, he suddenly
fell from the seat backward, and brake his neck 1. Sa. 4. 18.
, This may teach thee that when thou sit, and think thy self most sure,
thou may take a fall and die.

The sleep which thou use for the great ease and benefit of the body, how
full is it of false and vain imaginations?

It is mere blindness and folly to love this world, so replenished with
miseries. wherein if any good thing be found, that good is mixed with
innumerable sorrows and molestations, which are to those that set their delight
in the world even the beginninges of the perpetual torments of the reprobate
in hell.

It is easier many times to be in torments, and pain, than to expect the
same. And because that every day thou look for the sentence of death to be
pronounced against thee; and know that the life which thou live, is
miserable, and not to be termed in deed a life, as neither death may
properly be called death, but a sleep Ge. 47 ^0
, the Lord would have this life to be full of all manner miseries, 1 Kin. 2.
10.
that disliking it, 1. K. 11. 43.
thou may covet and long after the life in heaven. Mat. 9. 2
Ioh. 11.


Think how this life was given thee of God, as a ship, to carry thee like a
traueler thorough the raging seas of this troublesome world, wherein thou were
to endure manifold dangers and perils: and that to the intent thou should
the more earnestly desire the other life, which is the sure harbarough and
haven of most blessed comfort.

If this life should have been all prosperous and pleasant, it so would have
drawn a man to the likeing thereof, that he would quite have for gotten the
other life, for the enioyning whereof he was created.

The manifold evils and miseries which continually thou suffer, they inuit
and call thee unto the desire of the celestial paradise. The troubles of this
life do make thee to go unto God many times by hearty prayer* and being thus
pressed with afflictions, a wonder it is that yet thou art no more willing to
leave this miserable state wherein thou art.

Cast not thine heart upon these transitory things. Here thou art subject to
continual debate and troubles, in ouercomming whereof thou shall get a Crown
of perpetual glory.

God, seeing that naturally thou art desirous of quietness has thought good,
that this life should be full of troubles, to the end thou should love and
long for that quietness which is eternal in the heavens.

CHAP. 15.
It is expedient that we know so much of God, as he has revealed of himself
in his word.
I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye sees thee,
Therefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes, says Job unto God
Job. 42. 5. 6
.

Seeing thou wast made to know God, open thine eyes, to the end thou may
know him.

Of the knowledge of God, comes the knowledge of thy self; and by the
knowledge of thy self, grows the knowledge of GOD. Therefore said Job, Mine
eye sees thee* There fore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes.

By thy knowing of God, thou art moved to reverence him. But if thou know him
not, thou art like unto him which passing nigh a King, because he knows him
not, is so far from giving him due honor belonging unto his Majesty, that
he iustleth and pusheth him. So deals the poor swain of the country with
his Lord now and then.

Marvel not that the holy men of God so, humbled themselves when they came
before the presence of God 1 K. 8. 22.
, for they knew him to be the King of heaven, and therefore they fell flat
prostrate on the ground before his glorious Majesty Ezra. 9. 5.
.

Pray earnestly unto God from the bottom of thine heart that thou may
thoroughly know thy self. 1. Es. 8. 90.


Do not deceive thy self by thinking thou do fully know God, when thou do
but know only that there is a God, and beleeuest that which the holy Church
believes. A rude fellow that keeps sheep may have a certain confuse
knoweledge of a king: But if it be told him that he is a great Lord, and for
power able both to reward abundantly such as des^rue well at his hands, and
to punish the wicked, he then will have him in more reverence than before. So
if only thou believe there is a God, and art not instructed how severe he is
in punishing malefactors, thou will not fear him; and again if thou be
ignorant of his mercy, thou will not trust in him. Learn what great riches
he has laid up in store for such as love him.

Consider further his exceeding goodness, who without any merit or desert of
thine, and having no need at all of thee, came of his own free will to seek
thee, and with his infinite grief and pains to redeem thee 1. Pet. 18. 19.
, that thou should love him for so doing.

Behold his power, his wisdom, and his infinite greatness, and yield that
reverence and honor which is due to his glorious majesty.

If thou beleeuest that God is good, seek with all diligence for some portion
of that perfection which thou know to be in him.

God would not have any other beasts offered unto him in sacrifice, than such
as did chewe the cudde Leuit. 11. ^.
.

Whereby was meant, as I think, Deuteronomy. 1^* 6.
such men as did meditate in their minds, and diligently call into their
remembrance the wonderful works of God, that thereby they might come unto
some knowledge of the Creator which is invisible.

Labor even to the uttermost of thy power to know thy maker, preserver, and
redeemer.

Will thou know who God is? Behold who thou art to him, and what he is to thee.

If thou would know him, then must thou take away the earth which the love
of this world has set before the eyes of thine understanding, whereby the
sight is dimmed.

Before God would manifest himself unto Moses, he gave him commandment first
to put of his shoos Exodus 2. 5
Surely God will never make himself manifest unto thee, unless first thou
throw away all naughty desires of the world.

If thou will ascend into the profound knowledge, and contemplation of Gods
matters, then must thou abandon all worldly affections or cares of this world
from thine heart.

CHAP. 16,
It is the duty of a Christian to meditate upon his God.
WHile I was musing, the fire kindled, says the royal Prophet Psalm. 39. 3.
.

For to kindle the fire of Gods love in thy will, meditation and contemplation
are necessary: between which twain there is little difference, but that
meditation agr^eth to those, which with difficulty and pain do think upon
heavenly matters: and contemplation to them which be exercised in the matters
of the Spirit. But neither in the one, nor in the other consists our
perfection, but in the love of God only.

Contemplation is the work of the understanding, and the way or mean unto
perfection: But perfection is in lifting up the will unto God, through that
heavenly union, and sovereign love which is the chiefest.

There is small pleasure in contemplating, but in loving there is a great joy.
The understanding does not give sustenance unto our souls, but only prepares
the meat that our soul is fed withal. There is no pleasant taste in preparing
that which must be eaten, but in eating that which is prepared.

And for so much as the object of our will, or that thing which our will
tends unto, is either good, or seems to be good, so that nothing can be
loved, but that which is good, or else taken for good, under the coulor of some
thing that is good; and the understanding conceaueth a bottomless depth of
goodness in the Lord, very cold should the will be, if, like another Phoenix,
it consumed not it self even with the fire of that heavenly love, beholding
by contemplation the glorious beams of the Sun of righteousness.

Shake thy wings like the Phoenix, and lift up thine heart in meditation, and
surely thou shall perceive thy self to be converted into dust and ashes as it
were, while thou confessest thy loathsome baseness before the infinite and
incomprehensible goodness of the Lord.

If thou will enjoy the sweetness of godly prayer, and be refeshed therein by
heavenly contemplation, thou must lift up the force of thy will unto God.

Some are exercised only in the intellectual part, and not in the affectuall
part of the will, whose end is not to be enflamed with the love of God, but
only to attain some curious speculation in hie matters; hence are they still
musing how our Savior Christ was borne, how he lived, how he suffered, and
rose again from the dead. But these be far from true contemplation in
deed, if they fix their felicity in the knowledge, and pure speculation of
such mysteries of God: for they are to ascend unto the fiery sea of Gods love
to manwarde, to whom by a reciprocal love of their own; they should be united
and incorporate, so as all the imperfection of thine own mortification may be
made perfect and pure through him and his love.

If thou have gotten any knowledge of God, thou must not stay there, but thou
art withal to proceed unto the love of God.

They which truly think of these things, they may well be called and counted
the friends of God: such were the blessed Apostles unto whom the Lord says
John. 15. 15.
: Hence forth, call I you not servants, for the servant knows not what his
master, does; but I have called you friends: for all things that I have heard
of my Father, have I made known unto you. But they which neither think hereof,
nor give themselves unto the works of piety, may well be called not the
servants of God, but the bondslaues of Satan.

True contemplation is the beginning of glory. Through it a man comes to the
knowledge both of God, and himself; and that being attained, he falls out
of love with this world, and thereby God blesses him with new strength to
serve him withal.

CHAP. 17.
He that will live with Christ, must first die to the world:
FOr thy sake are we slain continually, says the Psalmist Psalm. 44. 22.
.

Happy is that soul to which Christ both in life, and in death is advantage
phil. 1. 21.
.

So long as thou live in thy flesh, thou must die to the world, that after
thy death thou may live for ever with Christ.

Thou shall be quiet within, if thou use not to gad much abroad, but to keep
thy self at home.

He that fervently seeks after outward things, must needs wax cold in the
matters of God.

If thy disordinate appetites, and desires of the world be not dead in thee,
look never to obtain the true comfort of the spirit.

Christ he died for all, that they which live, should not hence forth live unto
themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again 2. Cor. 5. 15.
.

I live, yet, not I now, but Christ lives in me, says the Apostle Gal. 2. 20
.

That Christ may come into thy soul, it is needful that first thou die unto
sin; and that the inward man may live, the outward man must be mortified.

Ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God, says the Apostle Col.
3. 3.
.

Thou die when thou ceasest to be such as thou were before in wickedness.

If we live in the spirit, says the Apostle Gal. 5. 25.
let us walk in the Spirit. For if ye true after the flesh, ye shall die; but
if ye mortify the deeds of the body by the Spirit, ye shall live Romans 8. 13.
.

Saul he spared Agag and put him into prison, being commanded from God himself
to destroy all the Amalikites, and to have no compassion upon any of them 1.
Sam. 15* 3. 9.
. So many do enclose, and shut up their wicked passions for a while, but they
kill them not presently, as God would have them to do. For it is not enough
for thee to imprison thine affections, that they burst not forth, but thou must
besides kill them, so that all inordinate concupiscence, and desire of the
world have no life at all in thee.

There be diverse and sundry persons which like the trees in winter, seem as
it were dead unto the world, but they are no sooner ill entreated, but they
cannot only murmur, but rail too. For the roots being left alive, they
begin to spring again as soon as the tentation of summer comes upon them.

Because thou have let go out of thine hands a man whom I appointed to die,
thy life shall go for his life, says the Prophet unto Ahab 1. Kin. 20 42.
. The life which thou give unto thy fleshly part, which God will have
killed, it shall be recompensed by the death of thy soul.

Consider advisedly who it is that lives within thee. If the flesh do live,
than is the spirit dead.

Thou shall never give thy self unto devout prayer and meditation, unless
first thou be mortified in mind: yea it is necessary that all thy spiritual
exercises begin at mortification.

Many will fly without wings. They profit smallie which are not mortified.

Of this be thou sure, thou shall never see God, unless thine affections are
so ravished with the love of God, that thou art thoroughly minded in regard
thereof to despise thy self.

The pure love of God makes thy mind simple, and so free from all worldly
desires, that it does without all pain and labor mount up unto the Lord.

If thou were dead unto the world, the world also would be dead unto thee
again, as it was to the glorious Apostle S. Paul Gal. 6. 14.
.

Even as the sea retains in it those men that be living, and casts out to
the shore such as are dead: so the world it makes greatly of those which live
to the world, and suffers them to have no rest therein which are as dead
thereunto for Christ his sake.

CHAP. 18.
By abstinence the flesh m^ be brought in subjection to the spirit.
IF ye live after the flesh, ye shall die, but if ye mortify the deeds of
the body by the Spirit, ye shall live, says the Apostle Romans 1* 13.
.

Thou shall never please the Spirit, except thou subdue thy body by
abstinence, and true repentance for thy sins.

If thou burden thy body with much meat, thou shall depresse thy soul
through the weight of sin.

The devil by offering the forbidden fruit to our first parents overcame
them, and brought them, and us by them into the displeasure of God Genesis 3. 1.
2. and.
. The first tentaion wherewith Job was tried arose from the rio^ing and
bellie-cheere of his sons and daughters Job. 1. 13. etc.
.

S. Paul, notwithstanding he knew himself to be an elect vessel of the Lord:
yet he bear down his body 1. Cor. 9* 27.
; and we on the other side knowing our selves most heinous sinners in respect
of him, we live and fare deliciouslie without scruple of conscience. Take
heed to your selves, least at any time your hearts be oppressed with
surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of t^t^ life, says our Savior Luke.
21* 34
*

Daniel to be the better prepared to receive the heavenly consolations, he
was in heaviness for three weeks of days, and ate no pleasant bread, neither
came there any flesh, or wine into his mouth, till three weeks of days were
fulfilled Dan. 10. 2. 3. 4. etc.
; and immediately thereupon he saw most heavenly visions and revelations from
God.

If thou will overcome thine enemy, bereave him of his weapons.

The armor, that Satan takes to foil thee with all, is thine own flesh. He
that gives himself to bodily plesures, shall fall into the snares of the
devil. Labor to destroy the idol of the flesh by abstinence, watching, and
prayer, so shall thou carry away from Satan a most glorious victory. Nothing
makes the Devil more bold to invade, as thy delicious pampering of thy flesh.

He that thinks he can live chaste faring daintelie and deliciouslie,
deceaueth himself, and is a fool. Take away delicate fare, as wood* and thou
shall quench the fire of sensual desire.

After that Lot had out of measure quaffed up wine, and was drunk, he
committed incest with his own daughters Genesis 19. 33 34. etc
.

Though a man ascend unto the mount of meditation; and profess religion, yet
will he fall with Lot, unless he keep a sober diet, and abstain.

It is dangerous riding of a colt which neither is tamed, nor has a bridle.
Hold in the colt, the flesh, with the bridle of abstinence, least he throw
thee down to thine hurt: bind his mouth with bit and bridle, as the Prophet
says psalm. 32. 9.
.

Rush not violently into the waters of worldly delights, unless thou will be
drowned as Pharao with all his host, were Exodus 14. 28*
. They sunk like stones into the bottom, as thou shall likewise both in body
and soul, unless thou tame and restrain thy flesh with the bridle of
abstinence.

By abstinence much sin is avoided; unlawful pleasure banished; our
salvation furthered; grace confirmed; and chastity is retained.

It is a shameful thing for the master to be overcome of the servant.

As great shame is it for man, which by creation is made little lower than God
psalm. 8. 5.
, to fulfill the mind of so vile a slave, as the flesh is.

CHAP. 19.
The lover of God, loves little company.
I Will allure her and bring her into the wilderness, and speak friendly unto
her, says the Prophet Hos. 2. 14.
.

When God speaks unto our soul, he needs no witnesses.

When the pleasure of God was to bless Abraham, he willed him to get him out
of his own country, and from his kindred, and from his fathers house Genesis 12.
1.
. God called Moses out of the mount unto himself Exodus 19. 3. 12.
, and charged that none besides should go up to the mount, nor touch the
border of it As Hagar wandered up and down in the wilderness alone, the Angel
appeared unto her to her exceeding comfort Genesis 21. 17.
. Eliah also was far from the company of men, when the Angel said unto him,
Up and eat 1. K. 19. 5.
.

God when he sees thine heart to be solitary and alone, he then desires
to rest in the same; and seeing our soul withdrawn from the cares of this
world, he reuealeth many things thereunto, which he would not, if he saw it
occupied immediately with the affairs of this world.

God is a Spirit John 4. 24.
: and therefore cares not so much that the body, as the soul should be
solitary.

He may be said to be a sole man, whose mind is not fixed upon these worldly
things.

O that thou would leave all these dreams, and toies, and idleness, and
commend thine heart into the hands of Christ; thou should then have much
comfort of the spirit, which now thou go without.

If thou did know what loss thou receauest, while thou busiest thy self
in worldly affairs, thou would not think it such a pain to serve Christ,
as thou do*

The woman mentioned in the Gospel, which was diseased with an issue of blood,
came secretly behind our Savior, touched the hemme of his garment, and was
presently healed Matthew. 9 20. 22,
. Let every Christian soul that is diseased and weak, draw near secretly
unto Jesus Christ Mat. 6. 6.
, for in him it shall find perfect salvation, and true comfort of spirit.

Thou shall sooner be cured, if thou lift up secretly thine heart unto
almighty God in thy chamber, than if all the day long thou should walk
up and down in the market steedes, or palaces of earthly Princes.

No tongue is able to express the sweetness of that prayer which is private,
if it be unfeigned.

Think nor thy self then to be alone, for, as said Flisha, 1. K. 6. 16.
They that be with us, are more than they that be with them.

Thou have never more company, than when thou art most solitary. Sweet is the
fellowship of Jesus Christ, and the comfortable society of the blessed Angels.

But when thou praiest, enter into thy chamber and when thou have shut thy
door, pray to thy Father which is in secret, says the Lord Mat. 6. 6.
.

If thou did savor the things of the Spirit, thou would not deem
solitariness unnecessary for prayer.

It is the nature of them that love to covet, to be solitary and alone

Have you not read that it was the wont of our Savior Christ to pray alone
upon the mount of Olives Luke 2. 239
?

When our first parents were alone in paradise, they were gratfull to God, and
to his holy Angels, and dreadful to Satan: but they had no sooner acquainted
themselves with strange company, but their eyes were opened; their bodies
naked; and they lost the favor of God to their extreme affliction Ge. 3. 1. 2
etc.
*

To be short therefore thou shall forgo thy Lord and maker, unless thou
carefully do avoid the company, I say not of men, but of ungodly and profane
persons. Make not so small account therefore of God, that for the company of
thy pot companions here, thou will loose the company of thy God in the world to
come.

CHAP, 20,
The more wise and godly a man is, the more silent he is, and of the fewer
words,
IN silence, and in confidence shall be your strength says Isaiah Is. 30. 15.
.

Unless thou avoid unnecessary company, and love silence, thou shall never
be perfectly religious.

S. James does say Iam. 1 26.
, If any man among you seems religious, and refraineth not his tongue, but
deceives his own heart, this man's religion is vain.

He gives a great argument of wisdom, which is sparing of his speech.

Whatsoever thou have won by prayer, thou will loose by prating. Silence is a
good keeper of men in devotion.

Marvel not that thou art cold and weak in prayer, if thou spend thy time
in superfluous and idle speech. Learn to hold thy peace, if thou will profit.
For why has God given thee but one tongue, and two hands, but because thou
should speak little and do much?

God has appointed two hatches to thy tongue, one of them is of flesh, as the
lips; the other of bones, as thy teeth: and this is to the end that being so
kept in it should never speak superfluously, but only when necessity
enforces, and ministers just occasion.

When thou bablest, or pratest, what art thou but as it were, a city without a
wall; a house without a door; a vessel without a cover; or an horse without a
bridle?

What good thing can thou keep, if thy tongue do run before thy wit? If it
be lavish of speech, it will open an entrance for the devils into thee, which
will carry that away, which thou have gotten before.

Death and life are in the power of the tongue Pro. 18. 21
.

A goodly ornament of all virtues is silence.

As the vessel that is covered, will sooner be hot, and cause the liquour
that is in it the looner to boil, than that which is uncovered, by reason of
keeping in the vapors: so if thou keep thy mouth shut up close by silence,
thou shall the sooner wax warm and zealous in the service of God.

Unless thou have learned to hold thy peace, thou will never learn to speak
advisedly.

The Scripture speaking of the godly man does say Lam. 3. 28
, He sits alone, and keeps silence. He that keeps silence, will the more
easily lift-vp his heart unto the Lord.

S. James says Iam. 1. 19.
: Let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak, and slow to wrath.

Easily they fall from the rule of Godliness, which unadvisedly do breake-out
into much babbling.

Even as when you shut a conduct mouth, where water passes, the water will
straight-wayes mount up on hie: so while you keep close the lipes with
silence, the spirit mounteth zelously unto the sight of God, and the soul
ascends on hie, and tastes the more sweetly the comfortes of the spirit, by
zealous and earnest prayer, But if thou babble with thy tongue, thou hindrest
thy devotion; and openest a door to thy watchful enemy, at what time soever
thou speak idle words,

The city of our soul must needs suffer many a sore assault, when it is
without the walls of silence to keep of strokes*

It is written of Nebuchad-nezzer that he brake down the walls of Jerusalem,
robbed the temple, and carried the Jews into captivity 2. K. 25. 45 and 1.
, Surely the like would Satan do by thee, as often as he seeks to make the
break thy silence, that so he may rob thee, and make spoil of the temple
of thy conscience, and bring thy soul prisoner into the Babylon of hell it
self,

Set therefore a good watch about these, least thou be robed and spoiled of
thine enemies.

HHAP 21,
The servant of God must avoid not only ill, but also idle talk.
But I say unto you, says our Savior Christ Mat. 1226
, that of every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account
thereof at the day of judgment

Our heart is like unto wax, that with cold grows to be hard; and by heat
waxes soft, and tender again, and being once soft it receives the print
even of a King or any other great man. Thou must stop thine ears from vain
and idle talk, for they cool and harden thine heart; If thou keep not thy
self from either using or hearing the same, little shall thou profit in the
service of God.

Holy and spiritual comunication it does infla^e the heart with heavenly and
good motions. On the day of our Sauiors resurrection the two disciples that
went traueling by the way toward Emmaus Luke 24. 13. 14. etc.
, talking with our Savior Christ had their hearts inflamed within them, as
they did after say between themselves, Did not our hearts burn within us,
while he talkedwith us by thy way, and when he opened to us the Scripturs?

Thine heart will be well disposed to receive the impression of the eternal
King, 32.
if thou warm and mollify the same with the heat of Gods word.

With great diligence and care should the seruante of God avoid idle words,
and to reprehend others that use them.

If thou bridle not thy tongue, in vain do thou labor and take pains to
profit in the service of God.

The Apostle says 2. Tim. 2. 24.
, the servant of God must not strive, nor be troblesome one to another by
contentions, and clamorous speech*

Las^iuious and wanton words are many times odious and oftensiue even to those
which make no profession of religion: how much then should they be abhorred of
Christians indeed? Be circumspect therefore in thy words, and let thy speech
be such as well may beseem the servant of Jesus Christ.

Of evil words much evil does arise. The Apostle says 1. Cor. 15, 3
, Evil speakinges corrupt good manners, For ^ll words we go unto ill deeds,
As the ship saileth, according as the wind does blows so our soul sailing
forward with the prosperous wind of good speech, it shall joyfully attain
unto the haven of rest. As on the other side, if dissolute and wicked words
be once blown into the sails of thine ears, they will carry thy soul with
a contrary wind into the large sea of infinite confusion.

The wise man does say Eccles. 9 17.
, Let thy talk he with the wise, and all thy communication in the law of the
most high,

Good words do inflame the heart, kindle thy will, edify thy neighbor, and
increase the love of God in thee, Idle and vain words on the other side thee
distract the spirit, quench the zeal, diminish devotion, and offend the
hearers.

Metal is known by his sound, If gold have not the sound it should, it is
reputed for brass, Words be as it were the sound of the soul. If the
words be clamarous, vain, and idle, they are but copper and not gold: but if
they be grave and good, then do they show the soul to be as perfect gold.

An empty vessel makes a loud sound, so he that is most void of goodness
is vainest in his speech. Bet if thou be grave and sober in thy words, every
man will take thee for a staid and stable man.

It is written of Judas Maccabeus, that he armed the Jews, not with the
assurance of shieldes and spears, but with wholesome words and exhortations
2, M^c. 15, 11.
. Godly words and wise, are a notable armor, but idle speech is very
hurthurtfull.

If the clock have his wheel distempered within, the bell without will sound
false; but if they go true within, then will the bell without strike truly,
and tell the right hour of the day* by thy disordinate words thy disordered
conscience does appear.

As Peter was warming himself in the hall of the hie Priest, they that stood
by, said again to Peter, Surely thou art one of them, for thou art of Galile,
and thy speech is like Mat. 14. 70.
. And elsewhere in the Gospel it is said, Of thine own mouth will I judge
thee, O evil servant Luke 19, 22.
.

By his speech we know of what country a stranger is. With what conscience
would thou be counted an honest man, when thy speech is vain, and
altogether dissolute?

By the breaking out and parting of the flesh in the mouth and tongue the ague
is discerned: so thine infirmity is known by the words which break out at
thy lips and mouth.

Before thou utter any word, use premeditation: because men regard not the
heart, but the speech. For by thy words thou shall be justified* and by thy
words thou shall be condemned Mat. 10. 37.
A word once uttered, can never be revoked again. And therefore before thou
speak ought, advise thy self, that alterward thou say not, I had not thought;
for so to say, is not the part of a wise man.

But before all things have always in remembrance that in the day of
judgment, thy Lord God will take a straight account of all thy words and
sayings.

CHAP. 22:
The servants of God must beware of murmuring, backbiting, and slandering.
NEither murmur ye, as some of them also murmured, and were destoied of the
destroyer, says the Apostle 1. Cor. 10, 10.
.

The tongue of the murmurer is worse than hell; for hell is hurtful only to
the wicked, but the tongue of the murmurer it afflicts as well the good as
the bad; yea commonly it is incensed more against the virtuous than against the
wicked.

He that snuffeth the candle with his bare fingers, though he defile his
fingers, yet he causes the candle to burn the brighter thereby; so he that
defameth and speaks il of good men, defiles his own soul and conscience,
but makes such as are defamed a great deal the more glorious. So the Pharisie
that murmured about that which the good woman did unto our Savior Christ Luke
7. 39.
, he was rebuked, but the woman was most highly magnified, and commended.

The murmurers do more hurt themselves, than other men; themselves they kill,
but other men they profit. Miriam and Aaron they murred against Moses Number. 12.
1. 2. etc.
, and was not Miriam therefore punished with a lothsom leprosse, and both
Miriam and Aaron rebuked of the Lord of host? and Moses glory the greater by
the same?

A good name is to be chosen above great riches; and a loving favor is about:
silver and above gold prou. 2^ 1.
Less does he offend that takes away our goods, than he which takes away our
good name.

By the hand the body is stricken, but by the tongue the soul is wounded; the
hands can hurt but such as are nigh, but the tongue spares no man be he nigh
or far off.

All other harms done unto man do easily receive satisfaction, but the hurt
received by the tongue can never, or very hardly be recompensed. That which is
taken away by theft from any man, may soon be restored him again, but not so
of a man's good name impaired by an evil tongue; for although that the defamer
do unsay that again which he did slanderously report before, yet is the
nature of man so much the more inclined to hear evil than good, that the
first evil conceived opinion, will not be so rooted out of the mind, but that
there will somewhat thereof remain behind still.

One of the plagues of Egypt was the plague of Frogs Exodus 8. 9.
, and one of the plagues of the world, is the plague of murmurers; they sit
like frogs all day in the mire and uncleanness of their own sins, and
never say word of any man's virtue, nor speak any whit at all of their
neighbors good deeds, but in the night when it waxes dark they make a loud
and an evil noise, and do publish (all that they can) their neighbors faltes
and defects.

The Psalmist does say Pal. 140. 3.
, They have sharpened their tongues like a serpent; adders poison is under
their lips. As the serpents do feed of earth, so the murmurers do feed of
the infamy of their neighbor.

The Prophet David moves this question psalm. 15. 1. 2. 3.
, Lord who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle, who shall rest in thine holy
mountain? Immediately he answers, He that walks uprightly, and works
righteousness, and speaks the truth in his heart. He that slaundereth not with
his tongue, nor does evil to his neighbor, nor receives a false report
against his neighbor.

God he made not thy tongue of bone, nor of any other hard substance, but of
tender flesh, which may put thee in mind that thy words should be gentle and
soft, and not rough nor sharp.

The murmurers were so hated of the Lord that he said Number. 14. 23.
, Certainly they shall not see the land whereof I swear unto their fathers, 30.
neither shall any that provoke me, see it, and ye shall not doubtless come
into the land, for the which I lifted up mine hand to make you dwell therein,
save Caleb the son of Iephunneh, and Joshua the son of Nun, And so of six
hundred thousand men of foot Exodus 12. 37.
, which came out of Egypt only two persons entered into the land of promise;
if not into the earthly, than how into the promised land of heaven?

CHAP. 23,
The servant of God must not curiously pry into the dealings of other men.
WE heard that there are some which walk among you inordinately, and work not
at all, but are busy bodies, says the Apostle 2. These. 3. 11.
.

If thou have any desire to profit in the service of God, take thou diligent
heed that thou make not too earnest inquiry after the doings of other men.
And if thou would lead a quiet life, be not too inquisitiue what other men
do.

He that medleth, and is busy in other men's matters, is evil thought of and
hated of all men for his labor, yea even of his very friends. Hence comes
murmuring, and hence springs pride thorough the contempt of others, and lack
of knowledge of our selves.

The river that ouerfloweth his accustomed bounds, it washes the banks that
it beats against, whereby the banks are made the more clean, and the water
that washes them becomes the fouler, and more filthy: even so it fares
with thee when thou go beyond the bounds of thy vocation: in meddling with
matters nothing appertaining to thee, thou defilest thine own conscience, and
give them occasion to purge themselves in as much as they grow more wary and
advised by thy words, and thou with a troubled stream of a polluted
conscience, runnest on still in thy furious course of ungodliness.

What moves thee to intermedle in the matters of other men? Art thou a judge,
or magistrate appointed by authority to see, and ouersee others? Thou must
give an account of thine own stewardship Luke. 19, 2.
, not of another man's.

There is no merchant that will leave his trade, if he peceaue but he be a
looser thereby; and thou can no way apply thy self to any trade, that thou
shall either gain less, or loose more, than by meddling with the lives and
dealings of other men, which be not of thy charge.

Have thou so little time to look into thy self, and so much to pry into
other men? Whereas thou should bestow little time in seeing into other men's
affairs, and much in examining thine own heart and conscience.

To look so curiously upon other men, it is questionless an argument of an
evil mind, and of a guilty conscience.

No man is more rigorous in fifting other men, than he that is most dissolute
himself. No man is so soon offended at the small offenses of others, as he
that has many and monstrous defaultes himself. And no man judges so
sinisterlie of his neighbor, as he which is most loose, and licentious
himself.

While the master is at home in his own house, all that be in the house do
their duties there; but when he is from home, they will do what they list,
and take their pleasure. So when reason keeps the house, and enters into
the conscience, then be all the cogitations, senses, and affections set in
good order; but if reason be from home, and wandereth abroad from house unto
house prying what others do, that while be all the thoughts of the mind
idly occupied, and no good is done at all.

Be thou none examiner of other men's lives, neither do as the poor needy
tailor does, that makes a garment for an other man, and goes himself naked.
If thy neighbor be naught, he, and not thou, shall bear his burden.

Thou shall find for thy self enough to do, if thou will enter into the
consideration of thine own ife.

Why, like Martha, art thou troubled about many things? One thing is necessary
Luke 10. 41. 4^
. even that thou deal with God, casting of al other things, if thou will live
in quiet*

It is a sign that thou love God but little, if thou look curiously into
the lives of other men.

If needs thou will be an examiner of thy neighbors dealing, go to then
seeing him in necessity take thou compassion upon his misery, yea help and
succor him in his need and to none other end bufie thy self about other men.

Love all men, and fly all unnecessary matters, so shall thou be loved both
of God, and men; and so shall thou lead a joyful and merry life in this world.

CHAP. 24.
One Christian must bear with the faults, and infirmities of another,
Bear ye one another burden, says the Apostle (a):

Suffer your neighbor, seeing he must bear with you, in many things.

Take not such offense at thy brethren, neither so easily do thou observe
their faults: Thou have enough to look into thy self, so that thou need
not to observe curiously what another does.

If all men be not of thy disposition, blame them not therefore, neither be
grieved. For though very perfect thou were, yet may others also be holy, so
well as thou, though in all things they be not like unto thee.

When you see imperfections in others, think that under those defaults there
be many virtues; and that more good a great deal they do, than you be ware of.

Thou should be so far from condemning thy neighbor, or having
indignation against him, that thou ought to confess none more weak and
wicked than thy self.

Interpret the works of thy neighbor in the better part, if thou can not
excuse the deed, yet excuse the intent, which may be good; or if the work be
ill, yet think it was done of ignorance, and not of wilfulness. And if thou
can no way excuse thy brother that has sinned, think that by some grievous
tentation or other he was ouer-taken, and that thou should be more wicked
thy self, if so great a tentation did assail thee. And lastly thank God,
that hitherto thou have not felt what it is to fall into such tentations, and
with tender compassio pray unto God for thy neighbor that has sinned.

The Apostle says 1. Cor. 10. 12.
, Let him that thinks he stands, take heed least he fall.

If through pride thou have judged rashly, God will suster thee to fall either
into the same sin which thou condemnest in thy brother, or into some other as
great, or greater, to bring down thy proud stomach withal.

S. Peter, when he thought himself of greater courage than the rest, was
forced to say unto our Savior Christ Luke. 5. 8.
, Lord, go from me, for I am a sinful man.

True holiness is never whithout compassion, though always without
indignation.

The just man has pity upon the sinner, knowing that himself may fall so
well as any other man.

If thou be learned, wise, prudent, and have more favor either with God or
man than others, be not proud thereof, neither despise thy neighbor, but
rather find fault with thy self, that being many ways more bound to serve
GOD, art yet so cold in religion; and think that if God had showen that
favor, and granted those benefits even to a thief, which he has given to
thee, he would have been so far from delighting in the every, that more a
great deal he would have promoted the glory of God than thou do.

If God has dealt so well with thee, why so wickedly do thou requite the
same? Continue I pray you, in the humble knowledge of thy self, that God may
power his graces more plentifully upon thee.

If thy brother offend, receive him again in love and mercy, according to
that of The Apostle Gal. 6. 1.
. Brethen, if if a man be fallen by occasion into any fault* ye which are
spiritual, restore such a one with the spirit of meekness, considering thy
self, least thou also be tempted. Consider thy self says S. Paul, and mark
thine own defectes, and be not proud, neither with indignation reprove thy
neighbor.

When thou correctest others, mark with what pity thou do the same. When
thou sinnest thy self, would thou that God forthwith should tumble thee
hedlong into hell? If then thou would that God mercifully should deal with
thee, pity thou in like sort thy neighbor, For he that with severity would
correct the sins of other men, he shall with severity be punished at the
hands of God himself.

Despise no man, though he be a sinner, for thou know no^ what his end
shall be; he that is bad to day, may be good to morrow.

Who ever would have thought that he should have come unto a good end, and
entered with Christ into the celestial paradise, which had spent his life in
the every and wickedness Luke. 23. 41. 42. etc.
? Have we not read of many great sinners, which afterward proved Saints? No
man therefore is utterly to be rejected, though an heinous sinner, inasmuch as
he may prove yet a good man before he die, ^or, the Lords hand is not
shortened, that it cannot save Isa. 59. 1.
.

Appoint no bounds unto the favor, nor limits unto the goodness of God. It
may be those which you see to offend to day, the Lord has predestinate, and
chosen for his very saints, though not called them as yet.

What shall become of men hereafter, thou wottest not: only this thou know
that thou art a sinner, and deseruest of all men to be contemned, and to burn
in the pit of hell fire.

If thy neighbor do sin, take thou heed, Ye are the body of Christ, and
members for your part, says the Apostle 1. Cor. 12. 27. 21. etc.
. It is conformable to the law of nature that one member should help another.

Despise not thine own flesh, but patiently bear the defectes of thy
brethren; take none offense, neither forsake the holy exercise of prayer and
contemplation, though thou be enforced to behold the faults of others which
thou would not.

It hurts the servant of GOD much, when he busieth himself about other men's
defaultes, and hinders his proceeding forward in godliness exceedingly.

Enter thou into the secret closet of thine own conscience, hear in mind
always how thou art a sinner; and live in great fear, in as much as thou
may greatly doubt, whether God be pleased with thee or no, or how long thou
shall continue in thy goodness, if thou have any.

CHAP. 25.
As wicked actions, so evil thoughts must be taken heed of.
WOE unto them, that imagine iniquity, and work wikednesse upon their beds,
says the Lord Mic. 2. 1.
.

Think not upon vanity in your hearts; for even of wicked thoughts thou
shall yield an account unto God.

What would men say, did they see your cogitations? Now at the day of judgment
things shall be lightened that are hid in darkness, and the very counsels of
the heart shall be made manifest 1. Cor. 4. 5.
; what a confusion of face shall then be do thou think?

If thou dwell any time in wicked cogitations, it cannot be but thou must fall
into the pit of destruction. For of the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaks Mat. 12. 34
, and the hand works.

As the corn is which thou put into the mill, such shall be the meal that
it yeedeth. Thine imagination it goes about always like the wheel of a mill,
if therein thou put good thoughts, it will afforde thee again the meal of
good work; but if thou put thereunto euel cogitations, look for nothing
but evil action from the same: O barley corn will never good meal proceed*
nor of idle thoughts good works.

He that continues long in a wicked cogitation can hardly avoid it but he
must consent thereunto.

Blessed shall he be that takes and dasheth thy children against the stones,
says the Psalmist psa. 137 9.
. When thy cogitations are yet but young, and of small grows, dash thou and
bruise them into pieces if they be wicked; but if they agree to the law of GOD,
suffer them to spring and prosper.

If thou may, destroy thine enemy while he is yet but young, least after he
be growen-vp, he do kill thee. A wise man will dread his enemy, though he be
but small.

The thought is like unto the root of a tree, which if it be green, it is
good, and will yield fruit; but if it be dry, it affords none at all. If
the though be good, it ministers good matter unto the will to take hold of
which being maintained and helped forward with understanding, does bring
forth good desires, from which good works does proceed.

Thou must not continue in evil thoughts; which the Lord cannot abide, as
appears by the prophet Jeremiah Iere. 4. 14.
, How long shall thy wicked thoughts remain within thee?

So long as the Gentiles were mixed, and remained with the people of Israel,
so long was God absent from them, and would not speak unto them at all. So God
he will forsake thee, if thou allow any place for evil cogitations in thine
heart. When a little spark of an evil thought does catch hold in thy mind thou
must not blow on it, to kindle it thereby, least afterward it grow into a fire
unquenchable to consume thee withal.

The silk worms be at the first but little grains like unto Mustardeseede,
but by the carrying of them about in women's bosoms, they do gather an heat,
whereby they come unto life, and so prove worms. Pewa^e that thou sow not the
seeds of sensuality in thy corrupted imagination, least by the heat of
natural concupiscence they prove worms to gnaw thy conscience into pieces.

Nourish not thine evil thoughts with the heat of worldly love, neither let
thy consent yield unto them, least thou be deceived, and perish with au evil
death.

CHAP. 26.
Idleness is the enemy unto godliness.
Idleness brings much evil, says the wise man Ec. 33. 26.
.

Above all things shun thou idleness as the mother of vices, and the
stepdame of virtue.

Idleness it is naught else but the death and grave of a living man.

If God, would not that man at the first, being created in original
righteousness, and endued with so many excellent graces, should lead his life
in idleness; think thou that thou art Idly to passe-away thy time, being
environed with so many enemies?

The Lord took Adam, and put him into the Garden of Eden that he might dress
it, and keep it Genesis 2, 15
. But Adam even in that estate of his was foiled through the malice and
subtlety of Satan, and think thou a weak and wicked man, living idly in
pleasures to be safe?

Man is borne unto travel, as the sparks fly upward, as Job says (c).

As God has given the bird two wings to fly with-all: so has ^^e given
thee two hands to work withal.

The birder will not shoot at a bird while she flies, but when she si^t^th
still. The Devil then seeks to oppugn and overthrow thee, not when thou art
occupied, but when thou art idle. Be always there fore doing of some good,
least when thou art idle thou be overtaken.

The vessel that is employed to some use, and full already, it can receive no
more into it: and the mind that is full fraught already with good things,
has no room in the same for idle and wicked cogitations. Unless it be empty
either wholly or in part the enemy of mankind Satan, can put nothing thereunto.

The running water it brings forth the best fishes; but the standing water as
marrishes, lakes, and such like, they engeder froggs, and serpents, and the
fish that is within them is unsavory and dangerous to be eaten. So long as
thou art idles what bring thou forth but idle, or dishonest, and evil
cogitations?

Shun thou idleness, as thou would the plague, unless thou would be
taken prisoner by a number of sins.

So long as David was kept occupied by the persecutions of Saul 1. Sa. 19. 12
etc.
, he committed none adultery; but when he sat qu^etly and idly in his
palace, he then defiled himself with the wife of another man 2 Sa. ^1^. 2. etc
.

Solomon also so long as he employed his time in building of the temple, he
abstained from many things but being idle from great affairs, he fell and
was foiled with outrageous wickedness 1 K. 11. 3. etc
.

The Children of Dan they destroyed the city Laish with fire, and smote the
people with the edge of the sword, while they sat quietly and gave themseleus
unto idleness Iud. ^8* 27 28.
.

Idleness, it is the nourisher of carnal vices. Shun thou idleness, and
thou shall easily destroy many a dishonest motion in the mind, in cutting of
all entrance of idle thoughts by godly business. When the righteous (Iaakob)
fled because of his brothers wrath, (wisdom) she led him the right way*
showed him the kingdom of God, gave him knowlede of holy things made him rich
in his labors, and made her pains profitable, said the wise man wi. 10. 10.
.

The way unto heaven is full of travail, and continual occupations of
holiness, and virtuous exercises.

If thou hadest in remembrance that one day thou shall give a straight account
of all the time thou now misspendest, thou would endeavor with might and
maine to loose no time at all.

The spirit of God shows it self to all men; where that is there if none
idleness.

Solomon praises a good (...) wife, among other things, because she eats
not the bread of idleness pro. 32. 27.
.

By idleness time is lost which is a most precious thing.

Gather the Manna in the week days, Ex. ^6. ^^
, that thou may rest when the Sabbath day does come; take pains and
travail while thou art in this life, that thou may rest and take thine ease
while the great day of of that eternal Saboath shall appear.

The slothful will not plowe, because of winter; wherefore shall he beg in
s^mmer but have nothing Pro. 20. 4.
. If thou pass thy time here in idleness, look to famine for food, and be
the meat of Satan in the infernal pit.

Idle persons that stood still and did not work be reproved in the Gospel
Mat. 20. 6
.

The land that lies idle, and is not tilled, and husbanded, it brings forth
thistles, and thorns, as by experience we do see. Beware of idleness, if
thou do not, thou will bring forth no goodness, but much evil to t^^
dishonor of God, and hurt of (...).

I will thou should affirm, that they which have believed in God might be
careful to show forth good works, says the Apostle Tit. 3. 8.
. And* I must work the works of him that sent me, while it is day, says our
Savior Christ Io. 9. 4,
,

Employ therefore the ground o^ thine heart unto holy and good exercises; that
in the end thou may reap the worthy fruit of thy labors.

CHAP. 27.
Good words are not only to be done, but they must also zealouslie be done.
BE not slothful to do service, (be) fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord,
says the Apostle Romans 12. 11.
.

God requires feruencie in good works.

More account does God make of one hour spent in godly zeal, than of a
thousand, coldly consumed in his service. For GOD regards more the zeal,
than the time in working, whereby thou may perceive that in a little time
thou may gain much. The thief which did hang on the cross by our Savior
Christ, if you consider time, served God but a moment as it were, and yet in
that short time he came into the everlasting favor of God Luke. 12, 40. 41. etc.
.

Do you not remember how upon the sudden the father received his prodigal son
into favor again upon his return Luke. 15. 20. 21. etc.
, made a great feast for him, and received him with all tokens of joy, insomuch
that the elder son was angry and said that although many years he had
served him yet did he never receive so much as a kid from him to make merry
with his friends. 29.


Which his anger and indignation was altogether indiscreet, because the
prodigal son after his fall returned most zealously unto his father,
requiring pardon for his offenses, whereas the elder son was lukewarm, and
not so zelously affectioned to his Fatherward.

There be some young men more zelously given in the service of God, than many
old men. And therefore the multitude of years is not so to be regarded, as
the zeal of the spirit.

He that is neither hot, nor cold in Gods matters, may easily be seduced to
offend the Lord. God says Revel. 3. 15. 16.
, I would thou werest cold or hot. Therefore, because thou art luke warm, and
neither cold nor hot, it will come to pass that I shall spewe thee out of my
mouth.

Of warmness there be two kinds, one which goes from heat unto cold, which
is naught; another which forsakes the cold, and draws toward the heat,
and this is good. He that has been naught, and begins now to draw near
unto God, is not to be rebuked but encouraged, and inflamed; but he that was
fervent, and is now neither hot nor cold, deserves reprehension, because he
declineth from the heat of the spirit unto the cold of wickedness. This is
that luke-warmnesse which the Lord so finds fault with, and upon just cause.
For it is unmeet that he should so coldly be served, who with such a
feruencie of love has given himself to serve thee.

Our Lord and Savior Christ at his last supper said unto Judas the traitor
John. 13. 27
, That thou do, do quickly, he burned so with desire to die for us
miserable sinners.

The glorious virgin Mary she went into the hill country with have ^ Luke. 1.
39 40.
to visit her cosen Elizabeth; in which act of hers, thou may perceive
the great zeal of her affection. Do we not read in like sort that the
Passover was commanded to be eaten In haste Exodus 1^. 1^.
? And did not the Patriarch Abraham run to meet strangers that he might
entertain and receive them into his inhabitation Genesis 18. 2.
?

If thou were to receive a piece of money about the evening, the day being
already well spente, and thou having some good way to go, would thou not
set the best leg foremost, and make speed that you be not disappointed?
Remember, my good friend, what a precious treasure thou art to receive, how far
it is to the place where thou must take it up, and how short the time is
limited for the attaining the same; make haste therefore; and loose no time,
least thou loose all, to thine utter undoing.

O that thou could with the Prophet say Fol. 119. 32.
I will run the way of thy commandments.

Thou ought to be as swift, and ready in the service of God, even as though
within one hour thou should leave this world.

A certain wise man thus spoke his mind of Physic, The life is short, the
art is long, and practice may deceive? this said he, not to terrify his
Disciples from giving their minds unto the study of Physic, but that with
more diligence they should study the same, inasmuch as our life is short, and
the science very hard.

Be thou therefore earnest in the service of God, because thy life is short,
and many things there be in the same which thou have to do.

CHAP. 28.
We must not rashly resolve our selves in any thing.
Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they are of God, says
S. John 1. John. 4. 1.
.

Before thou set upon a work, consider first the quality thereof, and thine
own strength, least like a blind man thou rush upon a thing, and take a fall.

Many begin the work even of God with great zeal, but with little
discretion, and so in the end loose all their labor; for when they should
should bring it unto perfection, they faint and so repent them of their pains
taken.

God will not that we should be rash in determining any matter, but to do
things with wisdom, and discretion, and that before we enterprise any work,
that we advisedly premeditate,

The virgin, mother of our Savior, being saluted of the Angel, before she
made any answer unto the Angel Gabriel, she thought what manner of salutation
that should be Luke 1. 29.
.

If thou do not consider with prudence before hand, thou must run blindly in
the dark; and so the more forciblie thou fallest, the greater shall be thy
bruise.

Think that by how much thy zeal is greater, by so much should thy wisdom
be greater than other men's.

It is written to the reproach of the Jews, that they are a nation void of
counsel, neither is there any understanding in them Deuteronomy. 32. 28.
.

David in giving too light credit unto the false reports of Z^ba 2. Sam. 16.
3. 4.
, gave an unjust sentence against Mephibosheth 2. Sam. 19. 29.
, which faults diverse Princes and Prelates do fall into by believing hand over
head that which is told them, whereby many a good man is undone before his
cause be heard, and many a poor man suffers great wrong, before he ever
know who were causers of the same.

The Prophet Nathan did not well in aduising David to build an house for the
Lord, before he had asked counsel touching the same of God 2. Sam. 7. 3.
.

Our Savior Christ being chosen to be a judge in the cause of the adultresse,
suspended his judgment for a while, writing first with his finger on the
ground John. 8. 6. 8.
.

Give not credit rashly to every man, for He that is hasty to give credit
is light minded Eccles. 19 4.
; and he that quickly believes, shall repent at leisure.

Be not moved with every wind, neither walk thou by every way,

The Apostle says Eccles. 5. 15.
, Take heed therefore that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as
wise, that ye fall not into danger.

Christ says unto his Disciples John. 13. 15.
, I have given you an example, that ye should do, even as I have done unto
you Again he says Matthew. 11. 29.
Learn of me, that I am meek and lowly in heart. Christ would that we should
follow him, not only in doing well, but also in the manner of well doing, for
otherwise a work morally good may be unprofitable for want of wisdom.

Greatly is Abraham commended in the Scripture for doing with wisdom that
which was enjoined him of the Lord. God commanded him to offer his only son
Izaacke whom he loved, for a burnt offering Genesis 22. 1.
: and he for the better performing of that which was commanded him took his
son early in the morning Genesis 22. 3.
, least his wise should have hindered his purpose; and left his servants a
far off with the ass Genesis 22. 4.
, that they might be no let unto him at all; insomuch that he had put that in
execution in deed Genesis 22. 10.
, had not an Angel of the Lord called unto him from heaven, and willed him to
spare the child Genesis 22. 11. 12.
.

In all the service that pertains unto GOD, he looks for a discreet, and
a wise handling of the same. And, as meat though it be otherwise never so
good, yet unless it be well seasoned, it is never grateful unto the taste: so
thy service it pleases not God, unless it be well seasoned with the salt of
a good conscience, and of discretion.

CHAP. 29.
He that fears God need fear nothing.
Serve the Lord in fear and rejoice in trembling, says the Prophet psalm. 2.
11
.

He that fears God, fears nothing besides; and he that fears not God, is
afraid of all things.

When Kaine had lost the sear of GOD, he was so faint-hearted, and weak that
he said Genesis 4. 14
; Whosoever finds me, shall slaie me Marvel not heereat at all, because he
that has lost the fear of God, which gave him strength, must needs become
weak hearted and fear every thing, but he that fears God is valiant, and
besides God fears nothing at all:

This fear of God emboldened Moses and Aaron to go unto King Pharaoh* and
boldly to say unto him as from the Lord Exodus 5. 1.
, Let my people go, that they may celebrate a feast unto me in the wilderness.

Eliah feared the Lord, and therefore he said unto King Ahab 1. K. 18. 18.
, I have not troubled Israel, but thou, and thy fathers house in that ye have
forsaken the commandments of the Lord, and thou have followed Baalim.

Elisha with great severity took up Iehoram the King of Israel 2. K. 3. 13.
, and with greater aucthority did S. Peter in the behalf of himself and of
his fellow Disciples make answer to the Rulers, and Elders and Scribes that
were gathered together in counsel at Jerusalem Act. 4. 10. 11. etc.
; and stoutly did the Apostles and Marters speak unto the great men of the
world Act. 4. 19 20.
.

If thou fear God, care not for man, Act. 5. 29.
Greater is he that is on thy side Romans 8. 31.
, than he that is against you. But because thou fear not God, thou art
afraid of man, and every small infirmity makes thee to tremble.

The King that is guarded with men of arms stands in no fear, but sleeps
securely; and other men also of meaner calling be without fear when they go
strongly armed in the company of valiant men. Then how should they be affraide
that have God for their salfe-gard?

The Lord is with me, therefore I will not fear what man can do unto me.
The Lord is with me among them that help me: therefore shall I see my desire
upon mine enemies, says the Psalmist Psalm. 118. 6. 7.
The Lord is my light, and my salvation, whom shall I fear? The Lord is the
strength of my life, of whom shall I be affraide psalm. 27. 1.
?

The wise man says prove. 28. 1.
, The wicked flee when none pur^^^th; but the righteous are bold as a Lion. ^s
the worldly men that do evil, do live full of fear and suspicion; so good
men which put their trust in God, they are stout like the Lions, so that they
fear not men.

He that fears God, is not afraid of man: and if thou fear God, many good
things shall thou be sure to have Tob. 4. 2.
. But if thou arm not thy self with his holy fear, thine house it cannot
long continue.

By the fear of God we contemn the goods of this world. The Marchau^nt
through the fear which he has of loosing his life, is content to throw his
riches into the sea. If thou dread God, thou will cheerfully for the saving of
eternal, for go thy temporal goods.

It is great folly to pass the time without the fear of God, especially
living among so many perils, as the Scripture speaks of.

CHAP. 30.
God is to be obeyed, and those whom he does send for Gods sake.
WHAT man is this, that both the winds and the sea obey him, said they of our
Savior Christ Matthew. 27.
,

See that thou obey him, whom the very insensible creatures do obey. It is a
wonder that man will not obey him, whom the winds and seas obey.

The greatest sign of a mortified man, is obedience; there-in stands the
contempt of a man's own self, when a man for Christ his sake denies his own
will.

Think it not much to be in subjection unto him that is thy governor, seeing
it is written of our Lord that he was subject unto his mother and Joseph Luke.
2. 51.
. If thou do consider how much more mighty Christ was, than they whom he
obeyed, thou will not think it a grievous burden to obey them that be meaner
than thy self.

Why should thou complain of thy subjection unto man, though some ways
thine inferior, for the Lords sake, seeing Christ God and man for thy sake
obeyed simple and sinful man?

Though it be grievous to obey thy superiors; yet the love of God will convert
all that sharpness into sweeetenesse,

If thou do but annoint the lock of thy door with oil when it opens not
kindly, it will open and shut to no pain of the opener: so if to thy
murmuring thou add the oil of the love of God, thou shall proceed in peace,
and in the quietness of the Spirit shall do those things, which thou art
enjoined.

Christ says unto his Disciples Luke. 10 16
,

He that hears you, hears me; and he that despises you, despises me:
and he that despises me, despises him that sent me.

The preacher of the word is in the place of God, and that which he
commands, God himself does command, when he commands nothing which is
not contrary to the laws of God. When thou do reverence him, thou do in
him honor God: and although in respect of his person he be not always good,
yet in respect of his office, he is holy.

David obeyed Saul, as his king, and governor 1. Sam. 24 5 6.
, though a wicked man, and rejected of God 1. Sam. 15. 23
, and because he touched the lap of his garment, and that but once, his heart
was touched for so doing of the Lord. How think we, shall they escape the
chastisement of the Lord that do rent all the garments of their princes and
governors by murmuing and sedition, being sinners as Saul was?

Recommend thy Magistrates unto God, and obey them cheerfully in all things
that are lawful.

Much is the obedience of Abraham commended in the Scripture Genesis 24. 16. 17.
etc. Romans 4. 11. 22. etc. John. 8. 39. 40. Heb. 11. 8. etc Iam. 2. 21. etc.
.

For when God had promised him, that in Izshak should his seed be called Genesis
21. 22 Romans 9. 7. Heb. 11. 18.
and yet for all that commanded him to offer up in sacrifice the same Izhak
Genesis 22. 2
; Abraham used no contradiction, but held his peace and obeyed, committing the
whole matter unto the providence of God. For he that is vnreinedly obedient,
although that which his superiors command him do seem unto his carnal
capacity a fond and absurd thing, yet if it implie no sin in it, he will
yield obedience thereunto, subduing his own wit, and making it agreeable unto
the commandment of such as be set over him.

Thou must not be the judge of the governor, nor take on thee to know the
cause of that which is commanded thee, for God will have inferiors not to be
busy inquirers, but humbly obedient.

Do not thou curiously dispute and reason about that which is commanded thee.
The beginng of al man's misery, and mischief it came from the woman's curious
disputing with the serpent about the commandment given unto our first
parents of God Genesis 3. 1. 2. etc.
, For when the Devil reasoned thus with her Genesis 3. 1.
, Yea has God indeed, said; Ye shall not eat of the fruit of the trees of
the garden; If she had done well, she would have taken up her adversary
short, and said, I wot well what God has commanded me to do, even that I
forbear from eating of the forbidden fruit when he has done so, I may not
enquire; but seeing he has commanded, I must give obedience thereunto, because
he is my God and creator: but she overthrew her self, because she would enter
disputation with Satan. It is not the duty of a subject to argue, but to obey.

Hold thy peace, and obey; neither make answer to thine adversary, otherwise
thou shall be overcome.

Let thy will be all one with thy superiors will. For though the man that
commands thee, be of an evil life, yet if that which he commands thee
be good, thou shall by obeying both give a good ensample unto others, and
profit thy self.

The obedient subject lives at great case, when the troblesome person is never
without troubles.

Remove away the burden of thin own will, which so does tire, and weary thee,
and lay the same upon the shoulders of thy governor, so shall thou live in
security, and quietness. For it is great quietness to live with out care,
that so thou may the more freely addict thy self unto the Spirit.

Only the men of high authority in the world, they may lament and mourn that
they want this privilege. But worldlings they comprehend not yet the
sweetness of holy obedience. Hence it is that many, which would seem
religious, having not thoroughly perceived how pleasant a thing it is to obey
for Christ's sake, they both covet prelacy, and shun the quietness of the
Spirit; and while they think to find ease, they fall into troubles, and are
tired continually with cares and molestations. Only therefore the good souls
which be religiously obedient, they get the freedom of the Spirit, and live
with joy and comfort.

Many of their own free will do choose out places of comfort for themselves,
where being once come, they find themselves void of all joy and comfort. But
the Godly do even there find most consolation, where they think to have no
comfort at all. To be short, look not to find any true comfort but in God,
which dwells in the heart of the obedient person.

If thou be truly obedient, thou shall find comfort wheresoever thou shall
dwell, because God is with thee; but if thou be led by thine own affection,
what place or land soever thou chusest to dwell in, even there shall thou find
an hell, where thou think to have paradise. For thither shall thou carry
thine own will which offers bloody battle unto thy soul in all places;
thither shall thou carry thy affections, which night and day will vex and
trouble thee.

But submitting thy self unto the authority of others, as thou should, thou
shall make thy self a Lord and ruler over all things.

CHAP. 31.
Poverty is great riches.
BLessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven, says
our Lord Mat. 5. 3.
.

For the obtaining the custody of some strong castle, or place of defense, a
warrant signed with the hand and seal of the Lord or Prince of the same
shall do thee more good, than a great deal of money; for upon the sight of
the warrant the captain of the castle will give thee possession of the same,
which no money could get at his hands. Poverty in spirit is the warrant or
bill assigned by the great King of heaven, whereby the poor in spirit shall
enter into paradise, seeing the Lord does say Mat. 5. ^^
, Theirs is the kingdom of heaven. This warrant is more worth for the getting
of heaven, than all the temporal riches of the world.

Well said our Savior Christ, Blessed are the poor in spirit; For if he is
to be counted blessed which coueteth nothing* sure the greedy gatherer of
worldly riches, is not blessed, for he coueteth much.

The poor in spirit lacks nothing save that he will not have; what he
will, he has, and that will he not have, which he desires not. Theirs is
the kingdom of heaven, says Christ.

Poverty is a treasure that is easily kept; for no man will or can bereave us of
it. It is a sure possession which none will chaleng, or lay claim unto.

He that is so poor that he has nothing, needs never to fear that
dreadful sentence against the unmerciful rich men Mat 25. 43
I was a stranger, and ye lodged me not; I was naked, and ye clothed me not;
sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not. He that has not to give, is not
bound unto these works of mercy.

Had not the poor estate liked God, the Angel had never in particulars told
the shepheardes that they should find the Savior of the world swadled, and
lying in a cratch Luke 2. 12
.

The apostle says of Christ that 2 Cor. 8. 9.
He being rich, for your sakes became poor, that ye through his poverty might
be made rich. Christ was poor at his birth, in his life, poor; and poor at
his death.

If the only begotten son of God for thy sake became poor; why art thou
ashamed to become poor for his sake?

A good poverty is great riches; and to be thoroughly mortified it is
necessary that thou despise this salfe riches, and to withdraw thine heart
from the inordinate desire of them.

They which stand upon the ground are nearer unto heaven, then they which live
below in vauts under the ground: So they be nearer unto God that despise the
riches of this earth, than are the covetous which serve the world, and have
made themselves slaus unto the same.

Rejoice therefore if thou may heere-in be a companyon of Jesus Christ, who
hanged on the cross poor and naked to make thee a partaker of those
inestimable riches and glory in his celestial kingdom.

CHAP. 32.
We are to continue in doing good works.
ANd ye brethren, be not weary of well doing, says the apostle 2 Th. 3. 13
.

A good work is never without a reward. For, if thou live in the state of
grace, thou sha^t come unto heaven; but if thou art not in such a state, yet
shall thou not loose the good which thou do.

He that lives evil, and does no good deeds, shall hardly after become a
virtuous man; get therefore the custom of doing well, that by the use the thing
may be made easy.

Let us not therefore be weary of well doing says the apostle Gal. 6. 9
: For in due season we shall reap if we faint not.

Christ seeing a fig tree in the way, he came unto it, and finding nothing
there-on but leaves only, said to it Mat. 21. 19
, Never fruit grow on thee hence-forward* and anon the fig tree withered.

Therefore is it good to continue in doing well, least the curse of God come
upon us as it did upon the unfruitful fig tree.

CHAP. 33.
Perseverance in godliness is necessary.
HE that endures to the end, he shall be saved, says Jesus Christ Mat. 10. 22
.

Many do begine well, but few hold out; it booteth not to hau begun except thou
persevere.

Take away perseverance, and neither virtue shall have her reward; nor a good
work a recompense.

The friends of Job they begann well, in that they not only agreede together
to come to lament with him, and to comfort him Job. 2. 11. 12. 1*
; but also in that seeing him they wept, rent their garments, sprinkled dust
upon their heads toward heaven, and sat by him upon the ground seven days
and seven nights mourning without speaking any word, because his grife was
very great, but they perseuered not in doing the duty of friends, and
therefore they were rebuked, and that deservedly of the Lord Job. 42. 78.
.

The beginings of Saul were good 1 Samuel 10. 9
, but perseuering not in goodness he died an evil death 1 Sa. 31. 4,
.

If thou despise the vanity of the world, thou shall bepursued of worldly men.

Many have renounced the world, and because they looked back as did Lot his
wife unto Sodom Ge. 19. 26
, they both in this life were, and in the life to come shall everlastingly be
tormented.

Endeavor thou to proceed in that good way where-into thou art entered. Be
thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life, says God
Reu. 2. 10.
.

Upon the skirtes of the chief Priests vesture there were made Pomgranets of
blew silk and purple, and Scarlet, round about the skirtes thereof, and bells
of gold between them round about Ex. 28. 33.
. Of all fruits that grow, only the Pomgranet has a crown on the top,
the which, being the reward of virtue, is placed among good works, which
are signified by the little belles of gold: they are not set in the highest
part, nor in the midst of the garment, because they are not given unto those
either that begin well, or be in the midst of well doing; but they are set
in the end or lowest part of the vesture, because they only shall receive the
crown, which persevere in doing their duties unto the end.

The tree that is often removed, does seldom bear fruit, or not so much as
that which continues in a good soil: and being well bent, if thou change thy
mind from one thing unto another, thou shall never bring forth the wholesome
fruit of Christianity, or not so much as the constant man. By exercising of
good works, and adding virtue unto virtue, the very habit of godliness is
attained.

There is nothing better than God; and therefore the service of God is not to
be omitted for any thing in the world.

The talking of him that fears God all wisdom: as for a fool, he changes
as the moon, says the wise man Eccles. 27 11.
. Be not moved with every wind.

The fowls they fell on the carkases which Abraham was to offer unto the Lord,
and troubled the good man very much, yet could they not make him to give over
his good work, but he drove them away Genesis 15, 11.
.

If busy, and importunate cares do trouble thee being about to offer the
sacrifice of prayer and thanksgiving unto the Lord, yet let them not
altogether discourage thee, but drive them away, as Abraham did the fowls, but
let them never drive thee from that which is good.

What booteth it to take great things in hand, unless thou bring them unto a
good end,

Consume not thy time in beginning to do well, for fear least death do come
upon thee, and find thee idle, and out of the right way.

A painted image of a man that is made sitting in a chair, gives a show to
the eye, as though it would rise and stand up, but it never stands; it
seems as though it would go, but it never moves. And so plays many a man
that is often determining to draw toward God, but yet he goes not unto him at
all; he makes many profers of going, and yet stands stock still.

Our Lord himself says Luke. 9* 62
, No man* that puts his hand to the plough, and looks back, is apt to
the kingdom of God.

The four beasts, mentioned in the Revelation, they never ceased day nor
night, praising and magnifying him that sat upon the thron Revel. 4. 8. 9.
; no more should thou do,

The kine that were yoaked together, and brought the Ark of the Lord from the
Philistines, although they had young calves, yet did they go the straight way
to Beth-shemesh, and keept one path, and lowed as they went, and turned neither
to the right hand nor to the left 1. Sam. 6. 10. 11. 12.
. And since thou have taken upon thee to carry the yoke of our Lord, and to
bear on thy back the burden of his most holy commandments, thou must not
go out of thy way, neither to the right hand, nor to the left, though thy
sensual appetites, like young children do draw, and call thee back again
from the service of God.

Let the love of God vanquish natural affection, and whatsoever the children
of the world do cry and say, yet pass thou forward as one that has
neither ears, nor mouth, until thou come unto Beth shemish, the house of the
Son, even unto that light eternal, and incomprehensible glory, where thou
shall see God, even as thou art now seeene 1. Cor. 13. 12.


CHAP. 34.
Tentations cannot be avoided.
MY son, if thou will come into the service of God, (stand fast in
righteousness and fear) and preyare thy soul to tentation, says the wise man
Eccles. 2. 1
,

When thou art tempted, fear not, for being in the service of God thou have
weapons appointed to defend thy self with all.

Pharao, the King of Egypt did more persecute the Israelites after they made
suit to go into the wilderness to do sacrifice unto GOD, than ever he did
before Exodus 5. 7. 8. etc.
. So deals our adversary the Devil with us. He plagueth him with greater
storms of tentation that is about to forsake him, and to give his mind to
serve God, than him whom already he keeps in his own possession.

God he suffers thee to fall into tentation, to the end he may see whether
thou will persevere in that which good is, or no. But beware thou consent not
unto a wicked tentation.

Though that fire be stricken out of a flint by force of the steel: yet if
there be no apt matter under it for the fire to take hold on, it serves to no
purpose. So though the Devil with the steel of his tentation do strike upon
the stone of thy sensuality, yet shall he never strike any fire out of it,
that shall do thee harm, except thou join the consent of thy will thereunto.

Unless thou be very circumspect thou shall soon be deceived. For some do
come to you in sheeps clothing, which inwardly be ravening wolves Math. 7. 15.
, dissembling their naughty purpose^ of all tentations that is the soarest,
because under the show of virtues, they feign good will, being utter enemies*

The rouers on the sea, do carry in their ship with them banners of peace,
when they intend nothing but war, that the more easily they may beguile
their enemies and bring them into bondage. The Devil also does spread-foorth
the banners of such virtues as Christians have in greatest estimation, that he
may be taken for a friend, and so bring them the more easily under his
subjection. By this show and face of virtue many be deceived, and ca^ried
away.

Satan himself is tranformed into an Angel of light 1. Cor. 11. 11.
, and does change his habit, as did the wife of Jeroboam, who thought to
deceive Ahiiah the Prophet by disguising her self 1. K. 14. 2 4.


Be not carred away with every blast of wind, but try the spirits whether
they are of God 1. John. 4, 1.
.

Diverse and sundry be the devises of Satan to beguile thee: when thou
think he will strike thee on the one side, he will thwacke thee on the
other; and when h^e seems to fly, he will suddenly make a fresh assault.

If any tentation have left thee, imagine not now thou art safe, for even then
is the devil minded more egerly to set upon thee. And therefore thou had
need to be more vigilant in the time of peace, than of war.

Into more danger many times does a ship run in the time of a calm, than
in a storm; for in the calm, the sailers go without care, and fear no
danger, but in a tempest they have remedies for the same.

It is a great tentation to be without tentation* When the meat enters into
the stomach, the natural heat begins (as it were) to make war with the
meat, until that the substance thereof be altered and changed: and if, when
it is digested; there be not a fresh supply made of more sustenance for to
make a new combat, then does the stomach make war with it self, and
without some other matter be ministered, it consumes it self, and kills
thee. So if without thou have not, yet with in look for tentations.

Grieve not thy self that thou art tempted; for God will not fail to assist
thee 1. Cor. 10. 13.
, if thou fail not of thy duty toward him.

If outward tentations do cease: yet inward affections will challenge thee
into the field, and wage cruel war against thee. In the mean while know
that God suffers thee to be tempted for thy great benefit and behoof.

It is needful that tentations do come. The Apostle says 2. Tim. 3. 12.
, All that will live godly in Christ Jesus* shall suffer persecution. And 2.
Tim. 2. 5.
, No man is crowned except he strive as he ought to do. Now what manner of
conflict can there be, where there is none adversary to resist? Nay there can
be no glory, but where there is victory; neither can there be a victory,
but after a battle.

CHAP. 35*
The tentations which God sends making for the benefit of Christians.
BLessed is the man that endures tentation: for when he is tried, he shall
receive the crown of life, which the Lord has promised to them that love him,
says S. James Iam. 1. 12.
.

The time of tentation is but short, but the reward of victory is everlasting.

God he loves thee more a great deal than thou love thy self. What soever
he suffers to come unto thee, it is for thy great benefit, and advantage.

Tentation it comes by the permission of God. Satan he tempted Job, but yet
through God his sufferance Job. 1. 1^.
; so the evil spirit of God came upon Saul 1. Sam. 18. 10*
.

The Devil naturally tempts to hurt us, but he can do no more than God
will, and than we can bear 1. Cor. 10 13.
. And seeing God does suffer thee to be tempted for thine own commodity, it
is thy part through his grace and favor to reap the fruit of the same. Never
would the Marener betake him to the dangerous sea, did he not look for
commodity by so doing neither would the husbandman endure the parching heat
of summer, and the biting cold in winter, but that he hops for gain and
profit by his pains.

Be it, that to resist tentations it be laboursome; yet hope of reward
brings courage, and by the grace of God thou shall overcome,

In every tentation of ours, God he seeks our amendment and profit. God, if
it had been his pleasure could with a flood suddenly have drowned and
ouerflowed the world, but because he sought more the reformation, than the
destruction of man, he first admonished them by Noah to repent* and that an
hundred years before he drowned them Genesis 6. 3.
.

When God had in purpose to send a famine into the land of Egypt, he suffered
both Pharao to dream, and Joseph to expound the same, whereby not only the
people were provided for, but Joseph was advanced next unto the king Genesis 5^.
4^. 41. etc.
. This doubtless God would not have done, if he had minded that they should
have perished for want of relief.

So the all-mercifull God, as delighting in the life and not in the death of
sinners Ezekiel. 33. 11.
, before he would punish, did first a ^mo^^th the Ninevites by his prophet
Jonah Jonah. 1, 2. 3. 3. 4. etc.
,

Receive therefore chastisement at the hand of God, as from a most loving
Father, for therein assure thy self, he seeks nothing but thy profit and
welfare.

Persuade thy self, if tentations were not for the good of thy soul, God
would never permit thee to be tempted at all. But God deals liberally with
thee giving many means to save thee by.

For thy part put to thine whole strength^ that by his goodness thou may
overcome, and obtain the end of happiness which thou do desire.

Labor thou to overcome; For the pains are but momentanie, but thy reward
shall be everlasting.

The king that has in mind to advance some special man above all his
fellows, will place him first in some service of peril, and importance, to the
end that after his return, his fame may be the greater, and his reward the
more ample.

Susanna had never been so spoken of, and praised, had not her chaste mind
been assaulted by those two ancients, that haunted her father Ioacims house
Sus. verse. 5. 6. etc.
. But she overcame the tentation, and so purchased a good name among men, and
has eternal glory with God, insomuch that infinitely more good than hurt
came to her by that tentation.

In like sort Tobit was tried by the permission of GOD that all posterities
should have his name in remembrance, and his patience for an example.

CHAP. 36.
The remedy to escape tentation, is godly and zealous prayer unto God.
WAtch ye* and pray, that ye enter not into tentatition, says the Lord Mar.
14. 38.


Let prayer be a special buckler of defense unto thee against tentation,
otherwise look not to overcome. If thou repose confidence in thine own
strength, thou shall be subdued.

Harken what the Apostle says phil. 4. 13.
, I am able to do all things through the help of Christ, which strengthens
me.

God therefore is to be prayed unto that he would strengthen us in all
temtatio^s, seeing al our sufficiency is of God. 2. Cor. 3. 5.


Prayer is a messenger as it were, which opens our need unto God, according
to that of the Prophet psalm. 88. 2.
, Let my prayer enter into thy presence* A good messenger ought to have two
qualities, the one to be quick, and light; the other to be diligent and
earnest in that which he goes about lest through the messengers negligence the
mischief and damage may come while the message is undone, or but a doing.

Thy prayer cannot pierce the heavens: if thy mind be oppressed with the cares
and business of this transitory world, they are the enemies and hinderers of
godly prayers. Therefore unburden thy self of all unnecessary cares for the
maintenance of this life, if thou would pray with profit.

Again, for so much as a good mesenger is to be earnest and diligent in his
suit that although he be not suffered at the first to come in, yet he give
the attempt again and again until he be heard, and sent back again; prayer
it must not be neither hoate, nor cold, but fervent and fiery.

And, as they which would be heard of a Prince do first make means to them
which may do most with his Majesty, to have their cause heard, and their suit
granted: so if thou would that God should hear thy prayer, and yield unto
thy request, use the help of his Son, our only mediator and advocate Jesus
Christ 1. Tim. 2. 5. 1. John. 2. 1. 2.
.

And that we should not give over but continue in supplication and prayer,
Heb. 9. 15. 13. 24.
though we be not heard to our desire at the first, our Savior teaches in
that parable where he says, that three loaves were given to a man, and that
at midnight though not because he was his friend, yet because of his
importuniti^ Luke. 11. 8.
.

God he deferreth to show favor, that by thy constant prayer thou may more
earnestly desire that which thou prayest for, and esteem it more highly when
thou have the same; or if he graun^ not thy request, yet be sure he will
give that which is a greater benefit and better for thee.

Though he know right well before we ask, what we stand in need of: yet will
God have us to use prayer as a special mean to obtain deliverance out of
trouble.

It is necessary that thou pray, not to the end thou should make God privy
of thine estate, which before he knew much better than thy self; neither yet
that he should alter and change his determination, but only that by prayer
thou should use those means, whereby God purposed to give that unto thee
which thou do desire.

Prayer it presents unto God thy miserable estate, humbles thine heart,
delivers from evils, brings into the favor of God, and makes his majesty
at peace with thy soul.

Prayer it preualeth over all things. It overcomes men, as appears by the
example of David 1. Sam. 17* 45.
of Judith Iud. 13. 4.
of Judas Macchabeus 2. Mac. 15. 21. 22. etc.
all which, to omit an infinite number more, by humble prayer unto the Lord
overcame their enemies; It overcame the fire so that it could not burn the
three children cast into the hot fiery oven; It overcame the sea, which by
Moses prayer unto GOD divided it self, and gave passage to the Israelites; it
overcame time, when Eliiah thereby did make it to rain, and to leave raining
as he thought it most convenient, and thereby continued 40. days and 40.
nights without meat and drink; it overcame death, as it is manifest in
Hezekiah, who being adjudged to die by the sentence of God, by prayer
prolonged his life fifteen years: it overcame the clouds, for by the same
Heliah brought the clouds of the sea upon the land; it overcame the heavens,
for at the prayer of Joshua the Sun stood still, and the heavens moved not:
yea, which more is, it overcame God himself after a sort, for thus said God
unto Moses Exodus 3. 2. 10.
, Let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot againsh them, for I will consume
them. Low, how the Lord is held back as it were, when he wileth Moses to let
him lone. Briefly the Lord says Mar. 11. 24
. Whatsoever ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye shall have it, and it
shall be done unto you.

Seeing then prayer is of such efficacy, in all thy troubles, afflictions, and
tentations, take unto thee prayer as a bu^kler, for thereby out of doubt thou
shall get the victory.

CHAP. 37.
Man being created for God, should only seek God and his glory in all his
actions.
I Am (...) and (...), the beginning and the ending, says the Lord Reave. 1. 8.
.

The rivers do all come-forth of the sea, and thither do they return again;
al things naturally desire their proper end, and are by nature helped toward
the same.

As God is our sea, from which we came; and the center where-unto we tende^ so
our souls by nature must seek, and labor to come unto him, as to the very
end for which they were created.

Our soul can find no resting place here in this present life. For God
himself must be the end thereof, as the uttermost end of all that it seeks
after, and the very cause of the creation thereof.

God has made us for himself, and therefore can our hearts never be at quiet
until they enjoy him.

It is a thing much to be maruailed at, that al creatures doing the duty for
which they were created, man only should be rebellious, and have no care of
attaining unto his chiefest end.

God created thee not for the earth, but for heaven; he created thee not that
thou should seek after worldly things, as the final end of thy creation,
but that thou should only seek after him.

The beasts of the field which God created for the earth, they look
downe-warde, and go with all foure^ but man, created for heaven, should look
not downe-warde as though his mind were fixed upon earthly things, but up to
heauen-ward. Why then art thou so affected to those corruptible things? Cast
thine heart upon things above, where thou shall enjoy those riches that never
shall corrupt (b).

Depend not upon these visible things, but tend upwards unto things
invisible.

Loiter not idly by the way, but proceed thou directly toward the end for
which thou were created.

Why did God create thee, but to enjoy him? Let him be the final end of all
thy thoughts and actions*

Who shall assend into the mountain of the Lord? says the Prophet Psa. 24^ 4
, And who shall stand in his holy place? He makes answer among other things,
He which has not lift up his mind unto vanity.

He has received a thing in vain which uses not the same to the end
where-unto at the first it was ordained. In vain have thou bought a garment,
if thou wear it not; in vain have thou received thy soul, except thou do
those things by the soul for which the soul was created.

God created thy memory, that thou should remember him; thine understanding
that thou should know him; thy will, that thou should love and desire him.

Seeing therefore God has made thee and that to love and serve him, good
reason is it that the little time, which thou have to spend in this life thou
should bestow to the attaining of that most ecxellent and noble end, for
which thou were created*

He that having a soul, lives as though he had none; and he that gives
his understanding and mind to the getting of worldly riches and honor, does
greatly hurt and endamag his soul, for unto these ends he was not created.

Happiness is the final end of man, whereunto all things be ordained. Place
not thy felicity in earthly things, for rest shall thou find neither in
honor, neither in riches, not in learning, nor in any other thing that is
created.

Call home thine heart from all earthly things; love God only, of whom, and
for whom thou art created.

Despise this present world, and so shall thou come unto thy desired end.

This very reason, were there no more besides, were sufficient to persuade thee
to contemn the vanity of the world, if thou did bear in mind that created
thou were for heaven, and not for this world.

Abase not thy self so much as to delight in these base and contemptible
things of this world, and thou shall be quiet here in this world for the
time, and happy and glorious for ever afterward in the heavens.

CHAP. 38.
Terrible and horrible shall be the day of judgment unto the wicked.
ENter not into judgment with thy servant, said the kingly prophet Psa. 14^. 2
.

David was the servant of God, and yet lo he had in remembrance the day of
judgment.

So rigorus shall the judgment of death be, that even the holy prophet, so
beloved of God, does quake again at the consideration of the same.

Seeing therefore he that faithfully did serve God, so feared Gods judgment:
how much should he stand in dread of the same, which serves not God but the
world?

Enter not, says he, in judgment with thy servant. If the righteous scarsly
be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear 1. pet. 1. 18
?

It is a thing much to be lamented that any man should be addicted to these
vanities which we have so spoken-of, especially being so near unto the end
wherein God will lighten things that are hid in darkness, and make the
counselles of the hearts manifest 1. Cor. 4. 5


Belshazzar, king of Babylon, living in all manner of voluptuousness, and
satisfying his lusts in all kind of sin, had suddenly the sentence of Gods
displeasure pronounced against him Dan. 5. 1. 2 etc. 26. 27.
, and herds Mean, God has numbered thy kingdom, and has finished it. Tekel,
Thou art waied in the balance, and art found to light. Peers, Thy kingdom is
divided, and given to the Medes and Persians.

The hour is very ^igh at hand, when a straight reckoning shall be taken of all
thy deeds, words and thoughts. All the secrets of thine heart shall be
disclosed, and with all rigor of justice punished. Thou shall not have the face
to deny any thing, for thine own conscience shall be thine accuser; neither
shall thou have power and courage to reason the matter before the glorious
majesty of Jesus Christ, the King of Kings. Thy sins shall be put into the
balance, and all the circumstances of them shall be waied and all the benefits
which God bestowed upon thee, and thou most cursedly did cont^ne, shall be
rehearsed. Then shall thy kingdom be divided, when thy body shall be committed to
the earth to be deuoured-vp of worms, and thy soul shall be sent unto hell,
there to be tormented in hell fire. To call then upon God for help and mercy,
it will not avail thee.

Then shall thou see about thee a severe i^dge with a most angry countenance;
under thee, hell wide open, gaping to devour thee; on thy right hand thy
manifold and outrageous sins, accusing thee; on thy left, a most horrible
spectacle of infernal and damned spirits, ready to torment thee; within thy
conscience; without the world all on a hot fire.

If our first parents for eating but a little of the forbidden fruit contrary
to the commandment of God, did hide themselves from the presence of the Lord
God Genesis 3. 8.
; where will thou hide thy self when God shall appear with thousands of his
holy Angels to call thee to an account, and find thee even fully fraughted
with sins and wickedness?

As wax melts before the fire, so shall the wicked perish at the presence of
God Psalm. 68. 2.
, It is written Psalm. 33. 8.
, Let all the earth fear the Lord: let al them that dwell in the world, fear
him.

At that day it shall be as great a pain to stand before the glorious majesty of
the Lord of hosts, as afterward to lie boiling in the pit of hell: for he
shall not appear unto them to their joy, but to their shame and confusion Isa.
66. 5
.

The friends of this world they will not be brought to the knowledge of the
vanity wherein they live till by the punishment in that burning lake their
understanding be enlightened and they be enforced to bewail their extreme
wretched and cursed estate.

Despise therefore from thine heart the vanity, and false goods of of this
present world, least afterward thou repent, when it will be too late,

CHAP. 39.
The remembrance of the pains of hell, should reclame us from sin.
IN as much as she glorified her self, and lived in pleasure, so much give ye
to her torment and sorrow, says the Lord Revel. ^8. 7.
.

If thou did consider how these pleasures and vanities in which thou live
shall take an end, thou would live in sorrow and bitterness of soul, and
of such things as thou now delightest in, thou would take small joy.

Job he said Job. 6. 7.
, Such things as my soul refused to touch, as were sorrows, are my meat.

In this life men cannot away with any thing that may annoy them, and in the
next all things, will they nill they, shall vex and torment them. Gather hence,
that the more pleasantly men pass their days here, the more wretchedly in
torments shall they consume the time in the other world. For look by how much
any thing does resist his contrary, so much is the working of that thing
perceived to be more forceable which overcomes and mastereth that which
resisted it. Fire does more resist iron than wood, but when the fire
overcomes them both, the heat is greater in the iron, than in the wood. So
they which in this life do feel no sorrow, shall be the more tormented in the
world to come: as on the otherside the righteous which in this life have had
no rest, shall find the greater comfort and joy hereafter. Luke. 16. 25


The mighty shall mightily be tormented Wise. 6. 6
.

In those days shall men seek death, and shall not find it; and shall desire
to die, and death shall fly from them Revel. 19. 6.
.

Like sheep they lie in gra^e, death deuoureth them psalm. 49. 14.
.

The grass feeds the beasts of the field, and afterward it grows
again: so the damned souls in dying they shall never die; and though their
members be quar^e^ed into pieces, yet shall they not perish*

Note by the hard handling of his friends in this world, how greeuosly God
will afflict his foes in the life to come.

The Apostle says Gal. 1. 10.
, If I should yet please men, I were not the servant of Christ. The holy
Martyrs, which were Gods friends, they suffered many a cruel torment; and
do thou give thy self unto voluptuousness, and think for all that to have
ease and comfort in the other world Luke. 16. 25.
? Behold, says the Lord Ier. 49. 12.
, they whose judgment was not to drink of the cup have assuredly drunken, and
art thou he that shall escape free? Thou shall not go free, but thou shall
surely drink of it.

Think not that poverty, misery, and affliction were appointed for good me^,
for although God suffers them to taste of them for a time, yet are they not
purposely provided for them. For God has ordained them for his own glory*
But these afflictions properly belong unto thee, if thou art ungodly, although
they seem nothing at all to appertain unto thee, and therefore do shun
them as thou do.

If all the torments which the Martyrs have endured were joined together, they
should be nothing in comparison of the torments which the reprobate shall, and
must sustain in the pit of hell.

If thou be affraide in the dark night to be among the ougly carcases of
dead men, how will thou abide to be in the loathsome darkness among the dead
in hell, where thou shall be forced to continue, and never see the Sun,
Moon, nor stars: A miserable land is that where night is continually, and no
day at all.

If now thou can not endure the sight of one Devil, how will thou abide the
horrible shapes, monstrous, and terrible sightes of many ougly and cursed
feends.

If now thou art not able to abide to hold even thy smalest finger, and that a
little while in the fire; how will thou continue burning, body and soul in
that lake of fire and brimstone, in comparison whereof the hottest fire in this
world is but as fire painted on a wall.

If some little grief seem so painful unto thee now, how will thou abide all
manner of infirmities that may be upon thy body at once, and together: The
damned person in hell shall be made to bear in his body all infirmities
whatsoever the body of man is subject unto: yea every part of him shall have
more pain, than the wit of man is able to reach unto or comprehend.

If thou shun so a filthy savor now, how will thou abide the most loathsome
sent of that hellish pit:

If thou should be laid on a most soft and delicate bed, and have all
things ministered unto thee there that might move thee to take pleasure
therein: yet if thou should have all this under condition never to come off
from it in forty years space, but be bound to be there such a long time,
thou would take it for an intolerable pain and torment. Then how will thou
suffer thy self, and that perforce, to be bound with fiery chains in some
narrow hol^ of hell, where thou shall not stir at all, and from which thou
shall never escape.

To live continually without all hope; and to be well assured that no remedy
shall come, what can be more miserable?

Thou therefore which without all measure love the vanities of this world
more than God thy creator, turn unto thy self, and think upon th^se so
bitter, and so woeful torments; that moved with godly repentance, contemning
these vanities, thou may by the most holy and mighty God be delivered from
these perpetual torments, and punishments in the pit of hell.

CHAP. 40.
The glorious conditions of the Saints of God cannot so much as be conceived
in the heart, much less uttered by the mouth, or described by the pen of man.
AND these, (to wit, which have loved the world,) shall go into everlasting
pain, and the righteous into life eternal, says Christ Mat. 25.
.

Even as the just judge will lay everlasting torments upon such as leaving the
service of God, have preferred the goods of this transitory world before the
God of heaven: so to him that will contemn the base things of this world our
Savior will say Mat. 25. 2^. 23.
. It is well done good servant and faithful, thou have been faithful in
little, I will make thee ruler over much: enter into thy masters joy.

^oseph bringing his two sons to be blessed of his father, Iaakob placed
Ephraim on Israeles left hand, and Manasseh on his right Genesis 48. 13. 14.
; after the manner of the world, which gives honor to the eldest, and
despises the youngest and poorest. But Israel stretched cut his right hand,
contrary to Joseph's mind, and laid it on Ephraims head, which was the younger,
and his left hand upon Manassehs head (directing his hands of purpose) for
Manasseh was the elder. So will God do when he comes to judgment, he will
put the right hand of his glory upon them which in this world were at the left
hand of adversity; and his left hand of displeasure upon them which lived in
their life time on the right hand of ease and prosperity: and so condemn
them unto the everlasting hell fire.

Great is the goodness of God that gives unto men so great honor, for so
little labor or rather none at all Romans 4. 4. 3. 4. etc.
. At the sight of God his glorious majesty, whatsoever the heart of a godly
man can desire, the eye shall see yea, The things which eye has not seen,
neither ear has heard, neither came into man's heart (are) which God has
prepared for the^ that love him 1. Cor. ^. 9.
.

It is much easier to tell what life eternal is not, than to utter what the
happiness thereof shall be. God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes,
and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, neither crying, neither shall
there be any more pain Re^el. 25. 4.
for there shall be perfect joy: and all things that may provoke unto joy and
gladness shall concur together in that place.

When Joseph had made himself known unto his brethren, the joy was so great
that it pleased even Pharao well and al his household Genesis 45. 16.
How great think thou, shall be the joy, when all the Saints that ever
have bin, are, or shall be, shall meet together in the court of the celestial
king?

If the joy of the wise men at the sight of a star, was exceeding great Math.
2. 10.
what shall our joy be, when we shall see the glory of all Gods childdren in
the heavens?

If the birds do joy at the rising of the corporal Sun: how shall our
souls rejoice to see the Sun of righteousness most comfortably to show
himself in his glorious brightness, and incomprehensible glory?

If ^Iohn Baptist, not seeing Christ with corporal eyes in his mortal estate,
did even spring in his mothers belly for joy Luke. ^. 44.
, how shall we leap and triumph for joy, beholding Jesus face to face, and
that in his glory 1. Cor. 13. 12.
?

If they of Beth-shemesh lifting up their eyes, and spying the Arc, rejoiced
when they saw it 1. Sam. 6. 13
; and if Zacheus joyfully received Christ into his house Lke. 19. 6.
; what heart is able to comprehend the joy that then we shall have, when we
shall not receive but be received into the everlasting Tabernacles of heaven?
nor entertain Christ, but be entertained of Jesus himself the king of
glory, in his glorious kingdom?

If he that found the treasure hid in the field, for joy thereof departed, and
sold all that he had to buie that field, Mat. 13. 44.
, what shall be the joy of our soul enjoying the treasure of incomprehensible
riches in heaven, and that freely John. 17. 2. Romans 6. 23. Romans 8. 32. Ephesians.
2. 8.
?

If when Solomon was proclaimed king, the people so rejoiced that the earth
rang with the sound of them 1. King. 1. 40.
; art thou able to imagine, or all the men in the world, the singing, piping,
and triumphing that shall be when the King of all peace and tranquillity shall
be placed in his royal throne, and proclaimed the right inherit or of the
celestial kingdom, to the everlasting comfort and benefitte of all good
souls?

If God would give thee leave to taste the sweetness of those heavenly joys
though it were but half an hour, thou should for that favor despise the
whole world for the same, yea if there were a thousand such worlds as this:
the rather a great deal thou art bound to contemn the pleasures, or more
truly vanities of this world, whatsoever they be, if that may further thee any
whit to the attaining of those joys, and felicity which shall never have an
end.

And were this world to be loved as it is not 1. John. 2. 15
, and the things of the same highly to be esteemed; and if thou might live
therein a thousand years together and that in such health, honor, pleasure,
and felicity as thine heart could desire; yet in comparison of that happiness
which God has prepared for such as love him, the joy would be but sorrow,
and the felicity, vanity; which thou should despise: how much the rather
then the world being as it is?

The sovereign and true joy it comes from the creator, not from any
creature, which if thou once do taste no man can beteane the of Iohu. 16. 22
: in respect of this joy all other joy, is but sorrow: all pleasure, is pain:
all sweetness, is gall: all beauty, is filthiness, and molestation.

Place therefore before thine eyes, as the true servant of Jesus Christ, the
land of the living Psalm. 142. 5.
, toward which thou art bounding, and contemn all worldly vanities, that so
thou may come unto the heavenly felicity and reign with Christ world
without end.

The end of the third, and last Book.
FINIS.

