wonderful news of the death of Paul the. iii. last bishop of Rome and or
diverse things that after his death have happened, wherein is truly set ^^^
the abominable acts of his most mischeuous life. Written in Latin by. P.
Esquillus, and Englyshed by W. B. Londoner.

Apoca. viii.

Come away from her my people that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that
ye receive not of her plagues.

W. B. to the loving Reader.
IT is wonderful (good Reader) to see the sundry diversities of wits what
means they inuente to declare and publishe such things as they think
necessary to be known, some under the color of feigned histories, some under
the persons of specheles beasts, and some under ye shadow of dreams and
visions, of which thou haste here a notable and wurthy example. For some witty
man (as it appears by his writing) privy of the last Popes secrets,
(which are so abominable as I have heard of few like,) willinge to declare
to the world, how men were deceived in him, which not only called, but also
believed him to be more than half a god, has under the name of. P. Esquillus
written an Epistle to his fre^d forius. Wherein after that he has truly
declared the time of his death, he fayneth a poesy in manner of a vision, in
which he sees Paul Frenes. the Pope received into hell, and there meteth his
son Petrus Aloysius, who in talking to his father, sets forth his wicked
belief and doctrine. After that he beholds Arches and Pinnacles, wherein are
graued the mischeuous deeds of ye Pope, as the geuyng of his sister to be
abused of one that was Pope before him, the poysonyng of his mother, and of his
sister, because she loved another better than him, ye abusyng of his own
daughter, and his persecuting of Christians, with diverse other things. At last
following on still. S. John's reuelacio^, he sees him abuse princes, and at
last, cast with them into a lake of burning fire. All this he fayneth properly,
but lies not I am afraid. And now somewhat to say my fansy in the matter, me
thinks the book is very good and necessary, and I would wish that al
christian me^, especially princes, for whose cause principally it seems to be
written, had red it, that they might learn here how Popes and their
ministers have done and do abuse them. For I believe that al which is here
written of the Popes acts, and of others, be true, and that because I know no
man would have be^ so shamcles so to make report, except he were assured of
them. And to thente^t that all English men might thank God the more for his
abounda^t mercy, in delivering them through knowledge of his truth from the
tyranny of so corrupt and stinking an head, and yt better love and obey our
soueraygne lord and king, their head by God appointed, I have (good Reader)
according to my poor cunnyng, Englished Esquillus Epistle, that al they may
see therein the Popes most detestable, mischeuous, and deuillishe doctrine,
life and deeds: that such as yet for lack of knowledge favor him, may
through credyting this, detest and abhor him, or at least wise his vices,
which are unseparably joined unto the Popedom. Wherefore if thou (good reader)
shall for this entente read it, I shall think my pains not only well
bestowed, but also (as I wish they may be) abunda^tlye requited. Fare well.

Love and live.
To his derely beloved brother Mark Forius, well learned in both laws, Publius
Esquillus, master of Prelates, wishes joy and peace.
How heuily I took thy departure from the city brother Mark, both at thy
going away, and sense by letters you know well enough. In somuche that yt
the Pope had not feared me more absent than present, I must needs have goen
with thee, or else dyed, if I had be mortal. The Pope durst not strive with me
being present, because he remembered to how great a foil I put Adrian the
sixte, and Clement the seventh. For when God made me Master of Bishops and
Prelates, he gave me also such a nature and co^dicio^, as could feel no death,
chiefly because it is ordained by nature that men shall dye but once, which I
have once done already, and therefore I shall live always to set a work, and
correct the prelacie for ever. But thou art happy, O mark Forius, whose
chance it was to have so sone witness of you heavenly discipline which you
learned through out accompanying, wha^ as Pope Paul being in a rage, and
calling yt either to reca^t or dye, thou escapedst with a few. For what more
certain witness can any man have of Gods favor toward him, and of his own
allowaunce, than that the bishops priests and phariseis (as they did to Christ
himself) bitterly curse, trouble, vex, and endeavor to torment and kyl him?
But to let pass this, which thou taught from above know welynough, let us
come to the pith of the matter, for which I write now. Thou reme^brest (I
suppose) that wha^ we commoned of the common weal in heaven, thou made me to
promise yt if I should at any time (as I once did walk through the upper
coasts) chance, to pass through the neither, that is to say, the secrets of
hell, and of spirits, I should likewise certify the thereof. Which thing now
has happened wonderously well. For after that this dottrel (I mean Paul
Farnesius) was buried and carried into hell, I also dece^ded thither, and saw
there many things, which if bishops and other men would believe, they would
neither persecute Christ Jesus, and waste his church as they do, nor yet
suffer themselves to be led away from Christ with folish tryfles and
supersticions. But for as much as I cannot now be present to talk with the,
and show ye those things, I will in this Epistle as briefly as I can,
describe the whole tragedy. Wherefore as thou art wont mark thou well, and
consider in thy mind the things which you shall read.

Paul which is also Saul began to dye in the fifth I Would, that is the. ix day
of November, about the first watch of the night. At what time I was with
Titus Polibius, whom thou know to be a man of singular sobriety among all
the rest of the Citezins of Rome, and such a one as may worthily be called a
wiseman: With him I held communicacion of the calamities of the Christen common
welthe, and of the remedies of the same. But before our talk was ended, and
therefore deferred till an other time, it pleased Polibius to make me lodge at
his house that night. But ear I was on sleep, behold Genius that ghost, which
ten years agone had carried me into heaven, seemed to be present before me and
said: Up Publius; arise, if thou desire to see with what pomp, and what
preparacion, Paul is receiucd of Dites the prince of darkness, and of the other
fyendes. What, (quod I than,) is our most holy father dead? Yea (said he) he
is dead now at last, if at the least wise he ever lived.

But all his holiness he left for Christ and his saints, thinking it enough
for him, if but in title and name he might be called most holy. I come than
(quod I) my most trusty guide, and gladlye and willingly I do follow thee.
Forth we went till we came unto the Popes palace, where we found Paul
breathyng a little, for he was at the point of death. About him were many
diuelles, but few men. For they being sure he would dye, were othcrwise
occupied, some in riflyng his coffers, and other some in stealyng his costly
apparel, with his silver and golden vessel, some about one thing, and some
about another, as commonly men are wont to be at so good a season. While
these things were in doing, our holy father gave up his ghost. Then was there
one, which seemed to be captain of the fiendes, and to be in authority above
the rest, who coming to him, said: Sathanas save thee, thou pyller and
worship of our kingdom. And than taking him by the hand, led him down into
a certain shadowed valleye: The sides whereof were so full of most high
Cypress trees, that the pleasant light of the Sun could no where get
in. In the head of this valleye was a very stynkyng lake, which I think
either be Auernum, or some other like. Here Dracolicus (for that was that
Captain Deuylles name) because Paul went naked, commanded a woman's garmente
of iron graye, brodered with fiery serpents, to be brought him, about yt
borders whereof were Scorpio^s after the manner of a guard. Than lo, Paul seemed
to me to be wholly changed, into a most foul and doting old trot. Contrary to
Pope John, who counterfayting ye man, declared her self, in bringing forth a
son, to be a very woman. But I wondered much at one thing: For in this
garment I saw figured his most notable mischieues, as ma^staughter,
poysonynges, treasons, Incest, and abominable aduoutries. Than they put hi on
shoes, or rather boots, of swynes leather. And set upon his head a fox furre
nyghtcap, whereon they put a myter, mete for three crowns: of which the first
that went about his forhead and temples, was an * Amphisbene. The second was of
an Aspis, the third was a Cerast with two horns, which did well set forth ye
top of the Mytre. About his neck hong a chain made of two wrethed Adders. At
his ear instead of his earetyres, crocked. ii. speckled frogs. To this they
gave him laden gloves, and bracelettes of vipers, that he should lack nothing
of an whores attire and garnishme^t. The^ did they set him upon a great beast,
which had hear growe^ out of ma^s blood, which seemed diverse, with diverse
colored spots. In these spots might be read as they had be printed with a
burning iron, the names of al erroures and reuilinges of god and Christ, yt
have been at any time se^ce men were borne, both of the Egipcians, Phariseis,
Hessenes, Hebeonites, Maniches, Arrians, Maometans, and Pelagians, besides
those which the Papists have invented to the reproach of God and Christ. This
beast had seven heads, and ten hye lyfted horns, and on every horn a croune
which signifies a kings power. But Paul had carried with him a golden cup,
like unto these which the priests lift up at the altar, while they are at
work about his holy service. This Chalice carried he in his hand with such
gesture as the Germaynes be wont, when they bid any man to drink. The
ministers of hell led down the hye by shop being thus decked through the
low vallcye. But Genius my ghost guyded me very pleasauntly by the right side
of the mountain: So that we lurking among the Cypres trees, did ye easilyer
behold from an higher place, all things that were done, and all the whole
pomp of his Triumph. And when we had goen a little farther, we heard a great
noise of horsemen that were cummyng. And not long after through the monicion of
Genius my ghost, I knew Peter Aloysius the bishops son, who having heard
of his fathers coming, came forth before to meet him for honors sake. And
be being wrapped in a Goats skin, tyd upon a Goat, that was so byg, that he
seemed to be greater then a bull. At his breast instead of a golden Bull, hong a
great Priapus. And this Priapus (which I greatly wondered at, had a naked
Pintell hanging in the middle part of his body. About Peter Aloysius were
Catamites innumerable, having all the parts of their body finely clothed, save
only their atses, which being naked like Apes, they showed forth. The rest
that were with him, tode upon very great she goats. And in their banners
(whether it were to fraye birds or no I know not) they had images of Priapus.
There Petrus Aloysius with Constance his sister, who also was his stepdame,
skarce knew his father in that black band of horsemen. For he had not that
apparel, that face, that white horse, nor that train after him, which he was
wont to have in his life time. Neither could he have known him at all, if he
had not marked well a certain shape of a bishops mytre (which they call a
kingdom) and his voice and speech. But when he was come nerer him, and that
they had saluted one an other, he said: O father, art thou also come down
hither? whom I would have thought, if souls might live longer than the bodies,
(which now alas to my pain I feel) would have flyen up into heaven: For
many and that a great company of men worshipped the as a GOD. Thou promysedst
heaven to them that worshipped thee. Thou calledst up souls again from hell.
Thou forgauest them much punishment and peynes, (according to the aunciente
severity) which returned to thy holy seat and devotion, as of late days
thou shewedst the princes and people of Germany (which fell from the to a
certain (I know not what) doctrine of the gospel) by three by shops which
were thy Legates a late^e. Notwithstanding those which were nerest about the,
(as was I with few other) knew well and to well; that thou trustedst not thy
self to those things which thou so much boastedst of, and souldest to
other, but estemedst them as tales of Robin hode. For I remember when thou
affirmedst that there were no souls, nor any hell at all, but that thou did
defend them and say there were such, because they were excellent and very
mete to deceive men: and not only to save and defend riches and Empyres, but
also to get and obtain them.

I thy son being instructed and seasoned with this noble doctrine, thought
nothing unlawful for me to do. Hereof came my so many adultries both with me^
and women, Hereof came the slaughters and robberies, from hence came the
sacrileges, and blasphemous reuilinges against God, Christ, and his mother
the virgin and against all the heavenly saints, from hence came the
innumerable myschiefes, and all kind of ungracious deeds, which I following yt
my father, have committed: In which I being so drouned, that neither god nor
man could any longer suffer me at the last after the manner of other Tira^s,
without whose murder and wou^des, few desce^d hither, I fell into this pit,
where I have experience in very deed that there is an hell, that there be
furies, and fiendes, and that there are punyshmentes for wicked deeds, with
everlasting fire: which things while I was in life, being noseled in thy
instruccions, and household doctrine, I never thought upon at any time nor yet
feared, Wherefore (O father) there is naught else for us to look for here, but
miserye, and everlasting desperation. At this his father sighed and held his
peace, attendyng only to see the end of his own matter. And behold while
they went on, a greater neyghynge of horses, and roryng of Lions was heard,
which were certain Emperous, Kings, Tyrannes and other princes, but chiefly
those which had given their power to the beast, and which having drounken in
the lovely cup of the whore of Babylon, had committed fornicacion with her.
These came to meet him, and bewailed his wretchedness. After these came forth
a much greater company, of Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, Abbotes, munkes,
priests and friars, al these rode upon Locustes, like unto horses, which are
prepared to battle, upon whose heads was the shape of a certain golden
Crown. Their face was like a man's, their hear like womennes, but they seemed
to be armed with Lions teeth, and iron Habetions: with the clappyng of their
wings, they counterfayted Charettes going forward to battle. They had
tails, and in their tails stynges of Scorpions. And now to withhold the no
longer, with this company we went to the iron city of Dites, or Pluto, and
his unpleasant kingdom: where there were Arches, great pillars, and notable
memorials set up. In which the titles, and noble mischiefs of our holy father
Farnesius, were written, and graued.

The first Arche before the gate of the City, showed the first beginninges of
his noble mischiefs. That buyldyng was all of most heavy lead. And there in
scyled work, I saw Paul giving his sister to be defiled of Alexander
Borgias, the chief bishop, to deliver himself out of other men's det. On the
other side of that Arche, the same Paul poured in, (but gave not poison) to his
other sister, because she followed to openly the manners of the family of
Fregnesia, and seemed to love other more than her brother Paul. But they cannot
chose but live wastefullye, which hope for other men's goods, while the waste
their own. And the frunte and upper part of the Arche, declared plainly that
with the same cup he brought his mother to her long sleep. This was the title
of this Arche. To Paulus Farnesius a singular Patron of Baudes and manquellers.

When we were come from thence into the city, appeared the other building
made of sound brass, in which out Paul triu^phed over a certain we^che,
an Anconitane. For when now with his accustomed baude playing, and gyles, he
had deserved a red hat, and was the Legate of Anconia: there, under the color
of a certain merchaunte, he deceived a noble Damoysell, and when she was
promised him, married her for his wife: which woman after that she knew him to
be that, which he was in deed, and that she was not his lawefull wife, but his
concubine, (which out of the decrees thou knew very well,) It failed but
little that she fell not mad. But yet by that marriage he gat Peter Aloysius, a
worship forsothe and a singular Orname^t of the Romans name. The mayse of this
deed was this.

To Paul Farnesius Cardinal, a Knave most reverent, defrauders have set up
this. Then went we further, and behold another monument, made of a myxture of
lead, brass, and tynne all together. There in cast work, I saw Paul now
the chief Bishop, with his daughter Constans, which was more pleasant and
obedient to him, than a daughter should be to her father: on the backesyde of
this, This Goatishe old manne provoked to Aduoutrie a certain chosen
Damoysell, a niece of his, which was a Kyngly Matrone, no less excellynge in
Maydenly shamefastenesse, than in good shape and beawtie. In the upper part of
this Arche, Peter Aloysius, wroughte by force unnaturally with the Bishop
Fanensis, whereof that good young man dyed. And there his father Paul smylyng,
did absolve him. And therefore for these ientle mischieues, the fyendes wrote
upon the Arche.

To Paul the third, chief Bishop, and to his son both Aduoutrers,
Incestuous, Buggers, defilers, Abusers, and of all Ruffians the chiefest. The
company of Lechers have set up this, for an everlasting memorial. From hence
we came into Plutonium the greateste field of all the City, where were two
noble memorials, which seemed to be made of hardeste salt, and that somewhat
read.

In the one the Perusmes were overcome and oppressed. In the other Ascanius
Colona, a most righteous Prince was of this old Knave in a great fury driven
out of his kyngedome. To these was a superscripcion after this form.

To Paul Farnesius chief Bishop, a most cruel Tyran, Tyrannes have set up
this.

Not far from these on the other side ye fyeld, were two pillars, square and
broad the stuff whereof I could not know. For they were not of any
accustomed or used matter. In one of the^ he took Camerine, after he had driven
out the princess thereof, a woman endewed with singular wisdom and religion.
In the other I might see by what crafts he drew the College of Cardinals
to hold with him, as touching Placencia and Parma, by making an exchange with
them of Cametine, that was not his, for Parma and Placencia, which was not
theyrs: which afterward was the cause and that deservedly, of his son Peter
Aloysius death. Whom he made Lord of those two most noble Cities. And of
these both, the title was this. To Paul the third, chief Bishop, the most
notable in innumerable and most great treasons, Judas Iscariotes, with other
trayters, have set up this.

In the third part of the field, and in the side, was an Arche made in shape
like heaven, there were the seven Planettes, and the. xii. signs, so well
known of the Astronomers, and innumerable stars. There was our Paul with
Dionise Seruita, and Gaurico, and certain other, which all searched the
destiny of the Bishop and of his friends, in Hecoscopes, in Aspectes, and in
the houses of the stars, in which they were amassed with such astonishment,
that they seemed to fall into madness. This was the Title To Paul Fernesius, the
chief Bishop, an Astrosogian, a wysarde and the chiefest diuiner, the
Caldeyes have set up this. In the courthe angle or the tield there was a
buylding made of red wax, in which were many mitred: of which, three in
purple, higher than the test, and as it were judges, sat down together. The
place and cause were noted with these letters. S. S. T. C. The place and
sitting yielded the shape of some most holy counsel: In which as it appeared
by certain letters which were there both red and written, at the instaunce
of a few, was devised how the truth might be thrust down, and the Emperor
deceived. There might ye have seen some hyssed out of counsel, because they
were so boldc but slenderly to defend the truth, and hold against their
perverse counsayles. There saw I a certain wellearned Physician, but a better
astrologien. F. C. Corrupted with money, to thentente he should testify with
his mouth and writing, that the air there was unwholesome for the fathers: that
to deceive the Emperor, they might transfer the counsel to some other
place, where they might either bring more certain, and more free suggestions,
for the Popes tyranny, or else at the least wise delay the counsel.
Alexander. T. no common phisicio^, gaynsayed this corrupted Physician, and that
learnedly, prouyng the air and all other things there, to be very wholesome,
and that there was nothing in the nature and disposicion of the place, which
should seem to be able to fray them from keeping their counsel there. Yet
notwithstanding the gaynsaying of the Physician, and the vehement repugnyng of
the Emperor, it was brought to pass with corrupt and stynkyng suffrages, that
the greatest part of the blessed fathers went their way. Neither did this
Arche lack his title. For in it were these words.

To Paul the third, chief Bishop the troubler of counsayles, and common
peace, thirty Popes have set up this. About the myddle of Plutoniu^ was a
pillar of sound Adamante, at which I could not maruayle enough when I saw
the wars, and bluddye lights against the saints, so shine, they seemed to
be in doing, rather than showed by Imagerye, but after a new and vnwunted
kind of fyghtyng. For there were to be seen two fortes of battle.

First there were flocks of most meke chepe clothed in white garments. Upon
the shepes heads were golden crowns, glistering with a wonderful shine.

These flocks had to their guide a lamb which had seven horns, and as
many iyes. On the other part were raueninge wolves, wolves truly, but not all
in one sort of apparel. For some had on their heads read cappes, some two
topped myters, some Cooles, and that diverse, other some after another sort.
But one amongst them was above the rest, which bare on his head a triple
crown, which differed nothing at all from the myter and kingdom of the hye
Bishop. All ware one kind of garmente, some of purple, some violet, some
black, some graye, some white.

This was the kind of their battle. The wolves in diverse places brake in
upon the flock, and every one took a chepe, tare him and devoured him. The
fearful sheep did naught save sometime hold themselves together, and
sometime fly away, and lyftinge up their heads into heaven, bleat miserably,
and look upon the lamb. The la^be alone with a spear like a cross, fought:
and sometimes so drove away and chased the wolves, that he constrained the^ to
fall headlyng into a certain bottom les pit. The other battle was after this
sort. Not far from hence, were legions and crues of armed men, like to al
these which (as I said before) came forth to mete Peter Aloysius, save that
those seemed to have Paul the third to their chief Captain and Emperor. Of
these some catyed drawn sweardes, some kyndeled fyerbrandes, and some cups
myngled with deadly poison.

They which fought with sweardes, and common weapons, had to their Captain
a certain Cardynal the bishops Legate, a young man, desirous of vain glory,
upon whose garmente, these words were written: I will go and make such a
slaughter, that my horse shall swym me in the blood of Lutherians. All these
had in their standard the world between two kayes. Against these, with great
courage of mind and spyryte, strove men, without any manner of harness or
weapon, save that a good part of them, held up against their strokes with one
hand a pen, and in the other a book. And part after the manner of
peticioners, lyfted up pure hands to a certain mountain. For these armies
were scattered about a certain mountain: upon the top whereof, I saw a cross
fastened and lyfted up, so high that it femed to touch heaven with the top,
and upon it was Christ Jesus that son of god crucified. And there was a
title fastened to the head of the Cross after this tenoure. This is the victory
that ouercummeth the World our faith. This was a cruel battle, and a new
kind of ouercommyng. For here might we see some to be bound of their
enemies, and shut up in dark prisons, some to be slain with the swearde,
some dispatched with poison, some in the myddest of the syer syngyng the
praises of GOD and Christ, some bound and thrown into the water, some
banished and bound to the Galeyes, some to exile. At which things their
enemies were so astonyshed, and so disdaynfull, that they bote their toungues
with their teeth, and plucked away the hears of their beardes. These things
and many other were in that great pyller, which I know not how for to utter.
For there I knew many of the Popes Knights and ministers of his cruelty,
some dead, and some yet alive: whom if I should name, yt whole world would
wondre at it. Notwithstanding some of the^ are so well known by their wicked
and mischeuus deeds, that it needs not to name them. The other I will pass
with silence, least it should appear that I name the^ rather for the hatred I
bear them, that for the love of ye christen common weal.

But I had almost ouerskipt the writing of this pillar, which. about the
shrine, was this. To Paul the third, the chief Bishop, for his singular
hatred of Christ and christians, and for that which he has luckelye done
against them, which prisons, galeyes, ryuers, ashes, exiles, murders, and
slaughters, in Italy, France, Spain, England, and in unconquered Germany,
do witness: insomuche that he has wurthely deserved the name of Antechrist,
Emperors, Kings, and other Princes, Prelates, Cardinals, Bishops, and all
other Fautours of the Sea of Rome, and all the anointed that are here, have
consecrate this renoumed, wonderful and everlasting title on hard Adamant
stone. While I was greatiye inatuayling and musing upon those things which I
had read, Genius counsayled me to look upon that part of the fyeld whereas
Pluto his palace was. And behold I saw innumerable ministers, of which some
carried tables and tresties, some table clothes and napkins, some dishes and
cups, and some dressyng knyues, and by and by the tables were set and
prepared throughoute the whole field, and their seats made ready: but one was
higher the^ all the rest, more full of work, and better decked, which instead
of a base grounsell, a she wolf and a Dragon stayed up. Therein was set the
whore, Our holiness, holdyng in both her hands the golden cup, which we spoke
of before. Into the which cup, she shead first the filth of her menstrue, and
after her all the devils put in their engendryng seed. Than came the kings of
the earth crepyng unto her, to whom after they had kyssed her blessed feet,
she retched her louesome cup. Of which they drunk, and when they had done,
all the kings meddled with her, with abominable aduoutry. But wha^ this act
was finished, came Pluto his ministers, and when they had caughte that whore
Babylon, that is, the chief Bishop, (an horrible thing to be heard) they drew
her into the butcherye and there played the butchers with her, and than brought
her to the table, and set her before the kings to be eaten. Which fed
straight upon the flesh of the Romyshe whore, and in a while after provoked to
vomit, they spewed up their Gobbettes of flcshe, smellyng of that most filthy
wine. Of which Gobbets (a wonderful matter) put together, I saw the Bishop
new made again.

When this feast was done, and Dracolicus had given them warnyng, all rose up
from the table. Than was the Whore with her lovers and servants, led out of
the City, to a certain ponde whole kyndeled with fire of brinstone. Genius
gave a sign that we should follow, for the end of the tragedy was now at
hand. When they were come thither, the whore with her baudes, flatterers,
lovers and companies, were thrown headlong into the ponde, there to be punished
for ever. This is the end of the great Bishop Paul: This is the portion of his
cup, and of all other wicked folks. Genius my ghost allowed not that we
should return into Dites City, but ascendyng by a certain narowe pathe,
warned me that at no hand I should stand still, neither look back ward. That
if I did, the fault were not in him, though he performed not his promise. When
I remembered what betyded Lottes wife because she obeyed not the ghost, what
time they went from the burning of Sodom into the next mountains, I obeyed:
and clymyng up with him, I looked no whither, but both with iyes and steps
followed only my forgoer. By that path we came to the way, which leads into
the heavens. And behold there went before us one of Plutoes servants leadyng
the seven headed beast which Paul had ryd upon: on whose back was set that
byg and mighty cup in which all kings had drunk, full of the filthiness of
the whore. Than asked I my gyde what this should be. They are gifts. (quod he)
which Pluto does send to the new bishop, Paul's successout: The four foted
beast is for him to ride upon, and the cup, to get him (through the drink
thereof.) the love of princes and nations, as other Popes have done. But I fear
me lest yt strength be not in the drink, which has been here tofore, when me^
knew none other drink and wha^ through ye Popes means Christ's cup was hid.
But now when many begin to sauout the most sweet and whole some liquour of the
Lord, the fewer will come to yt whores cup. I grant ( q I) most faithful gyde
it is true that ye say: For not only the common people and some learned men
have tasted Christ's sweet drink, but also princes, yea (and that which is a
great metuayle) some Cardinals and Bishops. Thou know how Fregosius and. C.
Cantarene, Cardinals both, with John Baptist Uergerius the Bishop of Polen, were
for this cause poisoned of out most holy father Paul. And Peter Paul his
brother, the Bishop of Justinopolis, was for the same cause brought in great
dau^ get of his life. Who nevertheless Christ as it were an other S. Paul,
called and reserved for many commodities of his church. For thou know in
how little time he set forth many excellent godly works. Insomuche that this
man appears in my Judgment to have been stiered up of the Lord to be the
teacher and light of our Country Italy. Besides these there be other many
whom purposely I ouerskip. It is even so as thou say (quod he) but
perceiuest thou not that we be come to the City? Yes (quod I) I see it, and I
am so weary of it that it lotheth me. For it is not now Rome, but Babylon the
disworship of al christendom. Then (quod he) O Publius Esquillus, doubt thou
not but this Papacy of Rome, ye very enfeccion and head of al mischief, shall
shortly be taken away, which goen, not only Rome, but al Italy beside, shall
receive her old dignity and holiness again and Christ's church shall florishe.
And now sith I have brought thee home again safe, I will with thy license
depart, and be thou (O Publius) dilige^te in thine office, and earnestly
admonish princes, yt if they desire to bring themselves, and the ships whereof
they have the gydyng, unto the haven of health, and port of salvation, they
beware of ye deadly cup, flatteries, and song, of this whore. Wha^ he had said
this, he departed. But I (O my best beloved Forius) did for thy sake
straytewaye write this, yt thou might know of me the truth both of those
things which be done, and also that be in doing. The Cardinal Farnesius, as soon as his graundfather was dead, took, and keeps saint Angels tower. The
College of Cardinals prepare themselves to creat a new Bishop, and there is
much styrtyng of those yt gape for it. Princes are not in sleep, but every one
is earnest for his own part, and I fear that three Bishops shall be created at
once, except some prince mightier than his fellows, bow to his will the
consentes of many. Which if it come to pass, the beast shall shortly fall. For
the greater that the confusion and hurly burly of all things shall be, so
much the nerer and greater shall be the health and hope, to have a redress of
the christen common welthe. But while they strive and fight among themselves,
let us pass merely these Halcio^ and fexiall days, which god of his goodness
has granted us. For me thinks thou may now safely return to the city.
For this truly I assure thee that in this most great gladness of the whole
City, or rather of all the world, and in the death of Pope Paul, that was most
to be desired, I wanted only thy sight and embracyng to augment my joy
withal. Which if I may once get, I will never let go again. And except I
shall hereafter set furthe all the fruits of thy pleasauntnes in time passed,
which hitherto I have omitted, surely I should judge my self much unworthy
of this thy good will toward me. Adieu.

At Rome the. xi. day of Nouembre, the year of our Lord. M. D. Xlix.
Imprinted by Thomas Gaultier dwelling at Fliete Bridge in the new Rentes.


