To the Right Reverend Father in God, and his singular good Lord, Edmund,
Bishop of London, Lewis Euans wishes much health, long life, with increase of
all right godly Honor.
WHEN I CONsider, which thing I oftentimes do with my self, right Honorable,
of what knowledge, sharpen^sse of wit, and in^ustrie, the learned and wise
Philosophiers of ancient times were, I se cause both to rejoice, and to be
sorry: rejoice we (...), for that through their most excelle^^ labors, it has
pleased almighty God, such is his goodness, so to open unto us the secret
workings of nature, and knowledge of sundry things, which from many, were of a
long time before secret and hidden: again, sorry we m^^ be, to see such
singular instruments provided for our wealth and benefits, not only to be
utterly ignorant in the most comfortable, most high, and infallible doctrine,
in the knowledge of their Creator, of our Redeemer and Maker, but also (whereat
needs must we lament) to be so dotinglye wedded unto their own wills, as
wilfully, or rather willingly, and that (alas) without any reason to yield
them selves bond slaves and wretched captives unto the detestable servitude,
and most execrable bondage that ever since the creation of man reigned, unto
the embracing, I will not say of the evil, but of the most wicked, horrible,
and monstrous Idolatry of the heathens: that is, to worship the Sun, to
adore the Moon, to reverence the Stars, to honor the fire, to take for their
Gods the brute beasts of the earth, to esteem for their Saviors, some
Rauenyng Foul of the air, and (if all that be not madness and abomination
inoughe) further to pray unto most venomous snakes, to seek help of ugly
serpents, to account them for Gods, to keep, seed, and honor them. O blind
hearts! o darkness palpable! o learning to no purpose auailable! we may
therefore well say unto such, yea, be he otherwise never so perfect an Orator,
never so profound a Philosopher, Sapientia tua, and scientia tua, haec est quae
decepit te: thy worldly wisdom, thy over curious knowledge, his, this, is it
that has blinded, beguiled, deceived thee. For touching the excellency of
learning, and worthiness of eloquence, if we weigh well, but the flowing style
of the incomparable Cicero, what can be more pleasant? what may with greater
vehemenc^e persuade? what can with more efficacy dissuade? who, to be brief,
may but with much admiration embrace it? likewise, if we consider the great
wisdom of Socrates, who is to be accounted (this of the heathens I speak) so
worthy? so excellent? so perfect as he? Plato also was very famous, so were
both the Catoes, Pythagoras, Sophocles, and Demosthenes, with many more: and
yet how frowardlie, nay how frantikly these wandered from the right way, from
the acknowledging of one God, and the same of a divine essence, living,
understanding, of an infinite power, wisdom and goodness, true, bounteous,
just, chaste, and merciful, which is the father, the son, and the holy
ghost, three persons, and one God, how far I say, and how wickedlie, from
this they have strayed, so evident it is, that for their sakes how should we
but be sorry? for ours, how can we but rejoice? but what? have they erred in
nothing, but in the doctrine (which thing is very all) of our creation, and
redemption? have they not in their own doings oftentimes so foolishly
reasoned, as, i^ we fauour^d them not much, we might seem justly to say,
that almost they had no reason? and not to speak of Protagoras folly, nor of
Diagoras his impiety, De not. deo. lib. 1.
to let all others pass, what if we ripped up the doings but of him whom
amongst them all, I favor most, of eloquent Cicero I mean? might we not
therein sometimes see, very small proofs? epsy sclender reasons? and find
such childishe shifts? as better in my judgment it were, to deny in some
places the work, than to acknowledge it for the doings, in other things of so
incomparable a man? for to prove his divination, what I pray you among other
things alleges he? De divine. lib. 1.
two Snakes forsooth (so he says) were taken in the house of a noble and wise
man, one Ti. Gracchus, unto whom the wise men (for so I name them, whom the
Persians call Magos: the Egyptians Prophetas: the Assyrians Chaldaeos: and the
Indians Gymnosophistas) they being asked what these Snakes signified, did say:
that if he did let the Male escape, then should his wife shortly after die: if
the Female, then should he. The Female was let gone (for, loath a Gods name he
was, that P. Affricanus his daughter, being a young gentlewoman should die) so
he himself in few days after accordingly died. A worthy proof of a thing
never able to be proved Well, if any of the twain, says he, should escape,
by that mean, the man, or the wife must needs die. But as he had choice to
keep which he would, so was he bound by no necessity to let go any. Why
then kept he not both? he was a wise man, why saved he not thereby as well his
own life, as his wives? after the same manner might we easilye confute (were it
not to long) the famous Oracle at Delphi, the cutting of a whetstone with the
rasour by Tarquinius, the dream of Aeneas, and al such incredible, lewd and
whetstone lies. But let Cicero hereunto (for so he does) make this answer.
What subtlety is this, by trifling to condemn things, confirmed by years and
antiquitye of time? nay, what folly is it, without any reason, to receive
dreams and fond fables, found out we know not how, why, nor by who^? yet it
is contained in blind chronicles, it is of authority. Yea, but ipse dixit
(were the authority better than of those, qui sui quaestus causa, fictas
suscitant sententias) hinders the learner, letting him from adiudging what in
each thing is right. In reasoning (as Cicero himself says) the authority is
not so much, as is the weight of the reason to be sought for, and required.
What? is this, will some say the opinion of Cicero? is not his first book of
Divination written in the name of his brother Quintus? that I grant. And yet,
it is the doings of Tullie, it is his own work, and (though it pleases him
therein to try his wit) his very and full mind, as the same may well appear
as well in other of his works, as specially in his writing unto A. Caecinna,
wherein he affirms, that no signs can be surer, that none may be more
certain, than Divination. But let his first pass, and come unto the second.
Denies he not therein, not only dreams, whereof I speak not, but also
visions? not only (...), as therein the difference is pretye, Suidas:
but also (...), and yet we read that in the very book of God, how Daniel, S.
Peter, S. John, with others saw visions, regarded, esteemed and expounded them.
But here a while to omit the heathens, I would that we likewise, even we that
are Christians, should not trust overmuch unto authorities, unto the writings,
I mean, and conjectures of man, it is modesty to be allowed, and prudencie to
be praised, if we so read them, as S. Aug. did the writings of S. Cyprian:
that is, Aug. lib. 2 contra quendam Donatist.
Quod in eis diuinarum scripturarum authoritati congruit, cum laud eius
accipio: quod autem non congruit, cum pace eius respuo, that which agrees in
the same with the authority of divine scriptures, to his praise I receive: but
which agrees not, that with his favor I forsake, and leave. Where let none
think, that I contemn authorities, but only wish, Sine ratione vt non
valeret authoritas, that authority without reason or scripture, should not
take place, and prevail. For to say the troth, some received of many as
authorities, be so fond, vt aures a co^memoratione abhorreant. Peter (says
some) denied Christ, that he might follow him, and not for fear. O folly! o
madness! the scripture is plain. A far off followed Peter, he feared, yea,
he was greatly afraid. Some also affirm that S. John died not, but was carried
alive, as Enoch, and Elias into Paradys^^, and yet at his sepulcher is Manna,
say they, as it were bubling up, even until this day, a sepulcher he had, he
was buried, and notw^^^standing all this, he died not. Alas, what weak
authorities be these? nay, what foolish, and intolerable dreaming is this,
about the scriptures of God? again, such as childishlye do understand, that
the Lord will descend into a valley, upon the side of the mount Olyuet, there
to judge the world, is not therein their wisdom so small, and their writings
so fond, as whether is most foolish, it is hard to tell? Further, there be
which allege, that our Savior in no respect feared death, and that he was
nothing afraid of his passion. But the scriptures be altogether otherwise. For
he himself says, My soul is heavy, even unto death. Of whom likewise the
Evangelist thus speaks, Marc. 14.
Christ began to fear, and to be sorrowful. Ibidem.
Let them therefore be ashamed, which think that our Savior, in respect of
his manhood, feared not death, and that he did not through fear of his passion
say Transeat a me calix iste, Math. 26.
let this cup pass from me. There is moreover, which write, that though our
savior suffered, yet he felt no pain, though he were scourged, and wounded,
yet he felt no smart, no grief, no dolor, that all his passion was sine sensu
poenae, without feeling of pain. What? when he cried, Math. 27
Eli, Eli, lamasabachthani? Lord, Lord, why have thou forsaken me? Were not
then his pains great? his dolors unspeakable? his grief exceeding? Oh, our
infirmities he bare, Esa. 54.
and our sorrows did he sustein. Wherefore, may we not see, how slender
sometimes, are the writings, and authority of man? how far from the purpose
they estray? and how plainelye in some places they differ, from the Prophets,
Apostles, Evangelists, and holy Ghost? And to return unto the heathens again,
in whose works although many things be found untrue, supersticious and lewd,
yet through them, as means, we have attained the right entry into Arts, the
ready way how to understand liberal sciences, and the plain path into the
pleasant park of al laudable studies. And amongst all such benefits, which we
thus at their hands have received, no one seems more excellent, so
profitable, and so to be accepted, as is the Art of reasoning, which only
(as the Prince of Orators De leg. lib. 2.
says) does contain the whole skill of thoroughly seeing and adiudging, what
both is, and ought to be in every matter. Yea, and that man, as says the
divine Philosopher Plato, which utterly in this Art is ignorant, sees nothing
else, were he otherwise never so rich and renowned, but the very shadows, and
hollow bare images of things. Therefore have I thought it (my singular good
Lord) worth the labor, if we in our tongue, as the Latins have done in
theirs, should some briefly, and some at large, so set forth this Art (which I
may worthily term the very treasure house of sciences, the Casket of Jewels,
the ground of all good studies, and the very nurse of right perfect knowledge)
as it may at the length appear, that like as the Latin is nothing inferior
unto the Greek, so our tongue may in time, either be comparable with both, or
at the least (somewhat to grant the^) not much inferior unto the second. Which
my small labor howsoever done, although in value little above the apple given
by the poor man, unto Artaxerxes Memor, I have yet been bold to dedicate, and
offer unto your honor. First, as a token and pledge of the unfeigned good will
which (not to speak of your great clemency) for sundry good causes, I am
bound to bear during life, toward your good Lordship: then, that under your
protection, the same being published, the malice of Momus might be weakened,
and the spite of Zoilus abated. For it cannot be but Logique has enemies, but
reason has foes, but one industrious sometimes shall have adversaries. Thus
humbly I crave that your honor would, with such heart and countenance receive
it, as thereby I may be encouraged (if it shall please God, so to aid me) to
begin, and go forward with greater things.

Your humble Orator Lewys Euans.

Ludouicus Euans, optimarum artium studiosissimis. S. D.
QVoniam cum omni vtilitate, quam dij hominibus, doctissimi viri, dederunt, ars
aliqua (Ciceronianis enim qua^ saepissime, and libenter vtimur) coniuncta est,
per quam illa vtilitas subinde percipi, tradique possit: non possum non saepe
multumque admirari, quibusdam quid venire possit in mentem, eorum vt
industriam, and studia reprehendant, eorum labores, and ingenia contemnant, qui
dialecticam anglice aedendam esse, atque eam vel illiteratis in sua cuiusque
lingua tradendam, quam autem praeclare vestrum esto iudicium, censuerunt. Mihi
profecto multum, diuque cogitanti, quanam re nostris possem hominibus prodesse,
nulla impraesentiarum mayor, nulla praeclarior occurrebat, quam si dialecticae
artis, hoc est dicere, rationis viam traderem meis co^terraneis. Est nanque
eiusmodi hominibus vtilitati ratio, ea vt illis nihil a deo vtilius, nihil
praestantius, nihil pulchrius dari posse videatur. Qua cum, quod est etiam ars
quaedam coniuncta, and ea quidem long omnium clarissima, quae Logica dicitur,
and quae quasi disserendi quaedam magistra est, quis vsquam adeo immanis, quis
vnquam tam barbarus extitit, ea vt suos priuari desyderet? ea vt suos ornari,
vel ex animo non optet? Hoc fuit in causa, clari, praestantesque viri, quod ego
magnificam hanc artem, anglicis iam literis, and succincte illustrandam
putarem. Cui sententiae vos si nihil praeuertendum putatis, erit tum reliquum,
vt lucubratiunculam hanc qualemcunque meam, iniquorum contra morsus,
acerbitatem, and calu^niam, candide defendatis. Hoc si feceritis, erit cum id
mihi tam gratu^, quam quod gratissimum: tum a vestra art, humanitate, ingenio,
and literis non alienum. Valete.

The Abridgement of Logique.
LOgique is an Art to define the nature of things, What Logique is.
to divide them into parts, to knit true arguments, and to detect the false.

This Art consists of two parts: Logique divided.
the one in finding out matter, and showing the places, whence all Arguments do
spring: the other in adiudging and framing of such matter found, aptlye
together, and for the purpose.

The end of Logique is probably to reason of any matter set forth.

This Art (being only reason) naturally is engraffed in us, To wha end
Logic serves.
but yet now so darkened, as we have much need of the precepts thereof, and
that to instruct, and remember us, of such things, as by nature we have.

Now in this Art are invented five common words, serving to show forth, Five
common words.
how far other words do extend, and how much they contain in them.
Neither is there any word, which is not comprehended under one of these common
words: and they be these, ye General, the Special, the Difference, the
Property, the Accident, and hereunto is also added every proper name, or that
which supplieth the room thereof.

General.
The General is a word which is spoken of many, that differ in their
Specialles, as a living creature comprehends a man, a horse, a dog. etc. and
every General has diverse Specials, and is spoken evermore of them all: as a
tree comprehends in it self, a Pear tree, an Apple tree, a fig tree. etc.

The Special is a word whereof the sort or kind is conceived in mind:
Special.
as a man, a horse. etc.

Difference
The Difference is a word which serves to discern one Special from another,
as to be endued with reason, is the difference between man, and a beast.

Property
The Property is a word which declares a natural pronesse, and manner of
doing, which agrees unto one Special, and to the same only, and that
always: as the property of Grammar is to speak and write truly: of Logique
to teach aptly, and by a natural mean: of Music to sing: of Arithmetic to
number. etc.

The Accident is that, Accident.
which may both be present and also absent, without any detriment unto the
substance, wherein it is: as a man may be merry and sorry. etc. And here you
must note, that the Accident is two ways to be considered: either separable
from the substance, as mirth from man, or else inseperable, as heat from fire.
But yet in thought, heat may be separated from the fire.

The special use of these five common words is, The use of the.v. common
words.
that we use not the General for the Special, nor the Special for the
General.

There are also in this Art certain words called ye most general, Most
general.
which do chiefly serve to this purpose, that we confound not ye substances, or
inward nature of things with the Accidents: and they be in number ten, the
Substance, the Quantity, the Quality, the Relation, the manner of doing, the
suffering, When, Where, the Seatling, and the apparayling.

A substance is the inward nature of a Substance
thing, only in mind separated from the Accidents, as God, Man, a Lion. etc.

A substance. Without body God, Aungelles, The soul of man.
with body Without mixture Fire. Air. Water. Earth.
compounded of diverse elements. A living thing as a creture. Having the sense
of feeling, Endued with reason, as man. Socrates Plato.
Without reason: as beasts. Cattle. Fish. Foul.

Without sense of feeling, as A tree. A shrubbe.

Without life. Stones. Mettalles.




This table shows the order of every substance and kind: and also teaches
how ye may define any thing, as if you will know what man is.

Man is a substance with body, compound of diverse elements, living, having
the sense of feeling, and endued with reason.

A Quantity is the greatness of a thing, Quantity.
and it is by two means perceived, by sight, and by feeling, and his property
is to be divided, as an Ell into quarters, a shilling into pence, an Oration
into sentences. etc.

Quantity is two ways considered, Quantity divided.
the one as by asking how great, long, or broad a thing is: the other, by
asking how many things there be.

Quality is all (except Quantity) which is subject unto the senses of man,
Quality.
and they be two ways to be considered: either of the body: as colors,
soundes, smellings, tasting, feeling: or of the mind, as sciences, virtues and
affections.

The Relation is a name given unto things not by nature, but in the respect of
an other: Relation.
as when I say a master, I must understand servants or scholars that he has,
in respect of whom he is so called. And there are two things here to be marked
ye ground of every thing, and the end whereunto it has respect: as a master
is the ground in that he teaches, and has respect unto his scholar which is
taught: again, the Scholar is the ground in that he is taught, and has
respect unto his master which teaches him.

The manner of doing.
The manner of doing, is a relation unto that which is done, or suffered: as to
love, is a relation or action, toward the thing which is loved. And hereunto
may we refer the duty of every man: as to teach, to write, to play the
lawyer or merchaunt. etc.

Suffering.
The suffering, is a relation of the sufferer unto the dooer, or the effect of
the manner of doing: as to be loved, taught, written. etc.

Where.
Where, is a word which comprehends the description of places, or shows
where any thing is done: as in England, at home, at London, at Cambridge, in
the school, in the church. etc.

When.
When, is a word, showing at what time a thing is done: as this day, to morrow.
etc.

Settling.
The Settling, is the disposition, gesture, or order of the body, as when it
lies, sits, stands. etc.

Apparayling.
The Apparayling, either shows with what thing any body is covered, as with a
cloak, coat, gown, chain, scepter, mace, or that which one possesses, as
gold, lands, wife. etc. or that which contains any thing, as the ship
holds or contains wares, men. etc. Further, whereas at the beginning, I
said, that Logique was an Art to define the nature of things: as thus you may
define or express what man is, man is a living creature endued with reason. A
definition divided.
Now you shall note that a definition is four ways to be considered: for
either it is Essential, which consists of the General and Difference, as in
the aforesaid definition of man: or it is causall, when the causes be
expressed, as Beer is a drink made of water, Hoppes, and Malt: or else it
consists of the parts, as Matrimony is the coupling together of man and wife:
or else it consists of the Accidents, as the Evening is a time wherein
shadows be most long.

Thus as a definition declares what a thing is, so shows a division how
many things are comprehended in the same: and it is also four ways to be
considered, that is, the division of a word, A division divided.
as time signifies an herb, and also this instant: the division of the
General into his Special: as a living creature is divided into a man, a Lion,
an Ass. etc. The division of the whole into his parts, as a body into an
head, breast, belly, feet, and hands: the division of the substance into
his Accidents: as Cicero was a Philosophier, an Orator and an Astronomer. After
that we have so showed what Logique is, what ye common words, and the most
general are, what a definition, and what a division is, we will briefly speak
of the knitting of words together in a Proposition.

Proposition.
A Proposition is a perfect sentence: showing a reason true or false: as Man is
a living creature. And every Proposition does consist of two parts, the one
whereof somewhat is spoken, the other which is spoken of any thing: as in this
sentence, Man is a living creature, a living creature is spoken of man, so that
man is that whereof it is spoken. Every perfect sentence is two ways divided,
Proposition divided.
either it is single, as modesty is a virtue: or else it is double, as if
modestye be a virtue: it is praise worthy.

Again, a Proposition is either true or false: true, as, all men are mortal:
false, as, no men are mortal. Also it is either affirmative or negative: as,
virtue is good, virtue is not good: it is further either universal, as, all men
are honest, or particular, as, some men are honest, or indefinite, as, virtue
is the chief good thing: or singular, as, Cicero is a perfect Orator.

The universal proposition has general signs, as these, all, none. etc.

The particular has particular signs, as, some one, the most part, oftentimes.

The indefinite has no sign. And the singular has to the one part a nowne
proper.

The use of a proposition, The use of a proposition.
or perfect sentence, is briefly to comprehend, and to couch together in one
sentence, the full sum of a long and large discourse: as in the second book
of the Aeneides of Uirgill. Troy was destroyed by the Graecians.

The repugnancie of propsitions, The repugnancie of a proposition.
is the diversity of two perfect sentences, consisting of two, and the self
same parts. And of these repugnant propositions there be four: A proposition
repugnant divided.
the one altogether contrary, as all men are liers, no men are liers: the
other particular contrary, as some men are liers, some men are no liers: the
third contradictorie, as all men are liers, some men are no liers: the fourth
(so to speak it) is subalterne, as all virtues are to be praised, some virtue
is to be praised.

A table of the repugnant propositions.
All men are good. Altogether contrary. No men are good. Subalterne.
Contradictorie. Contradictorie. Subalterne. Some men are good. Particular
contrary. Some men are not good.

The use of the repugnancy.
The diversity of these perfect sentences, is most necessary to discern the
truth from that which is false: for as black and white being joined together,
the difference is soon espied: so if you join two dissonant proposicions, you
shall easilye discern the true, and find out the false.

Then follows the turning of propositions, The use of the turning of a
proposition
which serves for the evident opening of them, for the making of short
arguments, and for the reducing of the second, and third figure into the
first.

The turning of a proposition, The turning of a proposition.
is when the first part, and latter of the same, are turned, the one into the
others room: as, some priests are good men, some good men are priests.

A plain turning of a proposition, is, A plain turning.
when the parts of the same, do supply the one the others place, the same signs
always unchanged: as, no good man is an usurer, no usurer is a good man.

An accidental turning, An accidental turning.
is when ye same signs do not remain: and by this are the perticulers
gathered of the universals: as all men are living creatures, some living
creatures are men.

Hitherto having briefly set forth al single words, and their nature, we will
now show how to frame an Argument.

An argument.
An argument is the proouing of a perfect sentence set forth, whereof before it
was, or might be doubted.

An argument divided.
An argument is divided four ways, into a perfect argument, an imperfect, an
induction, and an example.

A pefrect argument.
A perfect argument consists of three propositions, whereof the first is
called the proposition at large, the second is named, the less, and the
third is termed the conclusion: as for example.

At large.
Every virtue is to be praised: The less.
Modesty is a virtue, Conclusion.
Therefore modesty is to be praised:
And here you must well note one word, called the double repeat, contained in
the two first propositions, which in ye aforesaid argument is this word virtue,
for it knitteth together the two first propositions, proving the thing, and
never enters into the conclusion.

As for rules concerning a perfect argument to be observed, to one marking
well, though only his figures and moodse they are not so needful.

The figures appertaining unto a perfect argument are three: the first, the
second, 3. figures.
the third.

The first figure is when the double repeat is placed in the former part of
the first proposition, and in the latter of the second. 1. figure.


And unto this first figure there does belong four moodes, which be nothing
else, than words invented, 4. Modes^
that only by the vowels of the same, the quality and quantity of the
proposition may be known, that is, whether it be universal affirmative, or
universal negative, particular affirmative, or particular negative: the moodes
or the words are these: Barbara, Celarent, Darij, Ferio: the vowels whereof
are thus to be considered. A signifies A proposition universal affirmative E
signifies An universal negative. I signifies A particular affirmative. O
signifies A particular negative.
These things thus being well marked, you may by every one of the said four
moodes frame an argument, which evermore must be made from the general bnto the
special, as thus. Bar- All living creatures are of Gods creation: ba- All men
are living creatures, ra. Therefore all men are of Gods creation.
Ce- No justice is a vice: la- All piety is justice, rent. Therefore no piety
is a vice.
Da- All filthiness is to be avoided: ri- Some pleasure is a filthiness, j.
Therefore, some pleasure is to be avoided.
Fe- No Art is to be contemned: ri- Logique is an Art, o Therefore Logique is
not to be contemned.
The second figure has the double repeat in the last rehearsed part of both
propositions, 2. figure.
and it has also four moodes, 4. Modes
which be these: Cesare, Camestres, Festino, Baroco, the vowels whereof as
before, are most to be considered.

Ce- No good men do rob their neighbors: sa- All thieves do rob their
neighbors, re. Therefore no thieves are good men.
Ca- All drunkardes do hate good diet: mes- No good men do hate good diet,
tres. Therefore no good men are drunkards.
Fes- No wisemen do boast themselves* ti- Thraso does boast himself, no.
Therefore, Thraso is not wise.
Ba- Al good me^ are tha^kful to their benefactors to- Nero was unthankful to
his benefactor, co. Therefore, Nero was no good man.
The third figure has the double repeat in the former part of both
propositions, 3. figure.
and there be six moodes, appertayning unto the same: Darapti, Felapton,
Disamis, 6. Moods.
Datisi, Bocardo, Ferison, the vowels likewise whereof, are as before, specially
to be considered.

Da- All drunkardes are to be punished, rap- All drunkardes are excessive
drinkers, ti. therefore, excessive drinkers are to be punished
Fe- No lawful matrimony is to be rebuked, lap- All lawful matrimony have
dissentions, ton. therefore, some disse^tio^s are not to be rebuked
Di- Some learned men be heretics: sa- All learned men have knowledge, mis.
therefore some having knowledge, are heretics
Da- All knowledge is necessary unto a Divine, ti- Some knowledge is
Philosophy: si. Philosophy is necessary unto a Divine.
Bo- Some man is no drunkarde. car- Every man is a living creature, do.
therefore, some living creature is no dru^kard
Fe- No man is an ass, ri- Some man is a living creature: son. Therefore, some
living creature is no ass.
Here I have showed the three figures, what they are, and their examples, and
yet sufficient it is, that we use the first, and the second, for the third (as
in that Melancthon, and others do very well write) you may refuse.

An argument of a nowne proper.
There is further an other argument unto this third figure referred, in the
which the double repeat, in the first part of both propositions, is a nowne
proper, as David in possessing his own, did not offend: David was a christian,
Therefore, a christian in possessing his own does not offend.


An imperfect argument, is where one proposition is omitted, An imperfect
argument.
and that either for brevity, or else, for that the part omitted, is otherwise
undoubtedly known well enough: as*

Drunkenness is an evil thing,

Therefore, it is to be avoided.

Whereunto if you add the Proposition at large, which is wanting, that is,
every evil thing is to be avoided, then your argument shall be perfect, in
the mood Darij, of the first figure.

This imperfect argument consists partly of likelyhoodes, Note.
and partly of infallible reasons, therefore it must be foreseen, that
lykelyhoodes be not taken for necessary reasons.

An Induction, is, An Induction.
when we make an universal conclusion, upon a sufficient number of proper
names: as thus,

Red Wine makes one warm:

Hippocras makes one warm:

Spanishe Wine makes one warm:

French Wine makes one warm*

Tire makes one warm:

Neither is there any unlike example,

Therefore, al wynes makes one warm.

An Example, An example.
is the applying of a like thing, or reason, from one person, to an other: as,

Thy father against King Priamus was not so cruel,

Therefore, you ought not, against this man to be so cruel.

Here unto are referred the Fables of Poets, Proverbs, and Parables.

A heaping argument.
There is an other kind of reasoning, called a heaped argument, which is when
the last word of the one proposition is, and that throughout the argument,
repeated in the first part of the second, and that also when voices necessarily
agreeing thereunto, that is, when the general, special, causes, and effect,
are joined together: as,

Idleness breeds riotousnesse,

Riotousnesse breeds poverty,

Poverty breeds theft,

Therefore idleness, breeds theft.

Now it remains (where as I showed before, that of perfect Sentences, some
be single and some double, and having spoken as briefly, so sufficiently of
the single) that we speak somewhat of a double proposition, and that before I
do set forth the places, whence all arguments do spring.

A double proposition consists of two single, knit together with some
conjunction, either conditional, A double proposition.
as if justice be a virtue, it is praise worthy: or Disjunctive, as, either it
is day, or else it is night: or else Copulative, as love being unlawful, is
not to be praised.

A conditional proposition is evermore true when the parts are so knit
together, that the latter must needs follow upon the first.

A disjunctive is then true, when one of the parts is true.

A copulative is only then true, when both the parts are true.

Of the second part of Logique, which is, of the finding out of an Argument.
A Place is the seat, A place.
or resting corner of an Argument, and whence we are warned, how to ground or
talk, and to lay the foundation of our reason, of which places some are
appertayning unto persons, and some unto things, but unto the persons do
belong these which follow, and from thence we thus do reason: as from,

The Country,

He is a Grecian: therefore, light, inconstant, and disceitfull.

The kind,

She is a Woman: therefore, unapt for wars.

The Parents,

He is king Henry the eights son: therefore valyant.

The Age,

He is old: therefore to be asked counsel of.

Bringing up,

He was Lucius Scholar: therefore an Heretic.

Art, or trade of life,

He is a shoemaker: therefore no lover of liberal Sciences.

Fellowship,

He lived always with drunkards: therefore, what marvel, if he be a drunkard?

Manner of doing,

I did it not through anger, envy, rashenesse, but being thought upon, and of a
long time considered: therefore, it was well done, and perfect.

Manner of dying.

Enoch, and Elias were taken a live up into Heaven: therefore, they are become
blessed.

Signs,

She is brought to bed: therefore, no maid.

Antecedent,

He sought a good while a gone to rob me: therefore it is possible, that he
robbed me now.

Consequent,

He fled: therefore, it is probable that he committed this offense.

The places of things are all such, as be not of the persons, and from them we
reason thus: as from,

Definition,

Fortitude is a virtue, fighting in the quarrel of right: therefore it is praise
worthy.

General,

He is no living creature: therefore no man.

Special,

He is a man: therefore, a living creature.

Difference,

He is endued with reason: therefore, a man.

Property,

He barketh: therefore, he is a Dog.

Hole,

It is a house: therefore, walls, a roufe. etc.

Yoked words,

He does wisely: therefore, he is a wise man.

Efficient cause,

God has ordained the Magistrate: therefore we ought to obey him.

Matter,

He wants cloth: therefore, he can have no coat.

Form,

This Table is well preporcioned, therefore, it had a good workman.

End,

Public Schools do cause men to be civil: therefore they are to be erected.

Effect, or event,

They of India do hear the word of God: therefore, they are of God.

Relation,

He is Constancius father: therefore, not his son.

Contrary,

The water is hoate: therefore, not cold.

Privation,

It is dark: therefore, not light.

Contradictorie,

John writes: therefore, that John should now not write, it is impossible.

Greater,

Hector could not overcome Achilles: therefore Paris might less do it.

Lesser,

It is lawful upon the Sabbath day to save an Ox: therefore it is more
lawful to save a man.

Now it remains, that we speak somewhat, of the discerning, and
understanding of untrue arguments, which two ways are specially considered,
for either is, the fault in the form only, that is in the consequence: or
else in the matter, or things. And if the fault be in the consequence, you may
then reject the whole argument, showing the fault of the consequence: as, In all
holy men now living there is sin: Adultery is sin. Therefore in all holy
men living, there is adultery.


Here may you deny the consequence, and so reject the argument. And the reason
thereof is, that in the second figure of mere adfirmatiues (as the moodes there
teach you) there can nothing follow. Mark therefore diligently your figures,
and moodes, and then is the fault of the consequence soon espied. But if the
fault be in the matter, or things, then have we three ways to reject, and
confute the same, either by denying the untrue proposition, showing the untruth
thereof, out of the place, or seat of things, as out of the definition,
division, causes, and such others: as, A flattering, and a dissembling kind of
speech, does not become Philosophers: Eloquence is a flattering, and a
dissembling kind of speech. Therefore Eloquence does not become Philosophers.


Here may you deny the less proposition, showing that the definition of
Eloquence is not right, for Eloquence is an Art to set forth things well and
plainly, and in a meet, and perfect kind of speech.

Or else by distinguishing of the things ambigous, and doubtful: as, John. ^.
No sinner is heard of God: All men here living are sinners: Therefore no man
here living, is heard of God.


Here are the proposition at large, and the less to be distinguished, for of
sinners, some do repent, some do not, therefore of such only as repent not,
the first proposition is true, also the less proposition is to be
distinguished, for as all men are sinners, so are some without repentance, and
some have repented, in whom notwithstanding yet remains naughty affections,
and lewd desires.

Or else in reproouing the false proposition, by showing a contrary example:
as,

No Legates ought in their iourneys to be hindered:

Therefore, this ought not be hindered.

Here we may answer unto the antecedent thus: that if a Legate going from
Flanders through France: into Hispaine, do carry with him Letters, or any
thing hurtful unto the realm of France: he may be hindered, taken, and
punished: as they of Athens, took the Legates of the Lacedaemonians, going to
the king of Persia: and as the Romans took the Legates of Hannibal, going to
ye king of Macedonia. And thus I adiudge to be enough, for the understanding of
arguments, and for the discerning of the faults of the same, whether it be in
the form, or matter.

Thus having most briefly considered over, both the parts of reason, that is,
how to frame an argument, and how to adiudge of the same, the labor being
small, and the commodity great, let none therein omit such diligence, but that
he thereby at the length, may understand the truth, find not falsehood,
conceive the certainty of things, and so shake off fond opinions, self will,
obstinacy, childishe brawlings, and errors, for than the sight of truth, what
can be more excellent? on the other side, what is so to be hated, as the
wallowing in the foul mire of ignorance? What therein is so to be abhorred as
the opinion of Pyrro? or as in that the judgment of the Academikes? who do
allege all things to be uncertain, and doubtful, this foolishness, I might
well say, this madness, seeks to overthrow the most singular gift of God,
that is, truth, it endeuoreth to abolish all arts, and stay of life, it
labors to bereave us of the knowledge of God, which being, howsoever
ingraffed in the nature of man, is (all being Gods gifts) by true arguments to
be made manifest, by good reasons to be opened, and by sure conclusions to be
confirmed. But where as some arguments grounded upon many of the places
aforesaid, may seem right weak, and of small force, therein it shall be the
part of the discrete, and wise reader, so to weigh, and consider them, as he,
discerning likelyhoodes from truth, probalitie from plain proofs, may only
embrace the verity, and following the same, may be always thankful unto
God, whose worthy praise (as Plato says) does most at large in all Arts and
Sciences appear.

Epitomes dialecticae finis, Ludouico Euans, Brytanno autore.

Aug: THe knowledge of reasoning is of a great force to all kind of questions,
which are in the holy Scriptures to be weig^^^, and made manifest.

Hieron. What perverse doctrine soever is in the world, and smelling out of
worldly wisdom, is thought strong, the same by Logique is overthrown, and as
sparks of (...) is dashed in pieces.

Rodolph Agricola. It is certain that Logique is profitable, if to be
dec^yued, and to take falsehood for truth, and truth for (...) (...) adiudge
unprofitable.


